Plenary Lectures 
Abstracts of EsHG Plenary sessions
PL1.1  Peopling of the New World high-Arctic: A Genetic 
Perspective
M. Raghavan1, E. Willerslev2;  
1Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Centre for GeoGenetics,Natural History 
Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Distinct cultural waves swept through the New World high-Arctic 
(Canada and Greenland), leaving behind well-preserved material and 
biological traces in the permafrost. This talk will focus on a major pa -
leogenetic endeavor aimed at determining the genetic signatures of 
the three ancient high-Arctic cultures - Saqqaq, Dorset and Thule - 
and ascertaining any genetic relationships between them by analyzing 
bone, hair and teeth samples from individuals excavated from sites 
across the Canadian Arctic and Greenland. Current work constitutes 
the use of state-of-the-art high throughput sequencing to identify ge -
nome-wide markers that would help resolve the phylogenetic relation -
ships of the Saqqaq, Dorset and Thule with respect to each other as 
well as to modern Inuit and Native American populations. Results from 
this analysis will help disentangle issues surrounding the origins of the 
first humans in the region, the timing of these migrations, and provide 
some perspective on the extent to which they have individually contrib -
uted to the genetic history of the New World Arctic.
PL1.2  monogenic diabetes: the success of molecular genetics 
for improved diagnosis and treatment
P. Njølstad ;  
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, and Department of 
Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Monogenic diabetes results from mutation in a single gene primarily 
affecting pancreatic beta or acinar cell function. The prevalence is 1-2 
% of all diabetes. Monogenic diabetes is, however, frequently misdiag -
nosed as type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Knowledge of the genetic etiology 
of monogenic diabetes has proved essential for improved treatment, 
prediction of prognosis, genetic counseling and identification and 
screening of additional family members.
Monogenic diabetes can be divided in two main groups; neonatal dia -
betes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Neonatal 
diabetes is commonly used when diabetes occurs before the age of 
six months. Mutations in several beta cell genes can cause neonatal 
diabetes, the most important being KCNJ11 and ABCC8 that encode 
the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel, 
respectively. Children having a mutation in either of these genes can 
be treated with sulfonylurea rather than insulin injections and with bet -
ter glycemic control.
Some ten genes can cause MODY. It is important to diagnose GCK-
MODY (MODY2) since this is a mild form for diabetes that seldom 
requires treatment and in which late-diabetes complications are rare. 
Two other common forms are due to mutations in the transcription fac -
tor genes HNF4A (MODY1) and HNF1A (MODY3). These are clinically 
nearly indistinguishable and are commonly misdiagnosed as type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes. Sulfonylurea sensitivity is retained why these forms 
can successfully be treated with low doses of sulfonylureas. Subjects 
with mutations in HNF1B (MODY5) or CEL (MODY8) often develop 
both exocrine and endocrine dysfunction, and hence require both pan -
creatic enzyme supplement and insulin.
Monogenic diabetes should be suspected in subjects with diabetes 
and an unusual presentation or development. Most will have a positive 
family history of diabetes, a primary beta cell dysfunction and be nega -
tive for antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes.
PL1.3  A human protein atlas to study human genetics
M. Uhlén ;  
KTH Biotechnology, AlbaNova University Center, Stockholm, Sweden.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.PL1.4  Genetics of cancer predisposition
L. Aaltonen ;  
University of Helsinki, Molecular and Cancer Biology Program, Helsinki, 
Finland.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
PL2.1*  the Effect of t ranslocation-induced Nuclear Re-
organization on Gene Expression
L. Harewood1, F. Schütz1,2,3, S. Boyle4, P. Perry4, M. Delorenzi3,2, W. A. 
Bickmore4, A. Reymond1;  
1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 3National Center of Competence 
in Research (NCCR) “Molecular Oncology”, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4MRC 
Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
Translocations are known to affect expression of genes at the break -
points and, in the case of unbalanced translocations, alter gene copy 
number. However, a comprehensive understanding of the functional 
impact of this class of variation is lacking. We have studied the ef -
fect of balanced chromosomal rearrangements on gene expression 
by comparing transcriptomes of cell lines from controls and individuals 
with the t(11;22)(q23;q11) translocation. The number of differentially 
expressed transcripts between translocation carrying and control co -
horts is significantly higher than that observed between control sam -
ples alone, suggesting that balanced rearrangements have a greater 
effect on gene expression than normal variation. Many of the affected 
genes are located on the derivative chromosome 11. We show that 
this chromosome is concomitantly altered in its spatial organization, 
occupying a more central position in the nucleus than its non-rear -
ranged counterpart. Consistently, we observe nuclear repositioning 
of genes that show differential expression in balanced translocation 
carriers as compared to controls. The movement of the derivative 11 
also results in nuclear repositioning of other, non-translocated chro -
mosomes. Our results are consistent with recent studies that experi -
mentally altered nuclear organization and indicate that nuclear position 
plays a functional role in regulating the expression of some genes. Our 
study suggests that chromosomal translocations can result in hitherto 
unforeseen, large-scale changes in gene expression that are the con -
sequence of alterations in normal chromosome territory positioning. 
This has implications for the patterns of gene expression change seen 
during tumorigenesis associated genome instability and during karyo -
type changes that lead to speciation.
PL2.2*  PDZD7  is a modifier of and digenic contributor to retinal 
disease in Usher syndrome
H. J. Bolz1,2, I. Ebermann1, J. B. Phillips3, M. C. Liebau4, R. K. Koenekoop5, 
B. Schermer4,6, I. Lopez5, E. Schäfer7, A. F. Roux8,9, C. Dafinger1, A. Bernd10, 
E. Zrenner10, M. Claustres8,9, B. Blanco3, G. Nürnberg11, P. Nürnberg11,6, R. 
Ruland1, M. Westerfield3, T. Benzing4,6;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany, 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 
3Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States, 
4Department of Medicine and Centre for Molecular Medicine, University 
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5McGill Ocular Genetics Laboratory, 
McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada, 
6Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated 
Diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Praxis für Humangenetik, 
Hamburg, Germany, 8CHU Montpellier, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, 
Montpellier, France, 9Inserm, U827, Montpellier, France, 10Centre for 
Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany, 11Cologne Center for Genomics and Institute for Genetics, 
Cologne, Germany.
Usher syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous recessive disease 
with hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). It frequently presents 
with unexplained, often intrafamilial, variability of the visual phenotype. 
Here, we identify PDZD7 , encoding a homolog of proteins mutated in 
Usher subtypes 1C and 2D (USH1C, USH2D). We demonstrate in -
teraction between PDZD7 and two Usher disease proteins, GPR98 
(USH2C) and USH2A, and their colocalization in the photoreceptor’s 
connecting cilium region. On a homozygous USH2A  mutation back -
ground, PDZD7  aggravates RP. Heterozygous PDZD7  mutations Plenary Lectures 
were present with truncating mutations in USH2A , GPR98 , and an un -
identified locus. We validated the human genotypes using zebrafish, 
because visual defects are typically not evident in mouse models of 
Usher syndrome. Our findings in zebrafish were consistent with di -
genic inheritance of PDZD7  and GPR98 , and with PDZD7  as a retinal 
disease modifier in USH2A patients. Pdzd7  knockdown produced an 
Usher-like phenotype in zebrafish, exacerbated retinal cell death in 
combination with ush2a  or gpr98 , and significantly reduced Gpr98 lo -
calization in the region of the photoreceptor connecting cilium. Our 
data challenge the view of Usher syndrome as a traditional Mendelian 
disorder. As in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, reclassification of Usher syn -
drome as an oligogenic disease permits a better understanding of its 
phenotypic variability.
PL2.3*  The identification of 180 genetic loci involved in adult 
height variation highlights the complex genetic architecture of 
polygenic traits
K. Estrada1, G. Lettre2, H. Lango3, S. I. Berndt4, M. N. Weedon3, G. R. 
Abecasis5, M. Boehnke6, C. Gieger7, D. Gudbjartsson8, N. L. Heard-Costa9, A. 
U. Jackson6, M. I. McCarthy10, A. Smith11, N. Soranzo12, A. G. Uitterlinden1, F. 
Rivadeneira1, T. M. Frayling3, J. N. Hirschhorn13;  
1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands, 2Montreal Heart Institute (Research Center), Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula 
Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Department 
of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Center for 
Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 7Institute of Epidemiology, 
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 8deCODE genetics, 
Reykjavik, Iceland, 9Department of Neurology, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 10Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 11Icelandic Heart 
Association, Kopavogur, Iceland, 12Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom, 13Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute 
of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, United 
States.
Height is a classic polygenic trait: it has been proposed for nearly 100 
years that variants in multiple genes influence height; indeed up to 
90% of variation in height is attributable to inherited variation. As part 
of the Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) Con -
sortium, we performed a meta-analysis of genome-wide association 
studies of adult height, encompassing 2.8 million single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and 133,800 individuals of European ancestry 
from 50 individual studies. We detected 207 distinct loci with a SNP 
associated with height at P<5x10-6 (versus 5 expected by chance). 
When we examined the 207 SNPs in a replication dataset of over 
51,000 samples, 180 reached a combined P<5x10-8. Many loci have 
multiple associated variants: conditional analysis identified 19 loci that 
have additional independent strong associations. Together, the associ -
ated variants explain up to 12% of height variation. Using a polygenic 
model, the explained variance reached a maximum value of 16% when 
including signals associated at P < 5x10-3. The associated loci are 
strongly enriched for genes known to be mutated in monogenic disor -
ders of skeletal growth (P<0.001), and implicate genes in relevant bio -
logical pathways, including hedgehog signaling, TGF-beta signaling, 
extracellular matrix, and growth hormone signaling. In conclusion, we 
have identified nearly 200 genetic loci influencing adult height. These 
loci are enriched for genes in biological pathways relevant to human 
growth, and support a notion that allelic heterogeneity may be a com -
mon feature of polygenic traits.
PL2.4*  De novo  mutations of SETBP1  cause schinzel-Giedion 
syndrome
A. Hoischen1, B. van Bon1, C. Gilissen1, P. Arts1, B. van Lier1, M. Steehouwer1, 
P. de Vries1, R. de Reuver1, N. Wieskamp1, G. Mortier2, K. Devriendt3, M. Z. 
Amorim4, N. Revencu5, A. Kidd6, M. Barbosa7, A. Turner8, J. Smith9, C. Oley10, 
A. Henderson11, I. M. Hayes12, E. Thompson13, H. G. Brunner1, B. B. A. de 
Vries1, J. A. Veltman1;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
2Centre for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 
3Centre for Clinical Genetics, Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal, 5Centre for Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Central and Southern 
Regional Genetics Services, Wellington Hospital, Wellington, New Zealand, 
7Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães/INSA, Porto, Portugal, 
8Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children‘s Hospital, Sydney, 
Australia, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children‘s Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 10Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s 
Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 11Institute of Human Genetics, 
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom, 12Northern Regional Genetics Service, Auckland, New Zealand, 
13SA Clinical Genetics Service, Women‘s & Children‘s Hospital site, Adelaide, 
Australia.
Schinzel-Giedion syndrome is characterized by severe mental re -
tardation and characteristic facial features. Most patients die before 
the age of 10 years. Almost all patients occur sporadically raising the 
possibility that de novo  dominant mutations could be the underlying 
mechanism. The exomes of four affected individuals with Schinzel-
Giedion syndrome were sequenced to a mean coverage of 43-fold. On 
average 21,800 genetic variants were identified per patient. After filter -
ing against known variants and selecting variants affecting the same 
gene in all patients, only a single candidate gene remained, SETBP1  
which encodes SET binding protein 1. Sanger sequencing confirmed 
the presence of SETBP1  mutations in these 4 individuals as well as 
in 8 additional Schinzel-Giedion syndrome patients. All mutations oc -
curred de novo , and two mutations were recurrent: c.2602G>A and 
c.2612T>C in 4 and 5 patients, respectively. Because all mutations 
were missense, and clustered to a ultra high conserved 11bp exonic 
region of SETBP1,  it is highly likely that they cause disease through 
either a dominant negative or a gain-of-function effect. In conclusion, 
our study shows the potential of exome sequencing for disease gene 
identification by unraveling the first dominant Mendelian disorder. It is 
highly likely that the mutations cause disease through either a domi -
nant negative or a gain-of-function effect. Exome sequencing is par -
ticularly useful for identifying these types of mutations for which no 
other genomewide approach is applicable. De novo mutations may be 
a frequent cause of frequent sporadic conditions with reduced fecun -
dity such as congenital malformations, mental retardation, and psychi -
atric disorders.
PL2.5  complete genome sequencing and analysis of diploid 
African-American and mexican-American genomes: implications 
for personal ancestry reconstruction and multi-ethnic medical 
genomics
F. M. De La Vega1, J. D. Degehnardt2, S. Musharoff2, K. Bryc2, J. M. Kidd3, V. 
Seth4, S. Stanley1, C. Monighetti1, E. Levandowsky4, M. Barker1, A. Brisbin2, A. 
Keinan2, A. Clark2, C. D. Bustamante3,2;  
1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY, United States, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 4Life 
Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States.
Understanding the contribution of rare and common genetic variants 
to disease susceptibility will likely require multi- and trans-ethnic se -
quencing studies that compare the genomes of many individuals with 
and without a particular disease. Of particular importance will be ac -
counting for the role of population stratification at fine scales both in 
terms of genomic and geographic location. Here, we present results 
from sequencing, assembly, and genomic analysis of two diploid ge -
nomes from Phase 3 HapMap sequenced to ~20X coverage using the 
SOLiD System. The donor individuals are of Mexican and African an -
cestry and represent the first „admixed“ genomes to be sequenced 
to high coverage. We demonstrate that genomic sequencing provides 
finer resolution of „admixture breakpoints“ based on allele frequency 
estimates from HapMap and the 1000 Genomes Project. For each ad -
mixed genome, we use the distribution of admixture breakpoints to infer 
the personal admixture history of the sample and patterns of genomic 
diversity to reconstruct the demographic history of European, African, 
and Native American continental populations. Furthermore, we com -
pare the distribution of functional and putatively neutral genetic varia -
tion among 12 sequenced genomes and find that difference in demo -
graphic history may account for statistically significant, differences in 
distributions of synonymous vs. benign, possibly damaging, and prob -
ably damaging non-synonymous coding variants. Finally, we use the 
SOLiD comparative personal genomic data sets and 1000 Genomes Plenary Lectures 
data to quantify the relative proportions of private, rare, and common 
functional and neutral genetic within and among populations.
PL2.6  A mutation in the 3‘UtR of the HDAc6 gene abolishing 
the post-transcriptional regulation mediated by hsa-miR-433 is 
linked to a new form of dominant X-linked chondrodysplasia.
B. Arveiler1,2, D. Simon1, M. Barillot1, B. Laloo3, T. Barnetche1, C. Rooryck1,2, 
C. Blanchard1, I. Burgelin1, M. Marche1, I. Coupry1, N. Chassaing4,5, B. Gilbert-
Dussardier6, C. Grosset3, D. Lacombe1,2;  
1Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France, 3INSERM U889, Bordeaux, France, 4INSERM U563, 
Toulouse, France, 5CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 6CHU de Poitiers, 
Poitiers, France.
A family with dominant X-linked chondrodysplasia was previously de -
scribed. The disease locus was ascribed to a 24 Mb interval in Xp11.3-
q13.1. We have identified a variant (c.*281A>T) in the 3’UTR of the 
HDAC6 gene that totally segregates with the disease. The variant is 
located in the seed sequence of hsa-miR-433. Our data showed that, 
in MG63 osteosarcoma cells, hsa-miR-433 (miR433) down-regulated 
both the expression of endogenous HDAC6 and that of an eGFP-re -
porter mRNA bearing the wild-type 3’UTR of HDAC6. This effect was 
totally abrogated when the reporter mRNA bore the mutated HDAC6 
3’UTR. The HDAC6 protein was found to be over-expressed in thymus 
from an affected male foetus. Concomitantly, the level of total alpha-
tubulin, a target of HDAC6, was found to be increased in the affected 
foetal thymus, whereas the level of acetylated alpha-tubulin was found 
to be profoundly decreased. Skin biopsies were obtained from a fe -
male patient who presented a striking body asymmetry with hypotro -
phy of the left limbs. The mutated HDAC6 allele was expressed in 31% 
of left arm-derived fibroblasts, whereas it was not expressed in the 
right arm. Overexpression of HDAC6 was observed in left arm-derived 
fibroblasts. Altogether these results strongly suggest that this HDAC6 
3’UTR variant suppressed hsa-miR-433-mediated post-transcriptional 
regulation causing the overexpression of HDAC6. This variant is likely 
to constitute the molecular cause of this new form of X-linked chon -
drodysplasia. This represents to our knowledge the first example of a 
skeletal disease caused by the loss of a miRNA-mediated post-tran -
scriptional regulation on its target mRNA.
PL2.7  the BRcA gene patent dispute: breaking news from 
America
G. Matthijs ;  
Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
PL3.1  Neurogenetic pathways regulated by FOXP2, a gene 
implicated in speech and language
S. E. Fisher ;  
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
People who carry rare heterozygous mutations disrupting the FOXP2  
gene have problems mastering the complex sequences of mouth 
movements needed for speech, along with deficits in many aspects 
of expressive and receptive language. The gene encodes a highly 
conserved transcription factor that helps regulate development and 
function of neuronal subpopulations in a wide range of non-speak -
ing vertebrates, although evidence suggests that its role(s) may have 
been modified during human evolution. It is emphasised that FOXP2  
is not the mythical “gene for speech”, but represents one piece of a 
complex puzzle. I will describe how FOXP2  can be used as a unique 
window into key neurogenetic pathways via an array of complemen -
tary approaches. For example, using functional genomic screening of 
human neurons grown in the laboratory, we identified the CNTNAP2  
gene (a member of the neurexin superfamily) as a downstream target directly regulated by FOXP2 . Intriguingly, we found that CNTNAP2  is 
itself associated with common cases of language impairment; this tar -
get has also been implicated in language delays of autistic children. 
High-throughput screening has enabled us to isolate additional pu -
tative targets of FOXP2 , including multiple genes involved in neurite 
outgrowth and synaptic plasticity. Moving to animal models of FOXP2  
dysfunction, we have shown that point mutations implicated in human 
speech deficits yield impaired motor-skill learning in mutant mice. 
Electrophysiological recording suggests that this may be mediated by 
altered plasticity of Foxp2-expressing circuitry. Together with findings 
from other model systems, these data indicate that the contributions 
of FOXP2  to human speech and language are built on evolutionarily 
ancient roles in neural circuits involved in sensorimotor integration and 
motor-skill learning. Overall, this work demonstrates how we can be -
gin to bridge gaps between molecules, neurons and the brain, helping 
us to build more sophisticated models of the relationships between 
genes, speech and language.
PL3.2  mice, chimpanzees and the molecular basis of speech
W. Enard ;  
Max-Planck-Institute of Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
Identifying the genetic changes responsible for the phenotypic differ -
ences between humans and their close primate relatives is important 
from an evolutionary, medical and cultural perspective. The primary 
challenge facing researchers today, after analyzing the genomic data, 
is experimentally testing hypotheses concerning the genetic basis for 
human-specific traits. One of the more prominent hypotheses of this 
kind states that two amino acid changes in the transcription factor 
FOXP2 have been fixed in humans by positive selection due to some 
effect on speech and language. We have introduced these substitu -
tions into the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice. Although these mice 
are generally healthy, they have qualitatively different ultrasonic vo -
calizations, decreased exploratory behavior and decreased dopamine 
concentrations in the brain suggesting that the humanized Foxp2 allele 
affects basal ganglia. In the striatum, a part of the basal ganglia af -
fected in humans with a speech deficit due to a non-functional FOXP2 
allele, we find that medium spiny neurons have increased dendrite 
lengths and increased synaptic plasticity. Since mice carrying one 
non-functional Foxp2 allele show opposite effects, this suggests that 
alterations in cortico-basal ganglia circuits might have been important 
for the evolution of speech and language in humans.
PL3.3  Evolution of Human Language
W. T. Fitch ;  
University of St Andrews, School of Psychology, St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland, 
United Kingdom.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
PL5.1  ESHG Award Lecture : DNA fingerprinting and the 
turbulent genome
A. Jeffreys ;  
University of Leicester, Department of Genetics, Leicester, United Kingdom.
The accidental development of DNA fingerprinting 25 years ago 
marked the birth of DNA-based identification. I will discuss the origins 
and evolution of DNA testing, the creation of major national DNA data -
bases and the extraordinary impact that DNA has had on forensic and 
legal medicine. I will also discuss how DNA fingerprinting identified 
some of the most unstable regions in the human genome, allowing 
us to study human DNA evolution in real time and explore the funda -
mental processes of mutation and recombination that are the ultimate 
source of all human DNA variation.Concurrent Symposia 7
Abstracts of EsHG concurrent symposia
s01.1  the cradle of constitutional chromosome rearrangements 
is the cleavage stage embryo
J. Vermeesch ;  
Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
We developed several novel tools to genome wide screen for CNVs 
and SNPs in single cells. When applied to cleavage stage embryos 
from young fertile couples we discovered, unexpectedly, an extremely 
high incidence of chromosomal instability, a hallmark of tumorigen -
esis. Not only mosaicisms for whole chromosome aneuploidies and 
uniparental disomies but also frequent segmental deletions, duplica -
tions and amplifications that were reciprocal in sister blastomeres were 
detected in most cleavage stage embryos implying the occurrence of 
breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. In addition, we demonstrate the exis -
tence of those rearrangements in interphase nuclei. The type of rear -
rangements observed can likely explain the majority of constitutional 
rearrangements seen in miscarriages as well as live births such as 
deletions, duplications, inverted deletions duplications, ring chromo -
somes and mosaicisms of all of those rearrangements. The high fre -
quency of chromosomal imbalances in cleavage stage embryos make 
it likely that chromosomal disorders originate post-zygoticaly.
s01.2  How common is somatic mosaicism for DNA copy 
Number Variations (cNVs)?
J. P. Dumanski ;  
Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
DNA Copy Number Variation (CNV) has emerged as the most common 
form of human inter-individual genetic differences and this is important 
for basic research in biology/genetics as well as for disease-oriented 
translational science. We have recently discovered that monozygotic 
(MZ) twins frequently display within-pair differences in CNV profiles, 
which indicates the feasibility of studying MZ twins, discordant for 
established phenotypes in search for disease-causing aberrations. 
In addition, recent analysis of differentiated human tissues of normal 
deceased subjects supports the notion that somatic CNV mosaicism 
is underestimated. We tested multiple tissues from three people for 
differences in CNV profiles and observed changes, affecting a single 
organ or one or more tissues of the same person. Our results from 
MZ twins and CNV differences between normal differentiated human 
tissues of the same person suggest that humans are commonly af -
fected by mosaicism for stochastic CNVs, which occur in a substantial 
fraction of normal cells and are detectable by available array-based 
methods. However, the somatic DNA copy number variation is not well 
studied.
The work in the group focuses on establishment of “baseline of so -
matic CNV” (the normal frequency and genomic distribution of somatic 
CNVs) in phenotypically unselected, healthy, concordant MZ twins and 
comparisons of different tissues from the same individuals. We also 
study differences in the CNV distribution and/or frequency in MZ twins 
discordant for various disease phenotypes in search for new disease-
related biomarkers.
s01.3  Genomic Disorders: mechanisms and assays for cNV 
associated with neuropsychiatric and other disease traits
J. R. Lupski ;  
Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Houston, TX, United States.
Whereas Watson-Crick DNA base pair changes have long been rec -
ognized as a mechanism for mutations, rearrangements of the human 
genome including deletions, duplications, and inversions have been 
appreciated only more recently as a significant source for human ge -
netic variation. Diseases that result from DNA rearrangements have 
been referred to as genomic disorders. Structural variation of our ge -
nome can be responsible for inherited as well as sporadic traits. Rear -
rangements associated with genomic disorders can be recurrent, with 
breakpoint clusters resulting in a common sized deletion/duplication, 
or nonrecurrent and of different sizes. The analyses of breakpoints 
in the proximal short arm of chromosome 17 (17p) reveal nonallelic 
homologous recombination (NAHR) as a major mechanism for recur -
rent rearrangements, whereas nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) 
can be responsible for many of the non-recurrent rearrangements. Genome architectural features consisting of low-copy repeats (LCRs), 
also called segmental duplications, can stimulate and mediate NAHR. 
There are positional hotspots for the crossovers within the LCRs. We 
recently elucidated a DNA replication mechanism for nonrecurrent re -
arrangements that we termed FoSTeS - Fork Stalling and Template 
Switching. A newer model, microhomology-mediated break-induced 
replication or MMBIR, provides further molecular mechanistic details 
and may be operative in all life forms as a means to process one-end -
ed, double-stranded DNA generated by collapsed forks. Rearrange -
ments introduce variation into our genome for selection to act upon 
and as such serve an evolutionary function analogous to base pair 
changes. Genomic rearrangements may cause Mendelian diseases 
and complex traits such as obesity and neurobehavioral phenotypes. 
The mechanisms by which rearrangements convey phenotypes are di -
verse and include gene dosage, position effects, unmasking of coding 
region mutations (cSNPs) or other functional SNPs, creating gain-of-
function fusion genes at the breakpoints, and perhaps through effects 
of transvection. De novo  genomic rearrangements have been shown to 
cause both chromosomal and Mendelian disease, as well as sporadic 
traits, but our understanding of the extent to which genomic rearrange -
ments, gene CNV, and/or gene dosage alterations are responsible for 
common and complex traits remains rudimentary.
1. Hastings, PJ, Ira, G, Lupski, JR (2009) A microhomology-mediated break-in -
duced replication model for the origin of copy number variation. PLoS Genetics 
5 :1-9 [e100327].
2. Lupski, JR (2009) Genomic disorders ten years on. Genome Medicine 1 :42.1 
- 42.11.
3. Zhang, F, Gu W, Hurles, ME, Lupski, JR (2009) Copy number variation in 
health, disease, and evolution. Annual Reviews of Genomics and Human Genet -
ics 19 :451-481
4. Zhang, F, Carvalho, CMB, Lupski, JR (2009) Complex human chromosomal 
and genomic rearrangements. Trends in Genetics 25 :298-307.
5. Hastings PJ, Lupski, JR, Rosenberg, SM, Ira, G (2009) Mechanisms of change 
in gene copy number. Nature Reviews Genetics 10 :551-564.
6. Stankiewicz, P. and Lupski, J.R.  (2010). Structural variation in the human 
genome and its role in disease. Annual Reviews of Medicine  61:437-455.
7. Carvalho, C.M.B., Zhang, F., Lupski, J.R.  (2010). Evolution in health and 
medicine. Sackler colloqium; Genomic disorders - a window into human gene 
and genome evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.  107:1765-1771.
s02.1  Ethical issues in large scale genomics research
T. Caulfield ;  
Health Law Institute, Law Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
Large, population based biobanking initiatives are in full swing in many 
countries throughout the world. These projects are principally motivat -
ed by a desire to understand the myriad factors that have an influence 
on human health, including the role and interaction of genetics and the 
environment. But despite this current research activity, a wide range 
of policy issues remain unresolved. In fact, the continued existence 
of these issues is quite remarkable - especially when one considers 
that many have been debated for over a decade and that the actual 
practice of biobanking, and the implementation of policy frameworks, 
has continued notwithstanding this lack of consensus regarding key 
research ethics principles.
This talk will focus on two of the most persistent and perplexing of the 
policy issues associated with biobanks: getting consent and allowing 
participants to withdraw consent. These are not the only issues associ -
ated with biobanks, far from it. But they are the two that have attracted 
much of the policy attention. In addition, getting and withdrawing con -
sent are fundamental principles in research ethics. Understanding the 
lack of resolution on these key points seems particularly essential. As 
such, this talk will primarily focus on the reasons for and ramification of 
the lack of consensus, including an exploration of whom in the policy 
community is forwarding the different position. I will analyze factors rel -
evant to the debate, including the role of public perceptions regarding 
different consent approaches, the law around “ownership” of samples 
and health information and the idea that this research is in the “public 
good”. In the end, we will see that none of these factors can resolve 
the debate - at least in the absence of some fundamental and broadly 
based change in the norms of consent and withdrawal. Despite this 
reality, I will argue that appropriate governance strategies that specifi -
cally engage the issues associated with consent seem the only way 
forward.Concurrent Symposia 
s02.2  Ethical issues in expanded newborn screening
E. W. Clayton ;  
Vanderbilt University Center for Biomedical Ethics and Society, Nashville, TN, 
United States.
Ethical Issues Raised by Expanded Newborn Screening
Wilson and Jungner argued that newborns should be screened only for 
serious and well understood disorders that require early intervention of 
proven efficacy prior to the development of symptoms to avert serious 
or life-threatening sequelae. In recent years, newborn screening has 
expanded to include disorders that do not meet these criteria. Many 
factors have led to this expansion, including the availability of multiplex 
technologies such as tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), parent 
and provider advocacy, and assertions that the appropriate definition 
of benefit should be expanded. The technical possibility of performing 
inexpensive whole genome sequencing of newborns lies in the not-
too-distant future. In this talk, I will consider what limits, if any, ought 
to be placed on the expansion of newborn screening. I will consider 
specifically the critiques raised in the United States by the President’s 
Council on Bioethics in their report entitled The Changing Moral Focus 
of Newborn Screening  (2008) as well as reports of Sweden’s experi -
ence with newborn screening for alpha-1-antitrypsin in early 1970s.
s02.3  Ethical issues in preimplantation genetic diagnosis
G. Pennings ;  
Bioethics Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
Although prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis are frequently 
considered as similar, there are two differences that have an enormous 
impact on the ethical evaluation of the applications: 1) the simultane -
ous availability of several embryos, and 2) the much larger contribution 
of the clinician to the parental project. The first difference generates 
the procreative beneficence principle and the lowering of the indica -
tions when in vitro fertilization is indicated for other reasons. Some 
people label this evolution as a slippery slope because they believe 
that one adheres or should adhere to the strict medical model. This 
model is based on full penetrance, extreme severity and invariable 
expression of the disease. Since there are (almost) no such diseases, 
it is clear that even the currently accepted practice does not fulfill these 
conditions. We will illustrate this point by means of two examples: sex 
selection for diseases with skewed sex ratio and variable sex linked 
expression and selection of healthy carriers.
In the second part, we will consider some of the ethical problems that 
are generated by the new evolution of genetic screening by means 
of microarrays. Testing for all chromosomal abnormalities and hun -
dreds of genetic diseases and susceptibilities will confront us with new 
questions: how to decide which embryo to replace? How to ascertain 
informed consent before testing? Should information to the parents 
be limited and if so according to which principles? In essence, the 
evolution of new techniques always moves in the direction of higher 
performance but it may confront us with the fact that in reality more 
information is not necessarily better.
s03.1  Human induced pluripotent stem cell based in vitro 
modeling of Parkinson‘s disease
F. Soldner ;  
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, United States.
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as well as induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs) derived from somatic cells of patients are predicted 
to become a powerful tool for biomedical research and may provide 
a source for cell replacement therapies. Although the realization of 
hESC/iPSC based therapies is still at an early stage of development, 
the possibility to model human disease in vitro  could make patient-
specific hiPSCs immediately valuable. This is particularly relevant for 
diseases of the central nervous system (CNS) such as Parkinson’s 
disease (PD) which are not always linked to known genetic mutations, 
where primary neuronal tissue is not available, and in vitro  or in vivo  
animal models only partially recapitulate the underlying pathophysiol -
ogy. However, there are many technical challenges in generating and 
manipulating human pluripotent cells before they can be thought to 
be faithful models of human disease. Here, I will highlight some of the 
technical challenges and some emerging solutions:
(1) Generation of reprogramming factor-free iPSCs to minimize or 
eliminate genetic alterations in the derived iPSC lines. The use of vi -
ruses encoding the reprogramming factors represents a major limita -tion of the current technology since residual transgene expression may 
alter the biological properties of the resulting iPSCs derivatives or in -
duce malignant transformation. We efficiently derived reprogramming 
factor-free hiPSCs from several patients with PD using Cre-recombi -
nase excisable viruses and subsequently differentiated these cells into 
dopaminergic neurons, the cell type most affected in PD. Such fac -
tor-free iPSCs maintain a pluripotent state and display a global gene 
expression profile, more closely related to hESCs than to genetically 
identical hiPSCs carrying the transgenes. This is consistent with the 
possibility that residual transgene expression in virus-carrying hiPSCs 
can affect their molecular and biological characteristics and that fac -
tor-free hiPSCs therefore represent a more suitable source of cells for 
modeling of human disease.
(2) Efficient gene targeting strategies to generate markers for differ -
entiation and gene correction. Tracking, accentuating, or accelerating 
pathological phenotypes in the lab could greatly benefit from cell-type-
specific lineage reporters, as well as reliable tools to disrupt, repair, 
or overexpress genes. However, current techniques of gene targeting 
are inefficient at best and thus are not routinely used. Here we report 
the highly efficient targeting of several expressed and silent genes in 
hESCs and hiPSCs using zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN)-mediated ge -
nome editing.
s03.2  modeling and treating human genetic disease with 
induced pluripotent stem (iPs) cells
A. Raya1,2,3;  
1Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain, 2ICREA, 
Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER-BBN, Barcelona, Spain.
The generation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by ectopic 
expression of a defined set of factors has enabled the derivation of 
patient-specific pluripotent cells and provided valuable experimental 
platforms to model human disease. Patient-specific iPS cells are also 
thought to hold great therapeutic potential, although several shortcom -
ings should be addressed before iPS cell technology can be imple -
mented clinically. Here, I will present recent results by our laboratory 
and others on the usefulness of iPS cells to model human disease, the 
generation of disease-corrected, patient-specific cells with potential 
value for cell therapy applications, and novel strategies aimed at the 
generation of clinically-safe iPS cells.
s03.3  Using stem cells to model and treat neurodegenerative 
diseases
A. D. Ebert ;  
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Neurology, Stem Cell and 
Regenerative Medicine Center, Madison, WI, United States.
Stem cells provide an important tool in which to study human develop -
ment and disease. Stem cells that naturally carry a genetic mutation, or 
those that have been genetically manipulated to over-express disease 
causing mutations, have provided a way to better understand disease 
processes and mechanisms for a variety of neurological disorders in -
cluding Down syndrome and Parkinson’s disease. The recent advance 
in stem cell technology in which embryonic stem cell-like cells can be 
produced by reprogramming somatic cells (termed induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs)) has opened yet another window of opportunity to 
model and study human diseases. iPSCs can now be derived from a 
multitude of patient populations for both genetically linked and spo -
radic disorders, including Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, and spinal muscular atrophy. Importantly, these iPSCs can 
be differentiated into the specific cell types that are affected in these 
brain and spinal cord diseases. Interestingly, in the case of spinal mus -
cular atrophy, motor neurons derived from patient iPSCs have shown 
selective vulnerability in the culture dish, suggesting a faithful repre -
sentation of the human disease process. Not only will iPSCs allow 
for the examination of mechanisms involved in disease progression, 
but novel drug compound screening and therapeutic intervention may 
aid in developing more appropriate treatments for patients with these 
debilitating diseases.Concurrent Symposia 
s04.1  From Galton to GWAs: the genetic architecture of 
complex traits
P. Visscher ;  
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia.
Common complex disease is caused by a combination of multiple 
genes and environmental effects. Traditionally the genetics of disease 
has been studied using concepts that refer to the combined effect of 
all genes (e.g., heritability or sibling risk), for example by studying the 
recurrence risk or phenotypic correlation of relatives. Genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) facilitate the dissection of heritability into 
individual locus effect. They have been successful in finding many 
SNPs associated with complex traits and have greatly increased the 
number of genes where variation is known to affect the trait. How -
ever, GWAS have been criticised for not explaining more of the genetic 
variation that we know exists in the population, and many hypotheses 
have been put forward to explain the missing heritability. The most 
plausible explanations are that (i) causal effects are too small to be de -
tected with statistical significance and (ii) causal variants are not well 
tagged by the SNPs on the commercial arrays, for example because 
their minor allele frequency (MAF) is lower than genotyped SNPs. Ge -
netic linkage and association analyses are typically implemented as 
a genome scan, i.e. by generating and testing multiple hypotheses. 
Such approaches, in particular GWAS based upon SNP markers suf -
fer from a high false negative rate because of the use of stringent 
false positive thresholds. The use of all GWAS data simultaneously in 
an estimation rather than hypothesis testing framework is a powerful 
alternative to hypothesis testing. We show how such whole genome 
methods can be used to better understand the genetic architecture of 
complex traits, with applications in height and psychiatric disorders. In 
particular, we show that using genome-wide marker data can provide 
unbiased estimates of narrow sense heritability and that GWAS SNP 
data to estimate additive covariance between ‘unrelated’ individuals 
can uncover much more of the genetic variance than methods that rely 
on hypothesis testing.
s04.2  Developments in the genetics of multiple sclerosis - 
progress at last
S. Sawcer ;  
University of Cambridge Neurology unit, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
Multiple sclerosis is a disabling autoimmune disease of the central ner -
vous system that affects approximately 2.5 million people worldwide 
(http://www.atlasofms.org/). Little is known about the events that trigger 
the disease or the factors that govern its highly variable course. Epide -
miological studies confirm that genetic factors influence susceptibility 
but relevant genes have proven difficult to identify. Association with 
the MHC was established almost 40 years ago but alternate candidate 
gene studies and whole genome linkage screening were unrevealing. 
Fortunately the advent of genome wide association studies (GWAS) 
has revolutionised the genetic analysis of multiple sclerosis. To date 
7 GWAS have been completed in the disease and 18 associated vari -
ants have been identified. This year the International Multiple Sclerosis 
Genetics Consortium (IMSGC) and the Wellcome Trust Case Control 
Consortium (WTCCC) will completed a further, and considerably larg -
er, GWAS involving almost 10,000 patients and 16,000 controls. These 
new GWAS data will substantially expand the list of associated loci and 
thereby illuminate pathogenesis.
s04.3  Genome-wide association studies in cancer: sorting out 
the nuggets of truth
S. J. Chanock ;  
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Laboratory of Translational 
Genomics, Bethesda, MD, United States.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s05.1  Neocentromeres in human clinical cases
A. Choo1,2,3;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
The centromere is a highly compacted (and morphologically constrict -
ed) structure of the chromosome that is essential for the proper seg -
regation of replicated sister chromatids during cell division. A human 
centromere typically carries 1-4 Mb of repetitive alpha satellite DNA 
sequences. Human neocentromeres are fully functional centromeres 
that are formed ectopically on chromosome arms and are devoid of 
any alpha satellite DNA. The first case of human neocentromere was 
described by us on band q25 of a rearranged chromosome 10 in a 
child with mild speech impediment. To date, over 100 cases involving 
neocentromere formation have been reported with clinical phenotype 
ranging from very severe to mild or normal, with some of the cases be -
ing directly linked to cancer. In addition to humans, the ability of cells 
to form neocentromeres has been observed in fly, fungi, and higher 
plants.
Because of their non-repetitive and fully sequenced nature, neocentro -
meres are highly amenable to molecular analysis. Their study (in par -
allel with normal centromeres) has led to a better understanding of:
(a) the regulatory requirements of the centromere, providing the best 
evidence that centromere formation is modulated by epigenetic chang -
es at the chromatin level that can occur independently of the underly -
ing DNA sequences. Our work and those of others have also shown 
that transcription of some of the underlying DNA sequences plays an 
important role in centromere formation and function;
(b) a novel mechanism of cancer development, where studies have 
shown that a group of atypical lipomas and well-differentiated liposar -
comas characteristically carry oncogenic giant supernumerary ring or 
rod neochromosomes that are mitotically stabilised by the de novo for -
mation of a neocentromere; and
(c) a novel mechanism of evolution, where molecular and phylogenetic 
evidence have shown centromere repositioning via neocentromere 
formation to be a powerful driving force in chromosome evolution and 
speciation.
s05.2  Neocentromeres in candida albicans
L. S. Burrack , J. Berman;  
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology & Development, 6-170 Molecular and 
Cellular Biology Building, Minneapolis, MN, United States.
Centromeres are critical for chromosome segregation and genome 
stability. Neocentromeres, functional kinetocores that appear at ecto -
pic loci, can form when centromere function is lost at the normal locus. 
In humans, neocentromeres can arise in cells with gross chromosome 
rearrangements tohat rescue an acentric chromosome, but have also 
been described in otherwise healthy individuals where the centromere 
appears to have been inactivated. The mechanisms of centromere in -
heritance and neocentromere formation remain unknown. Using the 
yeast Candida albicans, which has small, regional centromeres, we 
previously found that disruption of the native centromere in C. albicans  
results in neocentromere formation (Ketel et al. 2009 PLoS Genet -
ics 5(3):e1000400). These neocentromeres form proximal to the dis -
rupted centromere or at distal loci on the chromosome arms far from 
the disrupted centromere. Distal neocentromere loci characterized to 
date share properties of low gene density and flanking repeated DNA 
sequences. We are also using the C. albicans  neocentromere model 
system to characterize the functional properties of neocentromeres 
such as the ability to bind cohesin proteins and other chromatin com -
ponents and the ability to be stably maintained under stressful growth 
conditions. Finally, in a genome-wide analysis of replication timing, we 
find that centromeres replicate at the earliest time during S-phase and 
that DNA that acquires a neocentromere also acquires this early DNA 
replication property. Thus, C. albicans  is a useful model for studying 
epigenetic activities involving centromeres, such as the establishment 
of neocentromeres and the maintenance of functional kinetochores at 
specific DNA loci.
s05.3  centromere repositioning in evolution and in humans
M. Rocchi ;  
Dip. di Genetica e Microbiologia, Bari, Italy.
In recent years we have used large panels of BAC clones to track the 
evolutionary history of chromosomes in primates and in non-primate 
mammals. This approach has disclosed an unprecedented phenom -
enon: the “centromere repositioning”, that is the movement of the cen -Concurrent Symposia 10
tromere along the chromosome without marker order variation. Repo -
sitioned centromeres are relatively frequent. In macaque, for instance, 
9 out of 21 centromeres are evolutionarily new; in donkey at least 5 
such neocentromeres originated after its divergence from zebra (less 
than 1 million years). A related phenomenon (clinical neocentromeres) 
has been reported in human clinical cases. Clinical neocentromeres 
are analphoid centromeres that emerge in ectopic chromosomal re -
gions. Usually they stabilize supernumerary acentric chromosome 
which have detrimental phenotypic consequences. Studies on the evo -
lution of the chromosomes where clustering of neocentromeres were 
reported (3q, 13q, and 15q for instance) disclosed distinct, intriguing 
relationships between human clinical neocentromeres and evolution -
ary neocentromeres. Additionally, examples are now available of cen -
tromere repositioning events in humans, disclosed by chance because 
they do not result in phenotypic anomalies.
s06.1  Dysruption of long-distance highly conserved non coding 
sequences at the sOX9 locus
S. Benko1, J. Amiel1, A. Munnich1, D. R. Fitzpatrick2, S. Lyonnet1;  
1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-781 , Université Paris 
Descartes Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute 
of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
One of the key discoveries of vertebrate genome sequencing projects 
has been the identification of non-coding elements that remained evo -
lutionarily conserved, and thus likely functional. Interestingly, two thirds 
of them do not correspond to transcribed gene sequences (exons and 
UTRs); they have been named conserved non-coding sequences 
(CNCs) and represent a vast amount of DNA (3% of the human ge -
nome). Interestingly, enrichment for CNCs has been demonstrated 
within gene deserts nearest to physically isolated genes known or 
suspected to be important developmental regulators. It has been sug -
gested that in these cases CNCs may represent regulatory elements 
(enhancers or suppressors) necessary for the correct spatiotemporal 
expression of these genes needed for embryonic development, and 
acting as modular, sometimes combinatorial, tissue-specific enhanc -
ers of gene transcription.
In that particular context, we will discuss recent findings from our 
groups regarding:
- A common non-coding enhancer genomic variant in a highly con -
served sequence located in a non-coding region of the RET gene, al -
tering the binding of a transcription factor expressed in neural crest cell 
precursors to the enteric nervous system, which would predispose to 
Hirschsprung disease.
- More recently, the discovery of long-distance disruption of enhancer 
CNCs on both side of the SOX9  gene coding sequences in Pierre 
Robin sequence (PRS), a common orofacial cleft anomaly with man -
dibular hypoplasia. The existence of a PRS locus at 17q24 was sup -
ported by both linkage analysis and mapping of independent translo -
cation breakpoints that cluster 1.06-1.23 Mb upstream of SOX9 . Also, 
microdeletions or point mutation involved CNCs capable of driving 
mandibular expression in transgenic mouse embryos. Moreover, the 
pattern of histone modifications associated with both the centromeric 
and telomeric regions suggests tissue-specific enhancer function. 
ChIP experiments demonstrated that a mutated or deleted CNC binds 
endogenous MSX1 protein. In addition, a human CNC mutation both 
alters MSX1 binding and abrogates enhancer function in a mandibu -
lar mesenchymal cell line. Our data, combined with existing evidence 
from human and animal phenotypes, strongly suggests that the dis -
ruption of distant, tissue-specific regulatory elements, required for the 
normal development of the mandibula, perturbs embryonic expression 
of SOX9  and accounts for the PRS phenotype.
These observations suggest that the domains to study for genomic al -
terations, resulting in tissue-specific misregulation of a developmental 
gene and a subsequent malformation, should be much broader than 
traditionally investigated. They also results strongly suggest that ge -
nomic alteration of highly conserved non-coding elements of the ge -
nome, located near to, or at a long distance from, coding sequences 
of a gene might alter gene expression in a tissue-specific and tim -
ing-specific manner. These evolutionarily constrained regions of the 
genome are under purifying selection for function, and with no pro -
tein coding activity, may be disrupted in a modular fashion as many 
such regulatory elements surround master developmental genes. This model could be regarded as a novel mutational mechanism causing 
human congenital malformations, and understanding it will certainly 
provide a powerful tool in establishing etiology for a broader range of 
human diseases.
s06.2  clustered gene co-regulation and enhancer sharing can 
be modulated by developmentally regulated chromatin loops
J. Tena1, E. Alonso2, E. de la Calle-Mustienes1, E. Splinter3, W. de Laat3, M. 
Manzanares2, J. L. Gomez-Skarmeta1;  
1Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Sevilla, Spain, 2Fundación Centro 
Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III,, Madrid, Spain, 
3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
Gene clusters are paradigms to study transcriptional regulation during 
development. Here, we present a general map of enhancer distribution 
along the 2 Mb of DNA spanning the IrxA cluster produced by means 
of transgenic Xenopus , zebrafish and mouse embryos. Using Chro -
matin Conformation Capture, we demonstrate that enhancer sharing 
is widespread within the cluster, which explains the common expres -
sion domains of IrxA genes in particular tissues and the evolutionary 
conserved architecture of the cluster. We also identify an insulator and 
two chromatin loops within the cluster that may help partition it in two 
independent regulatory domains in certain cell types. We finally show 
that this topology predicts gene expression in cases where cluster or -
ganization has been disrupted during evolution. We conclude that the 
regulatory constrains imposed by the linear arrangement of clustered 
genes in the genome can be modulated by developmentally regulated 
loops that facilitate the formation of gene-specific regulatory land -
scapes.
s06.3  Far reaching consequences - mechanisms and problems 
of long range control
S. Mundlos ;  
Institute for Medical Genetics, Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max 
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
The vast majority of most genomes consists of non-coding sequence 
with more or less unknown function. This “dark side” of the genome 
contains regions of diverse composition including sequences that are 
highly conserved throughout evolution. Some of these so called con -
served non-coding elements (CNEs) have been identified as essen -
tial regulators of gene expression. CNEs are particularly abundant in 
“genes deserts” surrounding genes that have important functions dur -
ing development and may be as far as 1 Mb away from the gene they 
regulate. Gene regulation is achieved through the binding of transcrip -
tion factors to the element and subsequent loop formation between 
the CNE and the gene’s promotor. Mutations that interfer with the cis 
regulatory capacity of these elements can thus be expected to result 
in altered gene expression in a certain cell type at a given time point. 
We have been investigating the consequences of CNE-controled gene 
regulation and the effect of mutations using cytogenetics and high-res -
olution array CGH in mouse models and patients. We identified several 
molecular mechanisms that cause abnormalities in long range control. 
These include the disconnection of control elements from their target 
gene by translocations, changes in presumed transcription factor bind -
ing sites by point mutations, and altered gene regulation by deletions, 
and duplications of CNEs. All abnormalities were detected in patients 
or mice with congenital malformations, i.e. brachydactyly, triphalan -
geal thumb-polysyndactyly, Laurin-Sandrow syndrome, Cooks syn -
drome, or syndactyly. We postulate that these conditions are caused 
by alterations of fine tuning of gene expression which in consequence 
disturbs dosage-dependent signalling pathways. Due to the fact that 
this mutation mechanism interfers only with a certain regulatory event 
and not the entire gene function, the resulting phenotypes are distict 
from those associated with mutations in the coding region
s07.1  the impact of the early social environment on the adult 
epigenome
M. Szyf ;  
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics , McGill University, Montreal, 
QC, Canada.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.Concurrent Symposia 11
s07.2  identifying parent of origin effects in the human genome
A. Sharp ;  
University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s07.3  Using c. elegans to study chromatin regulators involved 
in human disease
I. J. Latorre1, M. Cheung1, J. Garrigues2, A. Vielle-Canonge1, T. Takasaki2, S. 
Strome2, J. Ahringer1;  
1Gurdon Institute, The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
Regulation of chromatin structure plays a central role in transcriptional 
control. A large number of chromatin regulating enzymes and com -
plexes are known, however, their mechanisms of action are poorly 
understood. Global chromatin factor mapping and loss of function 
studies in single-celled yeast have provided important insights, but 
there is still little information on genome-wide targets and functions in 
multicellular organisms. Importantly, animals contain many chromatin-
regulating complexes not found in yeast, such as the histone deacety -
lase NuRD chromatin-remodelling complex, and the DRM complex, 
which includes the tumor suppressor Retinoblastoma. Components 
of both of these complexes have been implicated in human disease. 
C. elegans has many features that make it well-suited for studies of 
chromatin regulation. Of particular note are its small well-annotated 
genome (30X smaller than human), the ease of RNAi, and the rich 
resource of chromatin mutants for loss of function studies. Importantly, 
C. elegans has a complement of chromatin factors very similar to that 
of humans, allowing investigations of chromatin function in a multicel -
lular organism. As a step toward understanding the functions of chro -
matin proteins implicated in disease, we are identifying their patterns 
of binding in C. elegans genome-wide using ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq. 
In addition, to provide a framework for these studies, we are also gen -
erating genome-wide maps of the locations of histones and histone tail 
modifications.
S08.1  Genomic advances in Schizophrenia
M. J. Owen ;  
MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics , Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Recent studies have supported the hypothesis that the high heritabil -
ity of schizophrenia reflects a combination of relatively common al -
leles of small effect and some rare alleles with relatively large effects. 
Genome-wide association studies have identified several risk loci at 
genome-wide levels of significance as well as evidence for a substan -
tial burden of common risk loci. Moreover these recent findings sug -
gest genetic overlap with bipolar disorder which has traditionally been 
assumed to be genetically distinct from schizophrenia. Genome-wide 
studies of at least one class of relatively uncommon variant, submicro -
scopic chromosomal abnormalities often referred to as copy number 
variations (CNVs), suggest that these confer high risk of schizophre -
nia. There is evidence both for an increased burden of large (>100kb) 
and rare (MAF <1%) CNVs in schizophrenia and that risk is conferred 
by a number of specific large CNVs (including deletions at 22q11.2, 
1q21.1, 15q13.2 and 15q11.2 and duplications of 16p11.2) as well as 
by deletions of NRXN1 which encodes the synaptic scaffolding pro -
tein neurexin 1. Many of these CNVs have been implicated in autism, 
mental retardation, epilepsy and other neurodevelopment disorders. 
The implications of recent findings for the pathogenesis and noslogy of 
schizophrenia and related disorders will be discussed.
S08.2  Genome-Wide Association Studies in Autism Spectrum 
Disorders
H. Hakonarson ;  
Center for Applied Genomics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, United States.
Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) represent a large group of child -
hood neurodevelopmental, neuropsychiatric disorders characterized 
by restricted and repetitive patterns of interests and behavior, limited 
verbal communication and impairment of social interaction. Several 
sources of evidence suggest strong a genetic component in the sus -ceptibility to ASDs; for instance, there are much higher concordance 
rates for ASDs in monozygotic twins (92%) than dizygotic twins (10%), 
while recent estimates for the sibling recurrence risk is greater than 
15. Although ASDs are highly heritable disorders, they exhibit hetero -
geneous clinical symptoms and genetic architecture which have hin -
dered identification of common genetic susceptibility factors. Although 
previous linkage studies, candidate gene association studies and cy -
togenetic studies have implicated several chromosomal regions for the 
presence of autism susceptibility loci they have failed to consistently 
identify genes or genomic loci that increase risk of ASD presentations. 
Using the genome wide association study (GWAS) approach, we 
have recently identified common genetic variants between two cad -
herin genes ( CDH10  and CDH9 ) as associated with ASDs (Wang et 
al, Nature , 2009), as well as a collection of rare copy number variants 
in neuronal cell-adhesion genes (Glessner et al, Nature , 2009). The 
discovery cohorts in the GWAS contains 780 families (3,101 subjects) 
with affected children, and a second cohort of 1,204 affected subjects 
and 6,491 control subjects, all of whom were genotyped by us in the 
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP), representing the largest 
ASDs genetics studies ever performed. The results from these studies 
and our ongoing search for the causal variants and their potential influ -
ence on the neuronal cell-adhesion molecules in the pathogenesis of 
ASDs will be presented.
S08.3  Behavioural genetics in mice
J. Flint ;  
The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s09.1  Prenatal diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias
S. Unger ;  
Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University Hospital, 
Freiburg, Germany.
The delineation of skeletal dysplasias originated and still relies heavily 
on radiographic findings. Translation of this knowledge to ultrasound 
based diagnosis is not always evident or simple. Ultrasound provides 
an indirect image that is often focused on details and it can be dif -
ficult to get an overview (a form of prenatal babygram). For genetic 
counseling purposes it is important to distinguish lethal and non-lethal 
forms of dysplasia. Certain parameters, such as degree of long bone 
shortening, chest size relative to abdomen, and presence or absence 
of hydrops or other anomalies, are key to this interpretation. Few signs 
are specific (and none are pathognomonic) thus
a systematic approach to the skeleton is needed. This allows for the 
best possible chance of diagnosis but this is not always possible pre -
natally and even the most experienced centers must often give gener -
alized counseling. This talk will review the most common diagnoses as 
well as some of the pitfalls of ultrasound diagnosis.
s09.2  What you see depends on what you look at Genetics - 
Fetal ultrasound perspectives
R. Achiron ;  
University of Tel Aviv, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
Fetal medicine is a new evolving profession which requires a multidis -
ciplinary approach to confront with various fetal diseases.
Objective: To review the perspectives of Genetic counselling and So -
nographic evaluation in fetuses with abnormalities detected in utero.
Methods: A retrospective survey of stimulating and interesting cases 
will be presneted.
Results: Four fetuses representing the following topics are described:
1) New Technology and Pandora Box
2) One Sees what One Knows
3) What you see is the Tip of the Iceberg
4) Not Just Images
Conclusion: In modern obstetrics Genetic and fetal medicine collabo -
ration
is necessary for enhancing diagnosis and promoting accurate man -
agement.Concurrent Symposia 12
s09.3  Use of acGH in prenatal diagnosis
I. B. Van den Veyver ;  
Baylor College of Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology and Molecular and 
Human Genetics, Houston, TX, United States.
Current prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis for chromosomal abnormalities 
is performed by karyotyping of fetal cells from chorionic villi or amniotic 
fluid to detect any aneuploidy and structural genomic rearrangements 
of larger than ~5 Mb. In addition, fluorescence in situ  hybridization is 
used for rapid detection of common aneuploidies compatible with live 
birth or detection of deletion and duplication syndromes for which there 
is high clinical suspicion because of family history or prenatal ultra -
sound findings. In contrast, array-based Comparative Genomic Hy -
bridization (aCGH) can survey the entire genome for submicroscopic 
deletions and duplications, aneuploidy and other unbalanced chromo -
somal abnormalities. It is now widely used in the genetic evaluation of 
pediatric patients and is being increasingly applied to prenatal diagno -
sis where it is already making significant impact. Principles of aCGH 
and different platforms that can be used for prenatal diagnosis, with 
their benefits and challenges will be briefly reviewed. Our recent expe -
rience of over 600 cases suggests that aCGH-detection of copy num -
ber alterations of clinical significance from prenatally obtained samples 
is as high as 8%, depending on the indication, with more than 2% not 
otherwise detectable. The challenges of pre- and post-test counsel -
ing, cost, and potential for finding copy number changes of unknown 
significance continue to incite debate about the benefit of widespread 
use of aCGH for prenatal diagnosis; a large multicenter trial is ongo -
ing in the US to address some of these issues. However, the superior 
diagnostic power of aCGH, the small number of findings of uncertain 
significance (1% or less) most of which can be resolved by analyzing 
parents or by using data from ever-growing experience with diagnostic 
aCGH, and the decreasing cost, will likely spur universal acceptance 
of aCGH as a first-line prenatal diagnostic test for fetal chromosomal 
abnormalities in the near future.
s10.1  Patients‘ Organizations‘ Engagement in War on Rare 
Genetic Diseases: Scientific Activism and New Forms of 
sociality
V. Rabeharisoa ;  
Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris, Paris, France.
From the 1980’s onwards, both in Europe and North America, an in -
creasing number of patients’ organizations actively engage in the 
collection and circulation of knowledge on their conditions. Patients’ 
organizations concerned with rare genetic diseases offer a striking il -
lustration thereof. Some of them even intervene in research activities 
and contribute to the shaping of research agenda on their diseases. 
This communication aims at documenting this phenomenon and high -
lighting its impact on the governance of knowledge, as well as on the 
dynamics of patients’ organizations movements.
I will first show that patients’ organizations engagement in research 
constitutes a watershed in the history of patients’ organizations. They 
do no longer content to provide social and emotional support to their 
members and to advocate for their rights. They claim to take part in 
war on their diseases, alongside specialists. In the area of rare ge -
netic disorders, patients’ organizations are particularly assertive. Due 
to the scarcity of knowledge on their conditions, the limited number 
of specialists interested in, and the difficulties for making rare genetic 
diseases a public health issue, patients’ organizations soon decided to 
engage in research in order to foster war on their conditions.
Drawing on various case studies, I will then detail different configura -
tions of patients’ scientific activism. In the area of rare genetic dis -
eases, patients’ organizations do not only provide financial support to 
research. They mobilize patients’ experience and act as “lay-experts” 
in the process of knowledge production. They thus nurture specialists’ 
expertise with patients’ experience from bench to bedside, and give 
raise to hybrid forms of knowledge on their diseases.
Finally, I will show that patients’ scientific activism does not only trans -
form the very nature of knowledge and research activities. It also im -
pinges on patients’ identity and lay ground for new forms of sociality 
that the American anthropologist Paul Rabinow terms “biosociality”. 
To open the general discussion, I will offer a few examples and I will 
reflect on the social, political and ethical stakes pertaining this new 
articulation between genetics and society.s10.2  t ransitions between research and clinical practice: 
Families‘ experiences in a gene-hunting study
H. Statham1, M. Ponder1, M. P. M. Richards1, N. Hallowell2, L. Raymond3;  
1Centre for Family Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 2Public Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom, 3Dept of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
The GOLD study (Genetics of Learning Disability, a joint project un -
dertaken by the Department of Medical Genetics (University of Cam -
bridge) and The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute) to identify novel gene 
mutations on the X chromosome, recruited patients and families if:
• the family had multiple male individuals affected by significant Intel -
lectual Disability
• the pattern of occurrence of the Intellectual Disability suggested an 
X-linked inheritance pattern
• all genes known to be responsible for Intellectual Disability had been 
tested for and excluded.
This paper reports some of the findings of complementary research 
with a subset of families who were part of the GOLD study. The ob -
jectives were to explore and document the experiences, beliefs, un -
derstandings, attitudes and behaviours of family members while they 
were participating and afterwards.
Analysis revealed similarities between routine clinical practice and the 
genetic research in terms of process and desired outcome. Thus, in 
trying to identify the nature of the Intellectual Disability prior to par -
ticipation in the GOLD study, the diagnostic  process would have been 
to take blood and for the blood to be investigated for known genes. 
The process when the GOLD research was undertaken would also 
have been to take blood and to investigate the DNA extracted from 
the blood, but for as-yet unknown gene mutations. Those undergoing 
testing in either clinical practice or through research sought a genetic 
diagnosis for a variety of reasons, the most common of which was to 
allow informed reproductive choices for themselves and other family 
members. These similarities raise important issues for clinicians in -
volved with patients moving between clinical practice and research 
with regards consent processes at the beginning of research and the 
information and care given to participants at the end of research when 
they again become patients.
s10.3  Genetics and mental illness: perceptions of affected 
individuals and their family members
J. Austin ;  
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
To date, there has been little in the way of systematic effort to provide 
education about what is known (based on research) about the causes 
of mental illnesses for affected individuals and their families. However, 
because understanding cause of an illness is critical to adapting to it, in 
the absence of being provided with an explanation affected individuals 
and families create their own explanations, based on their experience. 
For mental illness, these causal explanations often invoke powerful 
negative emotions like guilt and shame, and can contribute to feelings 
of powerlessness over the illness. This presentation will review the 
potential psychosocial consequences of providing genetic counseling 
for individuals with severe psychiatric illness and their family members, 
illustrated with case examples from an ongoing randomized controlled 
trial.
s11.1  mechanisms of miRNA-mediated gene silencing
E. Izaurralde ;  
Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental Biology, Tuebingen, Germany.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are genome-encoded ~22 nucleotide-long RNAs 
that silence gene expression post-transcriptionally by base pairing 
with the 3’ untranslated regions of target mRNAs. To exert their func -
tion, miRNAs associate with Argonaute proteins (AGOs) in miRNA-
induced silencing complexes (miRISCs), which silence the expression 
of mRNAs containing partially or fully complementary miRNA-binding 
sites. In animals, most miRNAs are only partially complementary to 
their targets. In this case, our group has shown that the AGO proteins 
are not sufficient to mediate silencing and require interaction with pro -
teins of the GW182 family. We have also shown that AGO-GW182 
complexes mediate silencing by promoting translational repression 
and mRNA deadenylation catalyzed by CAF1-CCR4-NOT, the major 
cytoplasmic deadenylase complex. Deadenylation decreases transla -Concurrent Symposia 1
tion efficiency and, in somatic cells, commits the mRNA to decapping 
and 5’-to-3’ exonucleolytic degradation. Our analysis of GW182 pro -
tein function has revealed two domains critical for silencing: an N-ter -
minal GW-repeat-containing region conferring binding to AGOs, and a 
bipartite silencing domain, consisting of Mid and C-terminal regions, 
which elicits translational repression and degradation of miRNA tar -
gets. Exactly how the bipartite silencing domain of GW182 proteins 
interferes with translation and accelerates deadenylation is not com -
pletely understood. We have recently started to address this ques -
tion by showing that the silencing domains of GW182 interact with the 
cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPC1), suggesting GW182 
proteins are PABP-interacting proteins (Paips) that interfere with the 
function of PABPC1 in translation and mRNA stabilization.
s11.2  the hidden layer of noncoding RNA in the epigenetic 
control of human development and cognition
J. S. Mattick ;  
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.
Bioinformatic, genomic and experimental evidence all suggest that the 
genetic programming of humans and other complex organisms has 
been misunderstood for the past 50 years, because of the assumption 
- largely true for the unicellular prokaryotes, but not for multicellular 
eukaryotes - that most genetic information is transacted by proteins. 
The human genome specifies the development of an anatomically and 
cognitively complex individual comprised of 100 trillion cells with hun -
dreds of different and precisely sculptured muscles, bones and organs, 
including the brain, but which contains only about 20,000 protein-cod -
ing genes, similar in number and largely orthologous with those in 
nematodes that have only 1,000 somatic cells. On the other hand, the 
extent of non-protein-coding DNA increases with increasing complex -
ity, reaching 98.8% in humans, suggesting that much of the informa -
tion required to program development may reside in these sequences. 
Moreover it is now evident the majority of the mammalian genome is 
transcribed, mainly into non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and that 
there are tens if not hundreds of thousands of long and short RNAs 
in mammals that show specific expression patterns and subcellular 
locations. Our studies indicate that these RNAs form a massive hidden 
network of regulatory information that regulates epigenetic processes 
and directs the precise patterns of gene expression during growth and 
development. It also appears that RNA is central to brain development, 
learning and memory, and that animals, especially primates, have de -
veloped sophisticated RNA editing systems to modify hardwired ge -
netic information in response to experience, that in turn can modulate 
epigenetic memory, some of which may be inherited. Thus RNA may 
represent the computational engine of the cell and the substrate for 
epigenome-environment interactions. Moreover, what was dismissed 
as junk because it was not understood may hold the key to under -
standing human evolution, development and cognition, as well as our 
individual differences and susceptibilities to complex diseases.
s11.3  system genetics of non-coding RNA
L. Steinmetz ;  
EMBL Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
An unanticipatedly large proportion of eukaryotic genomes is tran -
scribed. By profiling genome-wide transcription at high resolution on 
both strands of the complete yeast genome we have found hundreds 
of novel intergenic and antisense non-coding RNA transcripts. By com -
paring transcriptome profiles across multiple conditions and strains 
with shuffled genotypes, we have defined an annotated set of differen -
tially expressed non-coding transcripts revealing differences in struc -
ture and level. Hundreds of non-coding RNAs appear to arise from an 
inherent bi-directional transcription from eukaryotic promoters. Many 
others originate from 3’ nucleosome depleted regions of genes and 
are transcribed antisense to the open reading frame. The arrangement 
and regulatory patterns of these transcripts suggest mechanisms of 
how they could be regulated and how they could regulate the expres -
sion of genes.s12.1  What can be learned from a large clinical cohort
S. Bergmann ;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
The Cohorte Lausannoise  (CoLaus) is a random population sample of 
more than 6‘000 individuals who were genotyped for 500.000 Single 
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) using Affymetrix SNP-microarrays. 
Besides these genotypic markers also a large number of clinically rel -
evant parameters were measured. Comparing the country of origin 
of these individual with the projection of their genotypic profile onto 
the principal components of the entire genotypic dataset revealed an 
astonishingly close correspondence between genetic and geographic 
distances. Indeed, a geographical map of Europe arises naturally as 
an efficient two-dimensional summary of genetic variation in Europe -
ans (see Figure). Whole-genome association studies for height, body-
mass-index, serum lipid and calcium concentrations, blood pressure 
and other clinical phenotypes using classical scans testing one SNP at 
a time elucidated many loci with highly significant associations, which 
are promising candidates towards unraveling mechanisms of actions 
and malfunction. Yet, like in many other studies, together these vari -
ants only explain a small fraction of the phenotypic variance, indicating 
that we still miss a comprehensive picture of: (a) what are the causal 
variants, (b) what effects are attributed by rare variants and/or copy 
number variations, (c) what fraction of the variance can be explained 
by SNP-SNP or SNP-environment interactions, and (d) what are the in -
trinsic limitations of currently used algorithms in dealing with very large 
sets of genotypic and phenotypic data, which are partially incomplete 
or noisy. I will outline our research dealing with these challenges.
s12.2  Human genetics from genes  to complex networks
R. Xavier ;  
Andrew D. Smith, Department of Biology, Boston, MA, United States.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.S12.3  Pathway Discovery in Adipocyte Biology Using 
Epigenomics
E. D. Rosen ;  
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States.
The epidemic of obesity and Type 2 diabetes has thrust the biology of 
the adipocyte into the forefront of biomedical research priorities. We 
are interested in identifying the transcriptional basis by which adipo -
cytes govern their behavior. To this end we have utilized approaches 
that leverage maps of epigenetic alterations in adipose tissue to pre -
dict novel transcriptional pathways. We have generated genome-wide 
chromatin state maps, PPARγ and CTCF localization maps and gene 
expression profiles from both murine and human models of adipogen -
esis. These data provide unprecedented views of chromatin remodel -
ing during cellular differentiation, and allow identification of thousands 
of putative pre-adipocyte- and adipocyte-specific cis-regulatory ele -
ments based on dynamic chromatin signatures. We find that the spe -
cific locations of most such elements differ between the two models, 
including at orthologous loci with similar expression patterns. Based 
on sequence analysis and reporter assays, we show that these differ -
ences are determined in part by evolutionary turnover of transcription 
factor motifs in the genome sequences, and that this turnover may 
be facilitated by the presence of multiple distal regulatory elements at 
adipogenesis-dependent loci. Finally, we also utilize the close relation -
ship between open chromatin marks and transcription factor motifs to 
identify and validate several novel regulators of adipogenesis and lipid 
homeostasis.
s13.1  can breast cancer mortality be reduced with genetic 
testing?
P. Hall ;  
Dept. Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.Concurrent Symposia 1
s13.2  common genetic variants and cancer risks for BRcA1 
and BRcA2 mutation carriers
A. C. Antoniou , on behalf of the Consortium of Investigators of Modifiers of 
BRCA1/2 (CIMBA);  
Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Several lines of evidence suggest that genetic factors modify cancer 
risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2  mutation carriers. Past studies concen -
trated on variants in candidate genes thought to be functionally rel -
evant to the diseases. However, these have not been very success -
ful and most studies were too small to provide enough power to de -
tect the modest associations that are likely to be present. Recently, 
polymorphisms identified through genome-wide association studies 
of unselected cancer patients and controls have been shown to be 
associated with cancer risk in large studies by the Consortium of In -
vestigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA). This approach identi -
fied seven genetic variants (in FGFR2, TOX3, MAP3K1, LSP1, 2q35, 
5p12 and SLC4A7 ) that are associated with the risk of breast cancer 
and one variant (in BNC2 ) that is associated with ovarian cancer risk 
for BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers. Differential associations 
were found between these variants and breast cancer risk for BRCA1  
and BRCA2  mutation carriers. These are in line with differences ob -
served in the associations between these polymorphisms and different 
disease subtypes in the general population and suggest that studies 
of mutation carriers may be useful for identifying genetic variants as -
sociated with different disease subtypes in the general population. All 
polymorphisms appear to interact multiplicatively on breast cancer risk 
for mutation carriers. Based on the joint genotype distribution of the 7 
risk associated SNPs in BRCA2  mutation carriers, the 5% of BRCA2  
mutation carriers at highest risk were predicted to have a probability 
of 80-96% of developing the disease by age 80, compared with 42-
50% for the 5% of carriers at lowest risk. Such risk differences may 
be sufficient to influence the clinical management of mutation carriers 
and suggest that this is may be one of the first clinically useful impact 
of common, low penetrance variants identified through genome wide 
association studies.
s13.3  is breast cancer prognosis inherited?
H. Nevanlinna ;  
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Helsinki, Finland.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s14.1  the 1000 Genomes project
R. Durbin ;  
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s14.2  international cancer Genome consortium
T. Hudson ;  
Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, MaRS Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) is coordinat -
ing an international-scale research effort to obtain a comprehensive 
description of genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic changes in the 
major forms of cancer. This information will lead to better ways of diag -
nosing, treating and preventing cancer.
The ICGC was launched in April 2008, with the announcement of the 
proposed strategies and policies to the international scientific com -
munity to enable funding agencies and research groups to plan their 
participation within the ICGC. As of April 2010, the ICGC has received 
commitments from funding organizations in Asia, Australia, Europe and 
North America for the following cancer genome projects: acute myeloid 
leukemia (United States); breast cancer, multiple subtypes (European 
Union, France, and the United Kingdom); chronic lymphocytic leuke -
mia (Spain); colon cancer (United States); gastric adenocarcinoma 
(China); glioblastoma multiforme (United States); hepatocellular car -
cinoma, alcohol and associated etiologies (France) and viral etiolo -
gies (Japan); lung cancer (United States); oral cavity cancer (India); 
ovarian cancer (Australia and United States); pancreatic adenocarci -noma (Australia and Canada) and entero-pancreatic endocrine tumors 
(Italy); pediatric brain cancers (Germany); prostate cancer (Canada 
and United Kingdom); and renal cancer (European Union and France). 
Each project is expected to involve specimens (tumor plus normal) 
from approximately 500 patients. Over time, additional nations and or -
ganizations are expected to join the ICGC.
Over the next ten years, the ICGC expects to produce comprehensive 
catalogues of the full range of genetic mutations involved in 50 types 
of cancer (i.e. 25,000 cancer and 25,000 germline genomes), with key 
factors being the ability to detect all mutated cancer genes, data at 
the level of individual DNA bases, application of common standards 
for pathology and technology and comparison data from matched, 
non-tumour tissue. The ICGC’s informed consent and ethical oversight 
policies state that cancer patients enrolled in an ICGC-related study 
should be informed that their participation is voluntary, that their clinical 
care will not be affected by their participation and that data obtained 
from analyses using their samples will be made available to the inter -
national research community. ICGC projects use common standards 
of data collection and analysis. In April 2010, the ICGC launched its 
data portal at www.icgc.org, with the release of several cancer genome 
datasets that are freely available to the global research community.
In my presentation, I will use the examples of pancreatic cancer ge -
nome datasets generated by the Australian and Canadian teams.
s14.3  Next Generation Human Genetics
D. Nickerson ;  
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA, 
United States.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
s15.1  Using simple cells to model complex Diseases
S. L. Lindquist ;  
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and HHMI, Dept. of Biology, MIT, 
Cambridge, MA, United States.
It is now clear that an astonishing number of human diseases, es -
pecially neurodegenerative diseases, result from basic problems in 
protein folding. These diseases may appear to have little in common 
with each other besides their devastating effects on patients and their 
families. Yet one feature they share is the occurrence of complexes 
of misfolded, aggregated proteins in affected neurons. For each dis -
ease, a different protein is the major constituent of the aggregate: in 
Parkinson’s disease alpha-synuclein, in Alzheimer’s disease Aβ and 
tau. We have developed simple cellular models these protein fold -
ing disorders by over-expressing human disease-associated proteins 
in yeast. By combining the unique power of yeast genetics with the 
highly conserved biology of protein homeostasis in all eukaryotes, we 
use yeast cells as “living test tubes” to investigate the mechanisms 
of toxicity associated with problems in protein folding, trafficking, and 
degradation and complement these basic studies with transcriptional 
analysis and high-throughput chemical and genetic screens for toxicity 
modifiers. Progress will be presented on models for the misfolding of 
α-syn and Aβ.
Supported by HHMI and NIH grants NS038372, NS060957.
s15.2  C. elegans  models for neurodegenerative diseases
E. Nollen ;  
Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and University of 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Various age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkin -
son‘s disease, polyglutamine expansion diseases and Alzheimer‘s 
disease, are associated with the accumulation of misfolded proteins 
in aggregates in the brain. However, how and why these proteins form 
aggregates and cause disease is still poorly understood. Using the 
nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans  to model these diseases and 
high-throughput genetic screens, we have identified genes that modify 
aggregation of the disease proteins and their toxicity. We have recently 
identified an evolutionarily highly conserved modifier of aggregation, 
moag-4,  as a positive regulator of aggregate formation in C. elegans 
models for misfolding diseases. We have shown that  moag-4 drive s 
the formation  of compact misfolding intermediates that are required 
for aggregate formation. We have also shown that loss of moag-4  pro-Concurrent Symposia 1
motes longevity in parallel to the core IGF/insulin (IIS) longevity path -
way, converging at the IIS transcription factors, daf-16  and hsf-1 . Thus, 
moag-4  has a dual function as a regulator of protein aggregation and 
of lifespan in C. elegans . moag-4  represents an unexplored protein 
quality control pathway and since there are two close human orthologs 
with conserved functions, our results will open up new avenues for 
research on aging-related neurodegenerative diseases.
s15.3  the prion-like aspect of Alzheimer´s disease
M. Jucker ;  
Department of Cellular Neurology, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
Cerebral proteopathy is a unifying term for cerebral neurodegenerative 
diseases in which aggregated proteins are abnormally deposited in the 
brain. The hallmark proteopathy is Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in which 
fibrillar amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is deposited extracellularly in the form of parenchymal plaques, and hyperphosphoylated tau intracellularly 
as neurofibrillary tangles. To understand the mechanisms how abnor -
mal protein processing and aggregation leads to cerebral amyloido -
sis and tangle formation, cellular dysfunction, and dementia, several 
transgenic mouse models have been generated. These mouse models 
have been instrumental to study the induction and spread of the AD 
lesions and a mechanism reminescent of prions has been suggested. 
The observation that Aβ structural variants can be induced in vivo  in 
these mouse models intensifies the search of the agent that drives 
corruptive protein templating in AD pathogenesis. AD lesions and neu -
rodegeneration likely occur many years before the clinical signs of the 
disease. Thus, an understanding of the earliest and initial events in the 
development of AD is crucial for the development of diagnostics and 
early mechanism-based intervention.Abstracts of EsHG Educational sessions
Es1.1  Genetics of Female Ovarian Dysfunction
B. C. J. M. Fauser ;  
Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecology, University Medical 
Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Ovarian function is regulated by a complex endocrine (and paracrine) 
system involving the central nervous system, pituitary gonadotropins, 
and ovarian steroids. Numerous factors are involved such as kiss -
peptin, GnRH, LH, FSH (its receptors and signal transduction path -
ways) and many enzymes and intermediate steroids (in the cascade of 
converting cholesterol to estradiol), and finally steroid receptors. Rare, 
single gene mutations and resulting phenotypes have been described 
for all steps imaginable. Well known phenotypes include Kallman 
syndrome, 21 hydroxylase deficiency, FSH receptor defect, McCune 
Albright. These “experiments of nature” greatly improved our under -
standing of physiology.
Normal menopause occurs between 40 and 60 yrs of age. The age of 
menopause between sisters (or between mothers and daughters) is 
closely linked, suggesting a strong genetic component. Age of meno -
pause is related to preceding fertility and has important implications 
for subsequent female health. Some candidate genes have been as -
sociated with age of menopause and currently additional information is 
generated through the use of genome wide association studies (GWA) 
using large numbers of samples. Early menopause seems linked to 
poor IVF outcomes, as well as low response to ovarian stimulation. Pri -
mary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is often associated with a premature 
exhaustion of the primordial follicle pool. Turner Syndrome is linked 
with the most severe form of POI. Several regions have been identified 
on the X-chromosome critical for normal ovarian function, and addi -
tional mutations, SNPs and CNVs are currently being described on the 
X chromosome. Many transgenic animal models have been generated 
to further explore roles of specific genes in ovarian function.
The current focus of genetic research beyond candidate genes in 
female reproduction is completely geared towards the elucidation of 
complex and common benign conditions such as polycystic ovary syn -
drome (PCOS), endometriosis, uterine fibroids.
Es1.2  Genetic Regulation of spermatogenesis
S. Repping ;  
Professor Human Reproductive Biology, Center for Reproductive Medicine, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
Es2.1  Finding your feet in the Genome Database World
C. Béroud ;  
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
Es2.2  Browsing Genes and Genomes with Ensembl
B. Overduin ;  
PANDA Coordination & Outreach, EMBL - European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
The Ensembl project provides a comprehensive source of annotation 
for the human genome, along with other species of biomedical inter -
est. Ensembl automatically annotates genomic sequence and predicts 
the position of genes, to provide a comprehensive range of sequence 
features and genome wide gene and protein sets. Ensembl also in -
tegrates manually annotated gene structures from external sources 
where available. Apart from the gene sets, Ensembl contains exten -
sive comparative, variation and regulatory information. A rich variety of 
links to external databases (e.g. OMIM, dbSNP and the NHGRI GWAS 
catalogue) helps to make Ensembl a key starting and reference point 
for studies in genetics and molecular biology. Ensembl data are ac -
cessible through an interactive web site (http://www.ensembl.org), flat 
files, the data mining tool BioMart, direct database querying and a Perl 
API.
In this presentation an overview of the Ensembl project and the BioMart data mining tool will be given with an emphasis on human data in gen -
eral and variation data in particular.
Es3.1  Family matters: theory and practice in the communication 
of genetic information
C. Gaff ;  
Departments of Paediatrics & Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia.
Facilitating family communication about genetics is an integral part of 
genetic counselling practice. Although the research literature predomi -
nantly focuses on the communication of test results, families inevitably 
discuss other aspects of genetic conditions, sometimes deliberately, 
often as part of their regular social discourse. It is likely that commu -
nication relating to inheritance and genetic conditions conforms to the 
rules and patterns that govern communication generally in families. In -
sights from the discipline of family communication may therefore assist 
practitioners work with families. They may also enhance awareness 
of the practitioner‘s own communication patterns and expectations. 
After a brief introduction to genetic counselling practice in this field, 
participants will be introduced to theories from the discipline of family 
communication - including Communication Privacy Management and 
Family Communication Patterns. The relevance of these to genetic 
counselling will be explored, with case studies used as a basis for 
discussion. Throughout the workshop, there will be an emphasis on 
reflective practice.
Es3.2  Families and Genomics: A Biopsychosocial model for 
clinical Practice
J. Rolland ;  
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neuroscience, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
Groundbreaking advances in genomics are identifying genetic com -
ponents in most major health and mental health disorders. This poses 
unprecedented challenges for families. How are family and couple 
relationships being affected by the ability to peer into their possible 
health and mental health futures? How can we help families use the 
knowledge of genetic risk to become more resilient and live life more 
fully?
Drawing from his recent book, Individuals, Families, and the New Era 
of Genetics , Dr. Rolland will first present an overview of his Family 
System Genetic Illness model to address the psychosocial challenges 
of genomic conditions for patients and their families, and to help orga -
nize this complex biopsychosocial landscape for clinical practice and 
research. This model clusters genomic disorders based on key char -
acteristics that define types of disorders with similar patterns of psy -
chosocial demands over time. For disorders in which genetic testing is 
available, core nonsymptomatic time phases with salient developmen -
tal challenges are described pre- and post-testing, including a long-
term adaptation phase. The FSGI model builds on Rolland’s Family 
System Illness model, which identifies psychosocial types and phases 
of chronic disorders after clinical onset. The FSGI model is designed to 
be flexible and responsive to future discoveries in genomic research.
Dr Rolland then addresses core issues and cultural influences in deci -
sion-making about genetic testing, communication with partners, chil -
dren, and other family members, and living with risk information across 
the life cycle. Other key issues discussed include: privacy vs. right to 
know of others at risk, belief conflicts, impact on childbearing deci -
sions, multigenerational themes, and behavioral genetics. Guidelines 
are provided for healthcare and mental health professionals to help 
families master these complex challenges. Its utility is discussed for re -
search, preventive screening, family assessment, treatment planning, 
and service delivery in a wide range of healthcare settings.
Es4.1  Alport syndrome
C. Antignac ;  
INSERM Division: U 423, Paris, France.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.1 Educational Sessions 1Es4.2  Renal cystic disease
N. V. A. M. Knoers ;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Human Genetics 
417, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Cystic kidney diseases are among the most frequent incurable genetic 
diseases. They are a clinically and genetically extremely heteroge -
neous group of disorders, encompassing autosomal dominant, au -
tosomal recessive and X-linked traits, which are all characterized by 
perturbed tubular architecture leading to the formation of cysts. The 
most prominent examples are Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) and 
nephronophthisis (NPHP), which affect both adults and children.
In this educational workshop, I will discuss the clinical and genetic as -
pects of the different types of PKD en NPHP. I will review studies that 
link these disorders to disturbed structure and/or function of renal pri -
mary cilia. Primary cilia are microtubule-based organelles, protruding 
from the apical surface of almost all cells in the mammalian body, with 
an antenna-like sensory function. In recent years primary cilia have 
been shown to play important roles in embryonic development and 
tissue homeostasis. The ciliary connection also explains the frequent 
association of extrarenal symptoms with cystic renal disorders, such 
as liver fibrosis/cysts, retinal degeneration, brain abnormalities, lateral -
ity defects, and others. Several examples of these syndromic forms of 
cystic kidney disease will be highlighted.
Es5.1  Genetic deafness
M. Bitner-Glindzicz ;  
Institute of Child Health, Ear Institute, Research Area Molecular, Clinical, 
London, United Kingdom.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
Es5.2  Non-syndromic and syndromic retinitis pigmentosa
H. Bolz1,2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics , University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 
2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is characterized by progressive loss of night 
vision in adolescence and constriction of the visual field that may ul -
timatively lead to tunnel vision. Loss of central vision may occur in 
later life. Most patients are legally blind by the age of 40 years. RP 
results from loss of retinal rod and cone photoreceptor cells. Dimin -
ished retinal function is detectable by electroretinogram long before 
night blindness, usually the initial symptom, is noticed by the patient. 
The appearance of abnormal pigment deposits (so-called bone spicule 
pigmentation) along with retina atrophy/thinning is the hallmark of RP.
RP is the leading cause of visual loss in individuals younger than 60 
years, with a prevalence of about 1 in 4000. RP is a major cause of 
blindness. Non-syndromic RP can have different modes of inheritance: 
autosomal dominant (ADRP, 30-40%), autosomal recessive (ARRP, 
50-60%) and X-linked (XLRP, 5-15%). Most isolated cases probably 
represent recessive disease. Non-mendelian inheritance patterns, 
such as digenic inheritance and maternal (mitochondrial) inheritance, 
exist but are probably rare.
RP genes encode for a variety of proteins, reflecting the functional 
complexity of the retina and including gene products hitherto consid -
ered crucial for life such as splice factors and an enzyme of the Krebs 
cycle. RP is part of many syndromes. In particular, it can be observed 
in several so-called ciliopathies, e.g. Usher- (with deafness), Joubert- 
(a developmental disorder with brain malformations) and Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome. Some of these retinal ciliopathies bridge monogenic and 
oligogenic inheritance, and variants in certain genes have been shown 
to act as modifiers of retinal disease. This presentation will give an 
overview of RP genes, the spectrum of phenotypes and future devel -
opments in therapy and research.
Es6.1  the Face Behind the syndrome
G. Gillessen-Kaesbach ;  
Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
Syndromes are typically diagnosed by a combination of clinical fea -
tures. In many conditions the facial gestalt is of high diagnostic value. 
Recognition of syndromes like Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Ka -
buki syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome and many others can be achieved just by looking at the face.
In this educational session the different anatomical structures of the 
face are explained and you will learn to recognize facial dysmorphisms 
of the eyes , nose, mouth, ears etc. In a second part of the course 
syndromes with a recognizable face will be presented. The variable 
expression of facial features will be demonstrated by showing the mild 
and severe end of the spectrum. In addition changing of the face with 
time will be shown. Finally the participants can test their diagnostic 
skills in a quiz.
Es7.1  Overgrowth
P. Lapunzina ;  
Section of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
Es7.2  Undergrowth
A. Rauch ;  
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.
ES8.1  Cystic Fibrosis
B. Kerem ;  
The Hebrew University of Jerusaem, Dep. Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel.
The gene responsible for the cystic fibrosis (CF) disease defined as 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 9CFTR) was 
cloned 20 years ago. The aim of cloning the “CF gene” was to uncover 
new knowledge that will help to prevent, detect, diagnose and treat 
patients suffering from the CF disease. In this educational lecture I will 
overview and discuss: 1. The impact of cloning the CFTR gene on CF 
incidence and prevalence. 2. Our understanding of the effect of ge -
netic modifiers on disease severity and 3. The current status of thera -
peutic approaches based on “CFTR knowledge”. In the first part of the 
lecture I will show that in most countries, but not all, we succeeded in 
finding the CF causing mutations in the majority of patients and by this 
generated the required basis for genetic testing. The incidence of new 
CF live birth has decreased in recent years in several countries while 
in others no change is found. I will discuss potential factors leading to 
this difference. In the second part I will discuss the molecular basis for 
disease variability among different patients and review the effect of 
genetic modifier on the disease severity. In the third part I will summa -
rize the therapeutic approaches which are being developed based on 
CFTR knowledge. This will include the current status of gene therapy 
for CF, activation of non-CFTR chloride channels, and mutation spe -
cific therapies. In summary, a trend for preventions is already found 
in many countries, better tools for CF diagnosis were developed, and 
therapeutic approaches are being investigated. Overall, 20 years of 
progress enabled us to develop new hopes for a better future for CF 
patients around the world.
ES8.2  Immotile cilia
H. Omran ;  
Universitätsklinikum Münster, Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, 
Münster, Germany.
No abstract reiceved as per date of printing, please check the abstract 
section on the conference website www.eshg.org/eshg2010 for pos -
sible updates.Educational Sessions 171
Abstracts of EsHG concurrent sessions
c01.1  t racing the derivation of embryonic stem cells from the 
inner cell mass by single cell RNA-seq analysis
K. Q. Lao1, F. Tang2, C. Barbacioru1, S. Bao2, C. Lee2, E. Nordman1, X. Wang1, 
M. A. Surani2;  
1Molecular Cell Biology Division, Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United 
States, 2Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and 
Developmental Biology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
The molecular mechanism underlying the transition from the inner cell 
mass (ICM) of blastocysts to pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESC) is 
not fully understood. This is partly because of the apparent heteroge -
neity amongst a small group of cells, which poses difficulties in inves -
tigating this question. Using single cell analysis, including RNA-Seq 
transcriptome analysis at the resolution of single cells, we have ana -
lysed the dynamic molecular network within individual cells from the 
ICM outgrowth and the established ESC. This study has identified mo -
lecular changes that accompany this transition. Our study shows that 
key genes that confer the property of self-renewal are up regulated as 
ICM cells progress to ESC. We also detected very significant global 
changes of transcript variants from individual genes, amongst which 
the general merabolism genes are strongly over-represented. Further -
more, there was a global increase in the expression of repressive epi -
genetic regulators with a concomitant decrease in gene activators. The 
unique ESC epigenotype may thus be sustained while retaining an 
inherent plasticity for differentiation. Moreover, changes in microRNAs 
result in one set that targets early differentiation genes, and the sec -
ond set targets ESC specific pluripotency genes to maintain a delicate 
balance between pluripotency and a capacity for rapid differentiation. 
A similar paradigm may also subvert normal developmental sequence 
in specific adult cells during the formation of diseased tissues, includ -
ing cancers.
c01.2*  Variation in transcription factor binding among humans
M. Kasowski1, F. Grubert2, C. Heffelfinger1, M. Hariharan2, A. Asabere1, S. 
Waszak3, L. Habegger1, J. Rozowsky1, M. Shi1, A. E. Urban1, M. Hong1, K. J. 
Karczewski2, W. Huber3, S. M. Weissman1, M. B. Gerstein1, J. O. Korbel3, M. 
Snyder1;  
1Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Stanford University, Palo 
Alto, CA, United States, 3European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
Differences in gene expression may play a major role in speciation and 
phenotypic diversity. Although variations in gene expression among 
individuals have been documented, the origins of these differences are 
not clear, and studies that directly measure differences in transcrip -
tion factor binding sites among humans have not been performed. We 
have examined genome-wide variation in transcription factor binding 
in different individuals and a chimpanzee using chromatin immunopre -
cipitation followed by massively-parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq). The 
binding sites of RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) as well as a key regulator 
of immune responses, NFκB, have been mapped in ten lymphoblas -
toid cell lines derived from individuals of African, European, and Asian 
ancestry, including a parent-offspring trio. Using a stringent threshold, 
approximately 7.5% and 25% of the respective NFκB and Pol II binding 
regions exhibit differences between any two individuals. To understand 
the underlying basis of the variations, we examined the effect of SNPs 
and genomic structural variations (SVs) on binding differences among 
individuals. We find that many binding differences are associated with 
SNPs and SVs. Comparison of the binding data with gene expression 
data generated by RNA-Seq revealed that differences in binding often 
correlate with gene expression differences. Furthermore, comparison 
of the Pol II human sites with binding sites identified in the chimpanzee 
suggests a high level of divergence in binding relative to our closest 
evolutionary neighbor. Our results indicate that many differences in 
individuals occur at the level of TF binding and provide insight into the 
genetic events responsible for these differences.
c01.3*  Genomewide DNA methylation analysis in 
neurodegenerative disorders
S. Iraola1, R. Rabionet1, G. Roma2, M. Montfort3, S. Carbonell3, I. Ferrer4, X. 
Estivill1,5;  
1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, 
2Center of Genomic Regulation (CRG), Bioinformatics Core Facilities, Barcelona, Spain, 3CEGEN _ Barcelona Node, Genoma España, Barcelona, 
Spain, 4Servei Anatomia Patologica, IDIBELL-Hospital de, Barcelona, Spain, 
5Pompeu Fabra University, Experimental and Health Sciences department, 
Barcelona, Spain.
DNA methylation is one of the most remarkable events within the epi -
genetic mechanisms of gene regulation, development and genetic 
imprinting in vertebrates. Alterations in the methylation pattern of regu -
latory regions have been linked to several pathologies, such as can -
cer and neuropsychiatric disorders (including schizophrenia and Rett 
syndrome). In addition, there is an emergent interest to elucidate the 
relationship between the ageing process, neurodegenerative diseases 
and aberrant patterns of methylation. For this purpose, we have com -
pared the DNA methylation profile along seven relevant brain areas 
between Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease samples and controls. 
DNA extracted from prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, hypo -
thalamus, pons, substantia nigra and cerebellar vermis, from cases 
and controls, was bisulphate treated and hybridized on an Illumina In -
finium methylation array (HumanMethylation27), covering 27,578 CpG 
sites located in the regulatory region of 14,475 genes and 110 miRNAs 
promoters. First, an unsupervised hierarchical analysis was used to 
detect a methylation pattern dependent on brain area, as previously 
suggested by Ladd-Acosta et al. (2007). Our data show a clustering 
of all the cerebellar samples (independent of disease status), confirm -
ing the observation made by Ladd-Acosta, although the remaining 
brain areas did not show such a clear clustering effect. Secondly, we 
proposed to identify disease and tissue specific methylation changes. 
We observed methylation differences in genes previously described 
as related to neurodegenerative disease (APOE, PSEN1, SIRT3, and 
MAOA/B) or to epigenetic mechanisms, as DNMT1, as well as in novel 
candidate genes.
c01.4  Dissecting the regulatory network of p63 in p-related 
developmental disorders
J. Zhou , H. van Bokhoven;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The transcription factor p63 is a key factor in ectodermal development. 
Heterozygous mutations in p63 give rise to seven clinical conditions 
with autosomal dominant inheritance in human. These conditions are 
characterized by different combinations of split hand-split foot malfor -
mation, cleft lip/palate and ectodermal dysplasia (ED). Numerous p63 
target genes have been reported; however, their contributions to the 
phenotypes in the patients carrying a p63 mutation have remained un -
clear. To understand the regulatory network of p63 relevant to patient 
phenotypes, we used a disease model, human primary keratinocytes 
established from patients with p63 mutations. A combination of ge -
nome-wide expression profiling and DNA-binding analysis by Chro -
matin immunoprecipation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) 
in primary keratinocytes revealed a subgroup of direct novel target 
genes relevant to ED syndromes. A number of validated p63 binding 
sites appear to be directly involved in related genetic disorders (cleft 
lip/palate and split hand-split foot malformation). These binding sites 
can be found in promoter regions and introns, but in several instances 
also at distances up to 500 kb from the predicted target gene. Gene 
expression controlled by p63 binding sites identified in our study was 
confirmed functionally in transgene reporter assays in zebrafish and 
mouse. Our study not only increases the repertoire of p63 target genes 
but also provides a concrete molecular basis to elucidate the disease 
mechanism of p63 and p63-related developmental disorders.
C01.5  Next generation sequencing-based mRNA profiling of 
total blood in a large human cohort
P. A. C. ‚t Hoen1, J. T. den Dunnen1, E. J. C. de Geus2, D. I. Boomsma2, J. J. 
Hottenga2, B. W. J. H. Penninx3, G. J. B. van Ommen1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics - Leiden Genome Technology Center, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of 
Biological psychology - Netherlands Twin Registry, VU University, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 3Department of Psychiatry - Netherlands Study of Depression and 
Anxiety, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
With rapidly decreasing sequencing cost, sequence-based gene ex -
pression profiling becomes an attractive alternative over array-based 
studies. We report on one of the first sequence-based studies into 
the inter-individual variability of gene expression levels in total blood 
(n=104). Despite the high abundance of reticulocyte-derived hemoglo -Concurrent Sessions1
bin mRNAs (20-80% of reads), the sequencing depth of 10±2.5 million 
reads per sample allows for the reliable quantification of mRNAs de -
rived from ~12,000 genes with an expression level down to 0.3 cop -
ies per cell. The amount of hemoglobin transcripts shows a significant 
inverse correlation with white blood cell counts at the time of sample 
collection. The absolute nature of the expression levels obtained with 
next generation sequencing, the high sensitivity of the technology, and 
the presence of cell type-specific transcripts allow for the accurate es -
timation of the relative amounts of white blood cells, including those 
for low abundant basophils and eosinophils. Since differences in blood 
cell content are a major confounding factor in blood-based expres -
sion profiling studies, it is essential to correct for these differences 
before analyzing expression differences between subjects. Unlike ar -
ray-based studies, sequence-based studies enable the quantification 
of allele-specific expression using variants in the mRNA-derived se -
quence reads. We found that the majority of genes demonstrate pre -
ferred expression of one of the two alleles. Furthermore, we observed 
remarkable inter-individual differences in the preference of one allele 
over the other. Another factor contributing to the inter-individual differ -
ences in gene expression is the preferred expression of specific splic -
ing isoforms and/or use of shorter or longer 3’-UTRs.
c01.6  mRNA-seq transcriptome analysis of human trisomy 21 
using monozygotic twins
A. Letourneau1, S. B. Montgomery1, C. Borel1, E. Migliavacca1,2, D. Robyr1, 
L. Farinelli3, S. Deutsch1, S. Dahoun-Hadorn1, E. T. Dermitzakis1, S. E. 
Antonarakis1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School and University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 
2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland, 3FASTERIS SA, Plan-les-
Ouates, Switzerland.
Trisomy 21 (T21) is the most widely studied model phenotype of whole 
chromosome aneuploidy. It is likely that the majority of the T21 phe -
notypes are related to alterations of gene expression. Transcriptome 
sequencing now provides the opportunity to investigate in details the 
perturbations of gene expression in T21 cells and tissues.
In this study we used fibroblasts derived from a pair of monozygotic 
twins discordant for T21. For the first time, the use of these samples 
eliminates the bias of genome variability and thus all transcriptome 
differences observed are likely to be related to the supernumerary 
chromosome 21.
The transcriptome (polyA+ mRNA) was studied by RNA-Seq; 29 mil -
lion 76 bp paired-end reads were generated from each sample. We 
were able to compare the expression of 285’550 exons and 28’178 
genes between the samples. We observed that about 9% of exons 
are differentially expressed between the two samples (FDR<0.01). As 
expected, we found that the majority (93%) of chromosome 21 exons 
are overexpressed in the trisomic twin. Differentially expressed exons 
and genes, chimeric transcripts, splicing variants and allelic expres -
sion imbalances will be presented. We will also compare the data with 
previous microarray studies in order to investigate which transcriptome 
differences can be validated by sequencing and truly related to the 
trisomy 21 per se.
C02.1*  Identification of ANKRD11 and ZNF77 as candidate 
genes for autism and variable cognitive impairment in the novel 
16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome
M. H. Willemsen1, B. A. Fernandez2, C. A. Bacino3, E. Gerkes4, A. P. M. de 
Brouwer1, R. Pfundt1, B. Sikkema-Raddatz4, S. W. Scherer5, C. R. Marshall6, L. 
Potocki3, H. van Bokhoven1, T. Kleefstra1;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
2Memorial University of Newfoundland and Provincial Medical Genetic Program, 
Eastern Health, St. John‘s, NL, Canada, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Texas 
Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 4University Medical Centre 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5The Centre forApplied Genomics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6The 
centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Introduction: The clinical utilization of array comparative genomic hy -
bridization in the evaluation of patients with intellectual disablity has 
recently led to the discovery of a number of novel microdeletion and 
microduplication syndromes. Aberrations of chromosome 16q with 
clinical relevance have rarely been reported. Interstitial deletions re -stricted to band 16q24.3 have not been reported before
Methods: In this study we aimed to characterize the clinical and mo -
lecular features of four patients with de novo submicroscopic interstitial 
16q24.3 microdeletions ascertained by genome-wide array analysis 
and to determine the shortest region of overlap (SRO) to identify can -
didate genes responsible for their overlapping phenotype
Results: Clinical features observed in these patients include facial dys -
morphisms comprising prominent forehead, large ears, smooth phil -
trum, pointed chin and wide mouth, variable cognitive impairment, au -
tism spectrum disorder, structural anomalies of the brain and seizures. 
The common region of overlap of the deletions is only 90 kb and com -
prises two known genes, Ankyrin Repeat Domain 11  (ANKRD11 ) and 
Zinc Finger 778  (ZNF778 ), and is located approximately 10kb distally 
to Cadherin 15  (CDH15 ). This region is not found as a copy number 
variation in controls.
Discussion: We propose that these patients represent a novel and 
distinctive microdeletion syndrome, characterized by autism spectrum 
disorder, variable cognitive impairment, facial dysmorphisms and brain 
anomalies. We suggest that haploinsufficiency of ANKRD11  and/or 
ZNF778  contribute to this phenotype and speculate that further inves -
tigation of non-deletion patients who have features suggestive of this 
16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome might uncover other mutations in one 
or both of these genes.
c02.2  Prader-Willi like phenotype in 2pter deletion: a possible 
imprinted locus.
M. Doco-Fenzy1, E. Landais1, M. Vincent2, A. Schneider2,3, J. Puechberty2,3, M. 
Girard3, M. Tournaire3, E. Sanchez4, M. Goossens5, D. Gaillard1, L. Taine6, G. 
Lefort2,3, P. Sarda2, B. Leheup7, D. Geneviève2,4;  
1Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du 
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Est, Hôpital Maison-Blanche. 
CHRU Reims, UFR de Médecine, Reims, France, 2Département de Génétique 
Médicale et chromosomique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies 
du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-Languedoc Roussillon, 
CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Faculté de Médecine Montpellier-
Nîmes, Montpellier, France, 3Plateforme puce à ADN, Service de Génétique 
Médicale et chromosomique, CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 
1, Montpellier, France, 4Unité Inserm U844, Institut des neurosciences de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, AP-HP, 
et INSERM U-841, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 6Service de Génétique 
Médicale, centre promoteur du réseau télomères ACLF, CHU Pellegrin, 
Bordeaux, France, 7Service de médecine infantile 3 et de génétique clinique, 
Hôpital d’enfants, CHU de Nancy - Brabois, Nancy, France.
Pure subtelomeric deletion of the short arm of the chromosome 2 is 
an extremely rare chromosomal anomaly. To date only, 4 patients with 
a pure 2pter deletion have been reported in the literature. The pheno -
type of these patients correspond either to a Prader-Willi-like pheno -
type (severe precocious obesity associated to mental retardation and 
abnormal behavior in 1 patient) or an Angelman-like phenotype (IUGR, 
mental retardation, speech delay, microcephaly and seizures in 2 pa -
tients). The last patient presented with a MCA/MR phenotype but the 
2pter deletion was different and distant from the 3 other patients. In 
addition, 2 other patients with Prader-Willi-like phenotype and unbal -
anced translocation leading to a 2pter deletion have been reported in 
the literature.
Here we report on two novel patients with small pure 2pter deletion 
and Prader-Willi like phenotype. Cytogenetic studies including FISH 
using BAC-PAC telomeric probes, BAC-PAC Array-CGH and Array-
SNP showed small 2pter deletions estimated to 3.15Mb and 1.96 Mb 
respectively. Both deletions encompassed the TMEM18 gene. Inter -
estingly, a meta analysis of GWAS for obesity found a significative 
association with a SNP (rs6548238) near to the TMEM18 gene. In ad -
dition, Dong et al suggested that 2pter is a possible human obesity-
related imprinted locus. These data suggest that the short arm of the 
chromosome 2 is an imprinted locus associated with phenotypes simi -
lar to those observed at the 15q11.2 imprinted locus. Parental origin of 
the deletion in our patients is in progress in an attempt to accumulate 
data in favour of an imprinted locus at 2p25.3.Concurrent Sessions20
c02.3  2q11.2 is a highly penetrant susceptibility locus for 
neurocognitive deficit
H. Kilpinen1,2, A. Pittman3, M. Storer1,4, J. Dickerson5, B. Garg6, L. Willatt7, 
J. Rosenfeld8, N. Huang1, T. Fitzgerald1, D. Felik9, C. Ogilvie10, M. Irving10, Y. 
Shen11, B. Wu11, R. Pfundt12, B. de Vries12, L. Peltonen1,2, M. Hurles1, J. Barrett1, 
L. Shaffer8, C. Shaw-Smith1,4;  
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute of 
Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child Health, 
London, United Kingdom, 5Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN, United 
States, 6Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 
7Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Signature Genomics, 
Spokane, WA, United States, 9Bay Regional Medical Centre, MI, United States, 
10Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 
11Children‘s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 12Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
One possible explanation for the ‘missing heritability’ in ‘common’ 
disorders such as autism and schizophrenia is the existence of rare 
alleles of high penetrance, which escape detection in genome-wide 
association studies. Recent large-scale studies of autism and schizo -
phrenia have implicated copy number variation in the pathogenesis of 
these disorders 1,2. Previously, a 1.3 Mb microdeletion flanked by seg -
mental duplications at 2q11.2 was reported in a single patient referred 
for CNV profiling, but no phenotypic information was provided 3. We 
now report five patients with microdeletions of similar size at this locus 
(chr2: ~96.0 to ~97.3 Mb, Hg18). All five patients presented with some 
form of neurocognitive deficit: four with developmental delay, three 
with autism or autism-like features, and two with epilepsy. We found 
one further example of this microdeletion in a schizophrenia case in 
a publicly available CNV dataset 2. No examples of this deletion were 
identified in ~7,500 controls. Notwithstanding that two of the deletions 
were inherited from a neurocognitively normal father, (one de novo, 
testing of parental samples in the remaining two in progress), this ap -
pears to be a very rare but highly penetrant susceptibility locus for 
neurocognitive deficit. Six highly homologous (>97%) segmental dupli -
cations (SD’s), size 2.5-40 Kb, cluster at the breakpoints. The rarity of 
this microdeletion syndrome may be a consequence of the relatively 
short length of these SD‘s.
1. Marshall CR et al. Am J Hum Genet . 2008 Feb;82(2):477-88.
2. International Schizophrenia Consortium. Nature . 2008 
455(7210):237-41.
3. Rudd MK et al.Hum Mol Genet . 2009 18(16):2957-62.
c02.4  the multiple phenotypes of the recurrent 593 kb, 16p11.2 
rearrangements: regulation of adiposity, language impairment 
and psychiatric symptoms.
S. Jacquemont1, R. G. Walters2,3, S. Bouquillon4, F. Zufferey1, A. Valsesia5, 
D. Martinet1, L. Hippolyte1, J. Andrieux4, B. Delobel6, A. I. F. Blakemore2, P. 
Froguel2,7, J. S. Beckmann1,8;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department 
of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom, 3Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, 
CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 5Departement de Génétique Médicale, Université 
de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Centre de génétique Chromosomique, 
Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, GHICL, Lille, France, 7CNRS, 8090 - Institut de 
Biologie, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France, 8Département de Génétique Médicale, 
Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
The 16p11.2 deletion has been associated with childhood-onset de -
velopmental disorders, macrocephaly and autism in multiple cohorts, 
while the reciprocal duplication has been associated with microcephaly, 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. We report an association between 
this deletion and obesity, regardless of the presence of cognitive or be -
havioral symptoms. This highly penetrant form of adolescent or adult-
onset obesity was initially observed in 31 carriers of the 593kb deletion 
ascertained for cognitive deficits. Nineteen similar deletions were iden -
tified from GWAS data of 16053 individuals from 8 European cohorts. 
Such deletions were absent from healthy non-obese controls and ac -
counted for 0.7% of morbid obesity cases (body mass index, BMI ≥ 40 
kg.m-2 or BMI standard deviation score ≥ 4; p = 6.4x10-8, OR = 43.0), 
demonstrating the potential etiological importance of rare variants with 
strong effects in common disease. These rare variants, which escape 
detection by GWAS, might account for a substantial fraction of patients with obesity or other “complex traits”. In addition, we hypothesize that 
clinical symptoms in carriers of the deletion and the duplication repre -
sent opposite manifestations of the same pathophysiologic process. In 
search of these “opposite manifestations” mediated by gene dosage, 
we are currently characterizing BMI, eating behavior, cognitive and 
psychiatric phenotypes in carriers of both types of rearrangements. 
Preliminary data reveals that carriers of the duplication show a trend 
towards being underweight which may confirm this hypothesis.
c02.5  mesomelia-synostoses syndrome results from deletion of 
SULF1 and SLCOA1 genes  at 8q13
C. Le Caignec1,2, B. Isidor1, O. Pichon1, R. Redon2, D. Day-Salvatore3, A. 
Hamel1, L. Kjellén4, C. Kraus5, J. Leroy6, G. Mortier7, A. Rauch8, A. Verloes9, A. 
David1;  
1CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Inserm, UMR915, Nantes, France, 3Institute 
for Genetic Medicine, Saint Peter’s University Hospital, New Brunswick, NJ, 
United States, 4Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala, 
Sweden, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Erlangen, Germany, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University 
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 
Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 9Department of Clinical Genetics and 
INSERM U676, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France.
Mesomelia-synostoses syndrome (MSS) or mesomelic dysplasia with 
acral dysostoses Verloes-David-Pfeiffer type is a rare autosomal domi -
nant disorder characterized by mesomelic limb shortening, acral syn -
ostoses and multiple congenital malformations. So far, five patients 
in four unrelated families have been reported worldwide with MMS. 
Using whole genome oligonucleotide array CGH, we have identified 
an interstitial deletion at 8q13 in all patients. The deletions vary from 
582 kb to 738 kb in size, but invariably encompass only two genes: 
SULF1 , encoding the heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatase 1 and SL-
CO5A1 , encoding the solute carrier organic anion transporter family 
member 5A1. SULF1 acts as a regulator of numerous growth factors 
in skeletal embryonic development while the function of SLCO5A1  is 
yet unknown. Breakpoint sequence analyses performed in two families 
showed non-recurrent deletions. Our results strongly suggest that hap -
loinsufficiency of SULF1 contributes to this mesomelic chondrodys -
plasia, highlighting the critical role of endosulfatase in human skeletal 
development. As co-deletion of SULF1  and SLCO5A1  - which does 
not result from a low-copy repeats (LCRs)-mediated recombination 
event - was found in all patients, we suggest that haploinsufficiency of 
SULF1  combined with haploinsufficiency of SLCO5A1  (or the altered 
expression of a neighbouring gene through a position effect) could be 
necessary in the pathogenesis of MSS.
c02.6  SHOX  duplications are associated with type i mayer-
Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (mRKH) syndrome
M. Miozzo1, C. Gervasini1, F. Grati2, F. Lalatta3, S. De Toffol2, B. Gentilin3, P. 
Colapietro1, M. Silvia1, G. Frontino4, L. Fedele4, B. Dallapiccola5, L. Larizza1;  
1Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina, Chirurgia e Odontoiatria, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Cytogenetics and Molecular 
Biology Unit, Laboratorio TOMA, Busto Arsizio, Varese, Italy, 3UO Genetica 
Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, 
Italy, 4UO Ostetrico-Ginecologica I, Università degli Studi, Milano, Fondazione 
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Ospedale 
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy.
Purpose: MRKH syndrome is defined as congenital aplasia of the 
structures derived from the Müllerian ducts in females with a normal 
46,XX karyotype and secondary sexual characteristics. MRKH is fre -
quently sporadic, although familial cases with an unknown pattern of 
inheritance have been described. Isolated (type I) and complex (type 
II) forms exist. The genetic basis of MRKH is largely unknown. Genetic 
lesions, including WNT4 point mutations and genomic imbalances, 
have been identified in a small number of cases. The aim of the study 
was to identify possible recurrent sub-microscopic imbalances in a co -
hort of familial and sporadic MRKH cases. Methods: Multiplex ligation-
dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was used to screen the sub-
telomeric sequences of all chromosomes in 30 MRKH patients (spo -
radic n= 27; familial n= 3). Segregation analysis and pyrosequencing 
were applied to confirm MLPA data from the informative family. Twelve 
patients with clinical signs of hyperandrogenism were also screened 
for WNT4  mutations.Concurrent Sessions21
Results: A partial duplication in the Xpter PAR1 region containing the 
SHOX  gene was found in five MRKH patients (familial n=3; sporadic 
n=2). The duplications were not overlapping and SHOX was never en -
tirely duplicated. Haplotyping in the informative family revealed that the 
SHOX  duplication had been inherited from the normal father and was 
absent in the two healthy sisters. No WNT4 mutations were identified 
in the 12 patients with clinical signs of hyperandrogenism. 
Conclusions: SHOX , which is known to be responsible for Leri-Weill 
Dyschondrosteosis and Langer Mesomelic Dysplasia, is associated 
with both familial and sporadic type I MRKH .
c03.1  in-depth metabolic characterization of genetic loci 
underlying serum-lipids
A. K. Petersen1, S. Y. Shin2, W. Römisch-Margl3, G. Zhai4, K. Small4, R. Wang-
Sattler1, E. Grundberg2,4, J. S. Ried1, A. Peters1, B. Kato4, A. Döring1, H. E. 
Wichmann1,5,6, P. Deloukas2, M. Hrabé de Angelis7,8, H. W. Mewes3,9, T. Illig1, T. 
D. Spector4, J. Adamski7,8, K. Suhre3,10, N. Soranzo2,4, C. Gieger1;  
1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, 
Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
CB10 1HH, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, 
Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Department of Twin 
Research & Genetic Epidemology, King’s College London, London SE1 7EH, 
United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, 6Klinikum Grosshadern, 
Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis 
Center, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 8Institute 
of Experimental Genetics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, 
Technische Universität Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 9Department of Genome-
oriented Bioinformatics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, 
Technische Universität Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 10Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
Emerging technologies based on mass spectrometry and nuclear 
magnetic resonance enable the monitoring of hundreds of small me -
tabolites from tissues or body fluids. Because metabolites change 
rapidly in response to physiologic perturbations, such metabolite con -
centrations provide a direct readout of the physiological state in the 
human body, leading to the discovery of novel proximal biomarkers of 
disease phenotypes. Furthermore, profiling of metabolites in relevant 
biological pathways can help elucidate the contribution of genetic vari -
ants underlying inherited variation in established risk factors. Among 
the major risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocar -
dial infarction (MI) are serum lipids, including total cholesterol (TC), 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides (TG). To dissect the effect of 
published genetic variants influencing serum lipid levels, we profiled 
151 metabolites covering a biologically relevant panel of amino acids, 
sugars, acylcarnitines, and phospholipids in 1,797 participants from 
the KORA population (Germany) and replicated the results in 1,236 
participants of the TwinsUK cohort. By analysing lipid concentrations in 
conjunction with genetic data and metabolite concentrations (and their 
ratios), we aim to identify cases where a genetic locus is associated 
with both a lipid and a metabolite concentration, which would provide 
new functional information about the underlying biological processes. 
We report here the initial results of this effort, as well as discussing 
methodological approaches to metabolite analyses. Among others, we 
identify associations of GCKR  (glucokinase (hexokinase 4) regulator) 
variants with different ratios of plasmalogens and phosphatidylcho -
lines ( P = 3.2 ξ 10-8).
C03.2  Identification of novel obesity loci by analysis of genomic 
structural variants
R. G. Walters1, L. J. M. Coin1, A. J. de Smith1, D. Meyre2, I. S. Farooqi3, P. 
Froguel1,2, A. I. F. Blakemore1;  
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090-Institute of 
Biology, Lille, France, 3Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Only a small fraction of the strong genetic contribution to obesity is 
explained by common variants identified from genome-wide associa -
tion studies. To explore the contribution to obesity of rare variants with 
large effect, we are investigating the large genomic structural variants 
(GSVs) that are routinely found in patients with extreme phenotypes 
that include obesity as a key feature, and analysing these regions in 
case-control and population cohorts. Using this approach, we have 
shown that deletions of ~740kb at chromosome 16p11.2 - initially identified as associated with obesity in patients ascertained for de -
velopmental delay - account for ~0.7% of morbid obesity cases in the 
general population (Walters et al (2010) Nature  463:671-675).
We are now investigating other GSV regions, identified from cohorts 
of patients with extreme obesity phenotypes or with severe early-onset 
obesity, by carrying out algorithmic analysis of genotyping data from 
multiple cohorts. For one region, similar GSVs are found in non-obese 
subjects, calling into question the putative association with obesity; 
for 4 others, GSVs are not found in our cohorts but we have instead 
identified haplotype signatures that are associated with (or protective 
against) obesity; and numerous smaller GSVs have helped to de -
fine the limits of putative obesity-associated loci. Of particular note is 
the identification of further instances of 220kb deletions surrounding 
SH2B1  (Bochukova et al (2010) Nature  463:666-670), exclusively in 
obese subjects and accounting overall for ~0.5% of severe childhood 
obesity. Targeted exome sequencing is being undertaken to screen for 
additional rare causal variants in these regions.
c03.3*  multiple common genetic variants for coeliac disease 
influencing immune gene expression
G. Trynka1, P. C. A. Dubois2, L. Franke1, *. Coeliac Disease Genetics 
Consortium3, R. McManus4, D. Barisani5, P. Deloukas6, J. C. Barrett6, P. 
Saavalainen7, D. A. Van Heel2, C. Wijmenga1;  
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Centre for 
Gastroenterology, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 
3University Medical Center Groningen and Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Departments of Clinical 
Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 
Ireland, 5Department of Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 
6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
7Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
Coeliac disease is a complex, highly heritable trait. In our previous 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) and its follow-ups, we identi -
fied 13 non-HLA genomic risk regions for coeliac disease. Known vari -
ants, including HLA variants, explain around 35% of the heritability. 
We proposed that additional common genetic variants would underlie 
a further component of coeliac heritability.
We performed a new GWAS in 4,533 coeliac cases and 10,750 con -
trols from 4 populations of European descent. We integrated data from 
our first GWAS and expanded genomic coverage in the new samples 
to 523,749 SNPs passing quality controls. We further tested 131 SNPs 
in an additional cohort of 4,918 cases and 5,684 controls.
Variants from 13 new regions showed genome-wide significance 
(Pcombined < 5 x 10-8), including regions containing TNFRSF14 , RUNX3 , 
CCR4 , CD80 , BACH2 , THEMIS , ZMIZ1 , ETS1 , CIITA /SOCS1 /CLE-
C16A , ICOSLG. A further 13 regions had suggestive association evi -
dence (10-6<Pcombined<5x10-8, and/or  Pfollow-up <0.01). Genes from most 
of these regions have an immune function, while newly identified as -
sociations to the TNFRSF14, RUNX3, ETS1  and THEMIS  genes point 
to an unknown role for the thymic T cell selection pathway in the patho -
genesis of coeliac disease. In a meta-analysis of expression quanti -
tative traits in 1,469 whole blood samples, 20 out of the 38 (52.6%) 
tested loci had coeliac risk variants correlated (P < 0.0028, FDR 5%) 
with cis gene expression.
Here we report multiple new common variants for coeliac disease and 
show that genetic determination of cis gene expression is a major 
mechanism by which these variants influence coeliac susceptibility .
C03.4*  Genetic variation in 22 loci influences QRS complex 
duration
A. Isaacs1, N. Sotoodenhia2, P. de Bakker3, M. Dörr4, C. Newton-Cheh5, I. 
Nolte6, P. van der Harst7, M. Müller8, M. Eijgelsheim9, A. Alonso10, A. Hicks11, 
S. Padmanabhan12, C. Hayward13, A. Smith14, O. Polasek15, S. Giovannone16, 
I. Rudan17,18, J. F. Wilson18, P. Pramstaller11, D. Siscovick19, T. Wang5, V. 
Gudnason14, C. M. van Duijn1, S. B. Felix4, G. I. Fishman16, Y. Jamshidi20, 
B. Stricker9, N. J. Samani21, S. Kääb22, D. E. Arking23, The QRS-GWAS 
Consortium;  
1Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Dep.of Epidemiology, Erasmus Univ.Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Dep.
of Medicine, Univ.of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Program in 
Medical Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard & MIT, Cambridge, Concurrent Sessions22
MA, United States, 4Dep.of Internal Medicine B, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Univ., 
Greifswald, Germany, 5Center for Human Genetic Research, Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 
6Unit of Genetic Epidemiology and Bioinformatics, Dep.of Epidemiology, Univ.
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Dep.of Cardiology, Univ.
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Institute 
of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center 
for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 9Dep.of Epidemiology, 
Erasmus Univ.Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Div.of Epidemiology 
& Community Health, School of Public Health, Univ.of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, United States, 11Inst.of Genetic Medicine, European Academy Bolzano 
(EURAC) (Affiliated Inst. of Lübeck Univ., Germany), Bolzano, Italy, 12BHF 
Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Univ.of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom, 13MRC Human Genetics Unit, Inst.of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 14Icelandic Heart Association Research 
Inst., Kopavogur, Iceland, 15Andrija Stampar School of Public Health, Univ.
of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 16Div.of Cardiology, New York Univ.School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 17Croatian Centre for Global Health, 
Univ.of Split, Split, Croatia, 18Centre for Population Health Sciences, Univ.of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 19Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, 
Dep.of Medicine and Epidemiology, Univ.of Washington, Seattle, WA, United 
States, 20Div.of Clinical Developmental Sciences, St George‘s Univ., London, 
United Kingdom, 21Dep.of Cardio Cardiovascular Sciences, Univ.of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom, 22Dep.of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, 
Germany, 23McKusick-Nathans Inst.of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Univ.
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States
QRS complex duration, an ECG measurement reflecting ventricular 
depolarization, is associated with risk of heart failure, sudden death 
and mortality. The trait is known to have a heritable component (h2 
ranging from 20 - 40%), however few genes influencing the trait have 
been identified to date. In the current study, a large-scale fixed-ef -
fects inverse variance weighted meta-analysis of GWAS data from 16 
studies consisting of >40,000 individuals of European ancestry was 
performed. More than 2.5 million SNPs were imputed using the Hap -
Map reference panel. Genomic control inflation factors were used to 
correct the test statistics at the individual population level as well as 
the final meta-analysis results. 612 SNPs achieved genome-wide sig -
nificance levels (P<5e-8). These SNPs represented 30 independent 
association signals (r2<0.05) in 22 distinct genomic regions, of which 
only four were previously reported. These loci included genes in rel -
evant cardiac conduction pathways, including sodium-channels (SC -
N10A and SCN5A), calcium handling (PLN/SLC35F1, STRN/HEAT -
R5B, CASQ2, TKT/CACNA1D, and PRKCA), and transcription factors 
(NFIA, HAND1, TBX3, TBX5, TBX20, and KLF12), in addition to novel 
pathways (including kinase inhibition and growth-factor related genes). 
Multiple SNPs demonstrated pleiotropic effects with other ECG traits 
reflecting atrial conduction (PR interval) and myocardial repolarization 
(QT interval). Further, we showed experimentally that SCN10A, a gene 
in our most significantly associated region, is expressed preferentially 
in the mouse ventricular conduction system and affects mouse QRS 
interval duration. These analyses greatly expand our understanding 
of the genetic basis for variation in QRS duration and provide insights 
into the biology of cardiac conduction.
c03.5*  A genome-wide association scan in sardinians reveals a 
novel gene associated with multiple sclerosis
S. Sanna1, M. Pitzalis2, M. Zoledziewska2, I. Zara3, C. Sidore4, R. Murru5, M. 
B. Whalen4, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1, G. Costa5, M. Pugliatti6, S. Traccis7, A. 
Angius4, M. Melis8, G. Rosati6, G. R. Abecasis9, M. Uda1, M. G. Marrosu5, D. 
Schlessinger10, F. Cucca1,2;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato, Italy, 2Dipartimento 
di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 3CRS4, Laboratorio 
di Bioinformatica, Parco tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 
4CRS4, Laboratorio di Genomica, Parco tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, 
Cagliari, Italy, 5Centro Sclerosi Multipla, Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche 
e Cardiovascolari, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 6Istituto di Neurologia 
Clinica, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 7Presidio Ospedaliero, Divisione 
Neurologia, Sassari, Italy, 8AOBrotzu, S.C. Neurologia, Cagliari, Italy, 
9Department of Biostatistics, Center for Statistical Genetics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 10Laboratory of Genetics, National 
Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a multi-factorial neuroinflammatory and au -
toimmune disorder. A primary cause of disability in young adults, it re -sults from interactions between unknown environmental factors and 
alleles of many susceptibility loci across the genome. Recent inves -
tigations of the genetics of MS have resulted in important advances, 
driven largely by completion of the first genome-wide association 
scans (GWAS). To detect additional loci, we performed a GWAS in 882 
Sardinian MS cases and 872 controls using 575,678 SNPs, genotyped 
with the Affymetrix 6.0 chip, that passed quality checks. Using imputa -
tion methods and haplotypes available from HapMap II, HapMap III 
and 1000 Genomes projects, we then imputed 6,031,588 SNPs and 
tested for association ~6.6 million variants. The strongest observed 
signal was on the HLA locus (p=1.4x10-20), at a SNP tag (r2=0.83) for 
the HLA-DRB1*0301 allele. We then ranked non-HLA SNPs based on 
their level of significance and proximity to functional candidate genes, 
and selected 9 SNPs with pvalue <1x10-5 for follow-up. Of those, one 
on chr3q13 was successfully confirmed in an independent sample of 
1,775 MS cases and 2,005 controls (p=9.3x10-6), yielding to an overall 
pvalue of 1.6x10-10 (OR=1.40, C.I.=1.27-1.57). The most associated 
markers at this locus fall in the promoter of a gene that encodes a 
negative regulator of adaptive immune responses. Mice deficient for 
the ortholgoue are prone to experimental autoimmune encephalomy -
elitis, the animal model of MS but also spontaneously reject a variety of 
cancers. Hence, this gene appears critical for maintaining the balance 
between immune activation and tolerance.
c03.6*  Genome-wide association scan reveals major 
susceptibility locus in IL28B for both chronic Hepatitis C and for 
treatment failure
Z. Kutalik1,2, A. Rauch3, P. Descombes4, T. Cai5,6, J. di Iulio5, T. Mueller7, M. 
Bochud8, M. Battegay9, J. Borovicka10, S. Colombo5, A. Cerny11, J. Dufour12, 
H. Furrer3, M. Heim13, B. Hirschel14, R. Malinverni15, D. Moradpour16, B. 
Müllhaupt17, A. Witteck18, J. S. Beckmann1,19, T. Berg7, S. Bergmann1,2, F. 
Negro20, A. Telenti5, P. Bochud5,6;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 
Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University Clinic of Infectious Diseases, University 
Hospital Bern and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Genomics Platform, 
National Center of Competence in Research „Frontiers in Genetics“, University 
of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Institute of Microbiology, University Hospital 
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Infectious Diseases 
Service, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital and University 
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Medical Clinic for Hepatology and 
Gastroenterology, Medical University Charité Campus, Virchow-Klinikum 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 8University Institute for Social and Preventive 
Medicine, University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland, 9Infectious Diseases and Infection Control Clinic, Department 
of Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 10Division of 
Gastroenterology, Canton Hospital St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland, 11Liver 
Unit, Clinica Luganese Moncucco, Lugano, Lugano, Switzerland, 12University 
Clinic of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Inselspital, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland, 13Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University 
Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 14Division of Infectious Diseases, 
University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 15Pourtalès Hospital, 
Neuchâtel, Neuchatel, Switzerland, 16Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 17Division 
of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland, 18Infectious Diseases and Infection Control Unit, Canton Hospital 
St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland, 19Service of Medical Genetics, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland, 20Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University 
Hospitals, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) induces chronic infection in up to 80% 
of infected individuals, half of whom do not respond to therapy. We 
conducted a genome-wide association study to screen for host ge -
netic determinants of HCV persistence and response to therapy. 
The analysis included 1362 hepatitis C infected individuals (448 of 
whom are co-infected with HIV): 1015 with chronic hepatitis C and 
347 that spontaneously cleared the virus. Responses to pegylated 
interferon-alpha and ribavirin were assessed in 465 chronic hepatitis 
C patients. Associations between more than 2.5M single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and outcomes were computed using multi -
variate logistic regression. Chronic hepatitis C was found to be as -
sociated with SNPs in the IL28B locus, which encodes the antiviral 
cytokine interferon-lambda-3. The minor allele of the top hit rs8099917 Concurrent Sessions2
was associated with progression to chronic HCV infection (OR=2.31, 
CI=1.74-3.06, P=6.07*10-9) explaining almost 3% of the phenotypic 
variance. The association was observed both in HCV mono-infected 
(OR=2.49, CI=1.64-3.79, P=1.96*10-5) and HCV/HIV co-infected in -
dividuals (OR=2.16, CI=1.47-3.18, P=8.24*10-5). Interestingly, SNP 
rs8099917 was also associated with failure to respond to therapy 
(OR=5.19, CI=2.90-9.30, P= 3.11*10-8), with the strongest effects in 
patients with HCV genotypes 1 or 4, where more than 11% of the vari -
ance in response was explained by this genotype alone. Re-sequenc -
ing of IL28B identified distinct haplotypes that were associated with 
the clinical phenotype. The association of the IL28B locus with natural 
and treatment-associated control of HCV indicates the importance of 
innate immunity and interferon-lambda-3 in the pathogenesis of HCV 
infection.
C04.1  Identification of novel deafness genes by homozygosity 
mapping in Dutch families
H. Kremer1,2, J. Oostrik3, P. L. M. Huygen2, J. A. Veltman1,4, L. H. Hoefsloot4, C. 
W. R. J. Cremers5,2, H. P. M. Kunst5,2, R. J. C. Admiraal5,2, M. Schraders1,2;  
1Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept 
Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands, 3Dept. Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept Human Genetics, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
Locus heterogeneity of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing 
loss (arNSHI) is large. So far about 30 genes have been identified but 
at least 50 genes await identification. Novel arNSHI loci are generally 
determined in large consanguineous families and are often large (10-
30 Mb). Although next generation sequencing enables the simultane -
ous sequencing of exons and regulatory regions of all genes within a 
region, strategies to delimit the critical region and “intelligent” candi -
date gene selection remain attractive for disease gene identification. 
Although the majority of the Dutch population is regarded to be mixed 
there are quite a number of regions with limited migration mainly until 
about 1950. Therefore, we followed a strategy of homozygosity map -
ping with high density SNP arrays in 125 patients with putative arNSHI 
from 77 families to delimited the critical region of known deafness loci 
and/or identify novel loci. Homozygous regions smaller than 1 Mb were 
not further investigated. We delimited the critical region for DFNB25 to 
an 0.8 Mb interval harbouring exons of two genes. Also, we obtained 
indications for a novel locus, now DFNB84, of 3.2 Mb with 11 known 
and predicted genes. Mutation analysis of all exons in the DFNB25 
interval and selected candidate genes in the novel locus revealed pu -
tatively pathogenic mutations in GRXCR1  and PTPRQ . Vestibular dys -
function can be associated with the hearing loss for both genes. Our 
results indicate that the demographic structure of the Dutch population 
is favourable for this method which is likely to be the case in more 
European countries.
c04.2  Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, a ponto-bulbar palsy 
with deafness, is caused by mutation in C20orf
D. J. Josifova1, P. Green2, M. Wiseman2, Y. J. Crow3, H. Houlden4, S. 
Riphagen5, J. Lin5, F. Raymond6, A. Childs7, E. Sheridan8, S. Edwards2;  
1Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Kings College, London, United 
Kingdom, 3Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, St. Mary‘s Hospital, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 
5Evelina Children‘s‘ Hospital, St. Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 
6Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Addenbrook’s Hospital, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 7The General Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 
8, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St James‘s Hospital, Leeds, United 
Kingdom.
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome is a rare neurological disorder 
first reported by Brown in 1894 as familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
with onset in infancy. Following the reports by Vialetto, in 1936 and Van 
Laere, in 1966, the name, BVVLS was adopted. The key features are 
progressive ponto-bulbar palsy and bilateral sensorineural deafness. 
The disease usually presents with VII, IX, X, XI and XII cranial nerve 
palsies, which develop in a previously healthy individual. A complex 
neurological phenotype with a mixed picture of upper and lower mo -
tor neuron involvement reminiscent of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
evolves with disease progression. The course is invariably progres -sive, but the rate of decline is variable within and between families. 
The observation of recurrences in siblings in some families suggested 
that the condition was probably autosomal recessive, however the 
variable age of onset and clinical course raised the possibility that it 
may be aetiologically heterogeneous. We identified a candidate gene, 
C20orf54  by studying a consanguineous family with multiple affected 
individuals and subsequently demonstrated that mutations in this gene 
were the cause of disease in other, unrelated families.
c04.3*  the microRNA miR-204 is required for vertebrate eye 
development
I. Conte1, S. Carrella1, R. Avellino1, M. Karali1, R. Marco-Ferreres2, P. 
Bovolenta2, S. Banfi1;  
1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Departamento de Neurobiología Molecular Celular 
y del Desarrollo, Instituto Cajal, CSIC, and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER), Madrid, Spain.
The functional role of specific microRNAs in controlling the morpho -
genetic and cell differentiation events involved in normal eye develop -
ment in vertebrates is still largely unknown. Here we show that a single 
microRNA, miR-204, is capable to regulate multiple aspects of eye 
development in medaka fish. Targeted ablation of miR-204 function by 
morpholino injections in medaka determined a severe eye phenotype 
characterized by microphthalmia, aberrant lens formation, incorrect 
retinal cell differentiation and coloboma. Through a variety of in vitro 
and in vivo approaches, we found that Meis2 is a key target of miR-
204 and plays a pivotal role in the generation of this phenotype via 
the regulation of the Pax6 pathway. These data demonstrate for the 
first time that a specific microRNA is involved in the regulation of basic 
processes underlying eye development and open new avenues on a 
better comprehension of the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying eye 
developmental disorders.
C04.4*  Phenotypic modifiers of DJ1
S. Jain , P. Heutink;  
CNCR, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a slow progressing neurodegenerative 
disease with devastating clinical symptoms. Current treatments are 
only symptomatic which ultimately result in debilitating side effects 
thus there is an urgent need to develop therapeutics which stop and 
reverse disease progression. None of the 13 loci implicated in the 
PD pathogenesis represent viable drug targets at present. In addition 
these genes have suggested that disruption of a myriad of molecu -
lar pathways (e.g. ubiquitin and proteasome, mitochondrial function 
and protein misfolding) can lead to the degeneration of the substantia 
nigra. It remains unclear how mutation of these genes and disruption 
of these pathways lead to PD and thus complicates the process for 
drug discovery.
To address these issues, we conducted a high content screening to 
interactors of DJ1, a gene mutated in PD to determine if any of them 
is capable of affecting DJ1 function. Thus far we have been able to 
identify several genes which are able to rescue DJ1 deficits on cell 
viability such as PPP2R2C and PSF and other genes which are able 
to enhance the loss of DJ1 such as 4E-BP. 4E-BP is a translational 
inhibitor to which many drugs are available thus the administration of 
4E-BP activators, such as rapamycin may protect cells from apoptosis 
and thus an effective treatment to prevent or delay the onset of dis -
ease. Using this approach we have been able to construct a detailed 
molecular pathway of the proteins that are involved in the function of 
DJ1 and identify additional therapeutic targets.
c04.5  miR-135b regulates two transcriptional cofactors, Pc4 
and Psip1, in the mammalian inner ear, identified using an 
integrative transcriptomics and proteomic approach
T. Elkan1, R. Hertzano1, I. Ulitsky2, R. Elkon1,2, M. Irmler3, R. Shamir2, J. 
Beckers3, K. B. Avraham1;  
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Blavatnik School of Computer 
Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Institute of Experimental Genetics, 
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 17-24 nucleotide-long non-coding RNAs 
processed from transcripts of endogenous genes that function through 
the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. miRNAs regulate gene expres -
sion by inducing degradation of mRNA of target genes and by inhib -Concurrent Sessions2
iting translation. Their relevance to the inner ear has recently been 
emphasized by the discovery of miRNA mutations leading to deafness 
in humans and mice. We integrated a comparative transcriptomic and 
proteomic analyses and a miRNA screen of early post-natal cochlear 
and vestibular sensory epithelia derived from mice, with sequence-
based predictions, to efficiently identify functional miRNAs and their 
targets. We identified PC4 and Psip1, two transcriptional cofactors that 
interact with one another, as targets for miR-135b in the inner ear hair 
cells. PC4, Activated RNA polymerase II transcription cofactor 4, or 
Sub1, mediates functional interactions between upstream activators 
and general transcriptional machinery. Psip1, also known as PC4- 
and SF-2 interacting protein or Lens epithelium-derived growth factor 
(Ledgf), is involved in transcriptional regulation of stress related genes, 
mRNA splicing, and cell survival. In order to prove the interaction be -
tween the miRNA and its target proteins the miRNA was silenced or 
over-expressed in cell line and the protein levels were studied using 
semi-quantitative western blot analysis. Our current work focuses on 
how miR-135b regulation affects downstream pathways in the inner 
ear.
c04.6*  Olfactory Expression of mutant A30P alpha-synuclein 
in conditional mouse Brain: implications for Early stage of 
Parkinson’s Disease
S. Nuber1, E. Petrasch-Parwez2, O. Arias-Carrion3, C. Wurst1, F. N. Gellerich4, 
Z. Gizatullina5, M. Fendt6, H. Nguyen7, S. von Hörsten8, P. Teismann9, J. B. 
Schulz10, T. P. Velavan11, T. Schmidt1, J. Boy1, I. Schmitt12, G. U. Höglinger13, J. 
Winkler14, O. Riess1;  
1Medical Genetics, Univ. of Tübingen, Germany, 2Institute of Neuroanatomy and 
Molecular Brain Research, Univ. of Bochum, Germany, 3Inst. of Experimental 
Neurology, Philipps University of Marburg, Germany, 4KeyNeurotec, ZENIT 
Technology Park, Magdeburg, Germany, 5KeyNeurotek, ZENIT Technology 
Park, Magdeburg, Germany, 6Novartis, Basel, Switzerland, 7Medical Genetics, 
Univ.of Tübingen, Germany, 8Department of Experimental Therapy, Univ. of 
Erlangen, Germany, 9Inst. of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, United 
Kingdom, 10RWTH, Univ. of Aachen, Germany, 11Inst. for Tropical Medicine, 
Univ. of Tübingen, Germany, 12Clinic for Neurology, Univ. of Bonn, Germany, 
13Experimental Neurology, Philipps University of Marburg, Germany, 14Division 
of Molecular Neurology, Univ, of Erlangen, Germany.
Growing evidence suggests that cognitive and psychiatric deficits pre -
cede motor impairment in Parkinson’s disease (PD). In this premotor 
stage neuropathology is detectable in the olfactory bulb and smell de -
ficiency is found in about 90% of PD patients. To explore the impact 
and reversibility of early pathological stages, we analyzed conditional 
transgenic mice, expressing high levels of human [A30P]alpha-synu -
clein limited to the olfactory bulb. Further, as alpha-synuclein posi -
tive olfactorial lesions of early PD-stages appears not to advance to 
non-olfactorial cortical areas, which are increasingly affected at later 
stages, their contribution to disease progression is unknown. Thus, 
the question raise of whether (i) mutated alpha-synuclein is able to 
induce olfactorial pathology,(ii) these alterations influence non-olfacto -
rial brain structures and (iii) neurological dysfunction is reversible after 
ceasing expression of transgene alpha-synuclein. Thus, we generated 
and characterized a tet-off conditional mouse model expressing hu -
man [A30P]alpha-synuclein in the olfactory bulb. We found that over -
expressing of mutated [A30P]alpha-synuclein led to a downregulation 
of dopamine neurotransmission in the olfactory bulb which was paral -
leled by hyperactivity and decreased anxiety in these mice. We further 
detected upregulation of neurotransmitter content in striatum and sub -
stantia nigra and mitochondrial dysfunction in non-olfactory brain re -
gions, both of which could be reversed in old-aged mice. Perspective: 
Using this regulatable transgenic mouse model, we may model and 
explore in detail impact of olfactory alpha-synucleinopathy on other 
brain regions; this model is also a useful tool to study early interven -
tion strategies, which may halt or even reverse the underlying disease 
process in PD.
c05.1  cANt1 mutations in Desbuquois dysplasia are 
responsible for a defect in proteoglycan synthesis.
C. Huber1, A. Rossi2, M. Bertoli1, M. Fradin1, M. Le Merrer1, Y. Alanay3, L. I. 
Al Gazali4, M. G. E. M. Ausems5, P. Bitoun6, D. P. Cavalcanti7, A. Krebs8, G. 
Mortier9, S. P. Robertson10, Y. Shafeghati11, A. Superti-Furga12, A. O. Muda13, C. 
Le Goff1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1;  
1INSERM U781, Paris Descartes University, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Dept of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Genetics Unit, Dept 
of Pediatrics, Hacettepe Univ faculty of medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 4Dept 
of Paediatrics, Faculty of medicine and health sciences, Al Ain, United 
Arab Emirates, 5Dept of Medical Genetics, Univ medical Center, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 6Jean Verdier hospital, Bondy, France, 7Dept of Medical Genetics, 
UNICAMP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 8Division of Paediatric Orthopedics, Orthopedic 
Hospital Speising, Vienna, Austria, 9Dept of Medical Genetics, Antwerp 
University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 10Dept of Pediatrics and Child Health, 
Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 
11Genetics Research Center, Univ of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 12Centre for Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg Univ Hospital, Freiburg, Germany, 13Dept of 
Pathology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Roma, Italy.
Desbuquois dysplasia is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia 
characterized by short stature, joint laxity, scoliosis and advanced car -
pal ossification with a delta phalanx. Studying 9 Desbuquois families, 
we identified 7 distinct mutations in the Calcium-Activated Nucleotid -
ase 1 gene ( CANT1 ) which encodes a soluble UDP-preferring nucleo -
tidase. Among the 7 mutations, 4 were nonsense and 3 were missense 
mutations, located in the region encoding the 7th nucleotidase con -
served region and changing arginine at position 300 in 5/9 families. 
All children presented with characteristic skeletal manifestations. How -
ever, an early death due to cardio-respiratory failure was observed in 
the 4 children with non sense mutations.
The function of CANT1 is unknown. Using RT-PCR analysis, we ob -
served a specific expression in chondrocytes. We also found elec -
tron-dense material within distended rough endoplasmic reticulum in 
Desbuquois patient fibroblasts. Finally, Desbuquois dysplasia shares 
phenotypic features with Diastrophic dysplasia and recessive Larsen 
syndrome, which are both due to a defect in proteoglycan sulfation, the 
final step of proteoglycan synthesis. To test whether CANT1 deficiency 
interferes with the availability of UDP-sugars needed for proteoglycan 
synthesis, fibroblasts from two Desbuquois patients and four controls 
were double labeled with [35S]sulfate and [3H]glucosamine. Surpris -
ingly, in the patient cells glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthesis was al -
most normal under basal conditions when compared to controls, but 
significant reduced GAG synthesis was observed in presence of β-D-
xyloside, a compound that increases GAG synthesis acting as a chain 
initiator. These data suggest that CANT1 plays a role in proteoglycan 
metabolism and supports its involvement in the rate of GAG synthe -
sis.
c05.2*  Disruption of the Podosome Adaptor Protein tKs4 
(SHPXD2B ) causes Frank-t er Haar syndrome
Z. Iqbal1, P. Cejudo-Martin2, A. De Brouwer1, B. Van der Zwaag3, P. Ruiz-
Lozano2, M. Cecilia Scimia2, J. D. Lindsey4, R. Weinreb4, B. Albrecht5, A. 
Megarbane6, Y. Alanay7, Z. Ben-Neriah8, M. Amenduni9, R. Artuso9, J. A. 
Veltman1, E. Van Beusekom1, A. Oudakker1,10, J. Luis Millan2, R. Hannekam11,12, 
B. Hamel1, S. A. Courtneidge2, H. van Bokhoven1,10;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
2Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA, La Jolla, CA, United States, 3Department of 
Neuroscience and Pharmacology. University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 4Hamilton Glaucoma Center, University of California at San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA., La Jolla, CA, United 
States, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Universität Duisburg-
Essen, Germany., Duisburg-Essen, Germany, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Saint 
Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon., Beirut, Lebanon, 7Pediatric Genetics Unit, 
Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,, Ankara, 
Turkey, 8Center for Human Genetics, Hadassah Medical Center, Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem,, Jerusalem, Israel, 9Medical Genetics, Department of 
Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 10Department of Cognitive 
Neurosciences, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Department of Pediatrics, 
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 12Institute of Child Health, 
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, UCL, London, United Kingdom.
Frank-Ter Haar syndrome (FTHS), also known as Ter Haar syndrome, 
is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by skeletal, cardio -
vascular and eye abnormalities, such as increased intraocular pres -
sure, prominent eyes and hypertelorism. We have conducted homo -
zygosity mapping on patients representing twelve FTHS families. A 
locus on chromosome 5q35.1 was identified for which patients from Concurrent Sessions2
ten families shared homozygosity. For one family, a homozygous dele -
tion mapped exactly to the smallest region of overlapping homozygos -
ity, which contained a single gene, SH3PXD2B. This gene encodes 
the TKS4 protein, a PX and SH3 domain-containing adaptor protein 
and Src substrate. This protein was recently shown to be involved in 
the formation of actin rich membrane protrusions called podosomes 
or invadopodia, which coordinate pericellular proteolysis with cell mi -
gration. Mice lacking Tks4 also show pronounced skeletal, eye and 
cardiac abnormalities and phenocopied the majority of the defects as -
sociated with FTHS. These findings establish a role for TKS4 in FTHS 
and embryonic development. Mutation analysis revealed five differ -
ent homozygous mutations in SH3PXD2B in seven FTHS families. 
No SH3PXD2B mutations were detected in six other FTHS families, 
demonstrating the genetic heterogeneity of this condition. Interest -
ingly however, dermal fibroblasts from one of the individuals without 
an SH3PXD2B mutation nevertheless expressed lower levels of the 
TKS4 protein, suggesting a common mechanism underlying disease 
causation.This is the first time that a developmental disorder is caused 
by the defect in podosomes. Further study on the role of podosomes 
may open a new horizon in identifying the genetic defects in related 
developmental disorders.
c05.3*  PTHLH  deletion and point mutations are associated with 
Brachydactyly type E (BDE)
E. Klopocki1, B. P. Hennig1, K. Dathe1, R. Koll1, T. de Ravel2, E. Baten3, E. 
Blom4, Y. Gillerot5, J. F. W. Weigel6, G. Krüger7, O. Hiort8, P. Seemann9, S. 
Mundlos1,10;  
1Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Centre for Human 
Genetics University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3AZ Saint Lucas, 
Brugge, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University 
Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Centre de Génétique Humaine, Cliniques 
Universitaires St Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 6University Children’s Hospital, 
Leipzig, Germany, 7Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum 
Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 8Departments of Pediatrics, University of Lübeck, 
Lübeck, Germany, 9Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies 
(BCRT), Berlin, Germany, 10Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, 
Germany.
Brachydactylies are a family of limb malformations characterized by 
short hands/feet due to aplastic/hypoplastic skeletal elements. Autoso -
mal dominant brachydactyly type E (BDE, MIM 113300) is character -
ized by shortening of metacarpals/metatarsals and/or phalanges. Here 
we describe a novel disease gene for BDE in five unrelated families.
Initially we detected a microdeletion encompassing PTHLH , the gene 
coding for parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHRP) in a pedigree 
with BDE, short stature and learning disabilities. PTHRP regulates the 
balance between chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophic differen -
tiation during endochondral bone development. Pthrp -/- mice show 
short limbed dwarfism due to premature differentiation of chondro -
cytes. Therefore we screened a cohort of individuals with BDE and 
short stature for mutations in PTHLH . We identified two missense 
(p.L44P and p.L60P), a nonstop (p.X178WextX*54), and a nonsense 
(p.K120X) mutation. Functional testing of the L60P missense muta -
tion in chicken micromass culture showed an earlier differentiation of 
chondrocytes compared to wildtype which indicates that the missense 
mutation results in a loss of function.
Since mutations of the primary mediator of PTHRP/PTH receptor sig -
naling, GNAS1, are associated with Albright Hereditary Osteodystro -
phy (AHO) which includes a skeletal phenotype strikingly similar to the 
BDE phenotype we conclude that the IHH/PTHRP pathway is of partic -
ular importance for cartilage differentiation and growth in the metacar -
pals. These results support the concept of molecular disease families 
based on phenotypic similarities and interacting signaling pathways.
Taken together, mutations in PTHLH  result in a specific type of skeletal 
disease which we suggest to name BDE with short stature, PTHLH 
type.
c05.4  Homozygous inactivating mutations in the NKX3-2 gene 
result in spondylo-megaepiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia
G. R. Mortier1, M. Simon2, A. Dheedene3, Y. Alanay4, E. Mihci5, L. Rifai6, A. 
Sefiani6, Y. van Bever2, M. Meradji7, A. Superti-Furga8, J. Hellemans3;  
1Dept Medical Genetics, Antwerp Univ Hosp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Dept Clinical 
Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept Medical Genetics, 
Ghent Univ Hosp, Ghent, Belgium, 4Dept Pediatrics, Hacettepe Univ School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 5Dept Pediatrics, Akdeniz Univ School of Medicine, 
Antalya, Turkey, 6Dept Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat, 
Morocco, 7Dept Radiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Centre for 
Pediatrics, Univ of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Spondylo-megaepiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia (SMMD) is a rare 
autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia with only a few cases re -
ported in the literature. Affected individuals have a disproportionate 
short stature with a short neck and trunk and relatively long limbs that 
may show flexion contractures of the distal joints. The most remark -
able radiographic features are the delayed and impaired ossification 
of the vertebral bodies as well as the presence of large epiphyseal 
ossification centers and wide growth plates in the long tubular bones. 
Genome wide homozygosity mapping followed by a candidate gene 
approach resulted in the elucidation of the genetic cause in three new 
consanguineous families with SMMD. Each proband was homozygous 
for a different inactivating mutation (c.336_337delGGinsT; c.337dupG; 
c.104_110delCGCCCG) in NKX3-2 , a homeobox-containing gene lo -
cated on chromosome 4p15.33. Expression studies in skin fibroblasts 
showed partial nonsense mediated decay of the mutant transcripts 
and upregulation of mutant NKX3-2  mRNA compared to control, the 
latter suggesting a disturbed autoregulatory loop. We observed the 
highest expression of NKX3-2  in chondrocytes and gut. In contrast to 
previous reports we were also able to demonstrate NKX3-2  expres -
sion in the brain. Striking similarities were found when comparing the 
vertebral ossification defects in SMMD patients with those observed in 
the Nkx3-2  null mice. Distinguishing features were the asplenia found 
in the mutant mice and the radiographic abnormalities in the limbs only 
observed in SMMD patients. This study illustrates that NKX3-2 plays 
an important role in endochondral ossification of both the axial and ap -
pendicular human skeleton.
c05.5  copy Number and sequence Variants in FREM1  are 
Associated With an increased Risk of isolated metopic 
craniosynostosis in Humans and mice
L. E. L. M. Vissers1, T. C. Cox2, I. M. Janssen1, K. M. Short3, I. Smyth4, F. 
Jehee5, G. Yagnik6, S. A. Boyadjiev6, C. Marcelis1, P. J. Anderson7, M. L. 
Cunningham2, M. Passos-Bueno5, J. A. Veltman1, M. F. Buckley1, T. Roscioli1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Division of 
Craniofacial Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 
3Cutaneous Developmental Biology Lab, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia, 4Cutaneous Developmental Biology Lab, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia, 5Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 6Section of Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 
7Australian Craniofacial Unit, Adelaide, Australia.
Metopic craniosynostosis (MC), the premature fusion of the fron -
tal bone primordia, results in trigonocephaly and has a frequency of 
1:10,000 live births. One form of MC is associated with monosomy 
for an 8Mb interval of chromosome 9p22.3 (OMIM 158170). Features 
include mental retardation, trigonocephaly and midface hypoplasia. 
Overlapping copy number variants (CNVs) have been identified which 
include the FREM1 gene. We wished to investigate the role of FREM1  
in more than 100 people with MC ascertained through an international 
craniofacial consortium. The presence of 9p CNVs was assessed by 
microarrays and FREM1  was screened for mutations by sequencing 
and MLPA. Frem1  knockout mice were also imaged with microCT to 
determine if craniofacial anomalies consistent with a human MC phe -
notype.
Two de novo  CNVs involving FREM1  and 3 human FREM1  alleles 
(one de novo ) were identified. The two CNVs interrupt the FREM1  cod-
ing sequence, likely resulting in structural abnormalities of the FREM1  
protein. Evidence that a p.Glu1500Val mutation may be involved in MC 
includes that it is de novo  in a single family and is present in a second 
family with a range of craniofacial abnormalities. Craniofacial imag -
ing of homozygous Frem1  knock-out mice demonstrated craniofacial 
deformities consistent with MC. Taken together, these findings account 
for a significant percentage of a uni-sutural craniosynostosis and are 
consistent with FREM1  variants increasing the risk of MC. We recom -
mend that all children with MC should have 9p CNV investigations and 
consideration be given to FREM1  mutation analysis.Concurrent Sessions2
c05.6  cranioectodermal dysplasia is a ciliary disorder caused 
by defects in the iFt122 gene
J. Walczak-Sztulpa1, J. Eggenschwiler2, D. Osborn3, D. A. Brown2, F. Emma4, 
C. Klingenberg5, R. C. Hennekam6, G. Torre7, M. Garshasbi1, A. Tzschach1, M. 
Szczepanska8, M. Krawczynski9, J. Zachwieja10, D. Zwolinska11, P. Beales3, H. 
Ropers1, A. Latos-Bielenska12, A. W. Kuss1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department 
of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States, 
3Molecular Medicine Unit, University College London (UCL) Institute of Child 
Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, 
Children´s Hospital and Research Institute Bambino Gesu´, Rome, Italy, 
5Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of North-Norway and University 
of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway, 6Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital for Children, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 
7Division of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Children´s Hospital and Research 
Institute Bambino Gesu´, Rome, Italy, 8Department of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, Division of Reproduction, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland, 9Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 10Department of Paediatric 
Cardiology and Nephrology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, 
Poland, 11Department and Clinic of Paediatric Nephrology, Wroclaw Medical 
University, Wroclaw, Poland, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner syndrome, OMIM 
218330) is characterized by craniofacial, skeletal, and ectodermal ab -
normalities. Most cases are sporadic, but a few familial ones support 
an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
We collected 13 CED patients from 12 independent families. In two 
families the patients had consanguineous parents, and in one of these, 
two siblings were affected, permitting linkage analysis and homozygos -
ity mapping. This revealed a single region of homozygosity with a sig -
nificant LOD score (3.57) on chromosome 3q21-3q24. By investigating 
candidate genes from this interval we found a homozygous missense 
mutation in exon 15 (V->G) of the IFT122 gene that co-segregated with 
the disease. In addition we identified another homozygous missense 
change (S->F) in exon 11 if IFT122 in the patient from the second con -
sanguineous family, and found compound heterozygosity for two differ -
ent IFT122 mutations (a splice site change in intron 6 and a missense 
change in exon 1) in a sporadic patient. All changes were absent in 
340 control chromosomes. The IFT122 protein is a component of the 
retrograde intraflagellar transport and important for in the assembly 
and maintenance of eukaryotic cilia. We therefore investigated the pri -
mary cilia in patient fibroblasts and found significantly reduced cilia 
frequency and length in patient cells as compared to controls. We next 
transiently knocked down ift122 in zebrafish embryos and observed a 
characteristic ciliary phenotype, confirming that CED is a ciliary dis -
order and suggesting that the causative mutations in the unresolved 
cases are most likely to affect primary cilia function as well.
c06.1  is there an increased risk of congenital malformations after Assisted Reproductive t echnologies (ARt)? Results of a 
French cohort composed of 15 162 children
G. B. Viot1, S. Epelboin2, F. Olivennes3, S. Follow-Up AMP vigilance4;  
1Maternité Port Royal, Paris, France, 2Maternité Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, 
France, 3Clinique de la Muette, Paris, France, 4Poissy, Poissy, France.
The aims of this study is to estimate the risk of major or minor congeni -
tal malformations and genetic disorders among children born after in 
vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) in 33 
French centers registered for ART.
The survey was prospective from 2003 to 2007. The cohort was com -
posed of 15 162 infants recruited from birth; medical data were col -
lected regularly from birth to the age 60 months. Questionnaires were 
fulfilled by the paediatrician and the parents and 98% of them were ex -
ploitable. The prevalence of each malformation identified among this 
cohort was compared to the data of national registers.
A major congenital malformation was found in 4.24% children (vs 2-3% 
expected). This higher rate was partly due to an excess of heart dis -
eases (0.45% vs 0.25%) and malformations in the urogenital system 
[uropathy : 1.25% (vs 0.08-0.65%), hypospadias : 0.37% (vs 0.29%)]. 
Among the minor malformations, a 5 times higher frequency of angio -
ma was reported with a totally skewed sex ratio (262 girls/103 boys). 
Surprisingly, the average age for parents of malformed children at the 
time of the conception was not statically different from the all parents of this cohort. Genetic disorders were found in 110 children. Six children 
presented with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (0.04% vs 0.007% ex -
pected) and 5 with a retinoblastoma (0.03% vs 0.006%), both diseases 
influenced by epigenetics.
More investigations will highlight detailed informations about factors 
impacting on the occurrence of these abnormalities, as parental pat -
terns, indications or ART technics.
c06.2  the origin of de novo  chromosome deletions identified by 
array cGH
S. Thomas , C. Sibbons, H. Eisenhauer, J. Crolla, P. Jacobs;  
Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom.
Among de novo cytogenetically visible chromosome imbalances with 
non-recurrent breakpoints, there is an overall excess of paternal cas -
es: this effect is genome wide but varies according to the type of ab -
normality and the chromosomal location. These imbalances are likely 
to arise meiotically and are not associated with increased parental 
age. In contrast, while non-recurrent balanced translocations are also 
predominantly paternal in origin, they display a significantly elevated 
paternal age suggesting they may arise during mitosis in male germ 
cells prior to meiosis.
The use of array CGH provides two significant advantages in the study 
of chromosome abnormalities: it allows the aetiology of very small im -
balances to be investigated and defines precisely the size of an imbal -
ance thus giving information on the sequence composition around the 
breakpoints.
We have investigated the parental origin of 37 deletions identified or 
characterised by array CGH using the Agilent 44K platform. Twenty 
seven (73%) were paternal in origin and 10 maternal (27%). Analysis 
of the breakpoint intervals showed that one of the maternal cases and 
five of the paternal cases contained segmental duplications suggest -
ing formation by Non-Allelic Homologous Recombination. The aver -
age size of the paternal deletions was 7.3Mb compared with 3.1Mb 
for the maternal cases. These results confirm the parental origin bias, 
although among deletions below 6Mb the excess of paternal cases 
was less pronounced.
We will investigate the origin of further cases including duplications 
and complex abnormalities with multiple breakpoints and also look for 
any association with increased parental age.
c06.3  Novel insights into the pathogenesis of common 
aneuploidies using genomic analysis of cell-free amniotic fluid
D. W. Bianchi1, K. L. Johnson1, K. Koide1, L. Massingham1, J. L. Maron1, D. 
Slonim2;  
1Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 2Tufts University, Medford, 
MA, United States.
Background: As a novel means of identifying pathophysiologic changes 
in fetuses with common aneuploidies, we characterized developmen -
tal gene expression using cell-free mRNA in residual second trimester 
amniotic fluid (AF) supernatant samples.
Methods: RNA was extracted from AF in fetuses with trisomy 21 [T21] 
(n=7), trisomy 18 [T18] (n=5), and euploid controls (n=13). cDNA 
synthesis and biotin labeling were performed prior to hybridization to 
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Initial analysis was done using the 
Affymetrix Gene Chip Microarray Suite 5.0, followed by comparative 
t-tests and Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. Differentially-expressed 
genes were further examined by the Database for Annotation, Visual -
ization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Ingenuity®.
Results: In T21 we identified 414 differentially-expressed genes vs. 
controls. Only 5/414 genes mapped to chromosome 21. In T18, only 
7/356 differentially-expressed genes were on chromosome 18. Heat 
map and functional analyses of genes not on 18 or 21 showed a con -
sistent pattern unique for each aneuploidy that significantly differed 
from euploidy. Only 6 differentially-expressed transcripts were com -
mon to both aneuploidies. T21 samples showed significant oxidative 
stress and disruptions in ion transport, G-protein signaling, immune re -
sponse, and circulatory system function. T18 showed down-regulation 
of the endocrine system and up-regulation of lipid metabolism.
Conclusions: Our results question the conventional wisdom that the 
pathophysiology of aneuploidy is due to a gene dosage effect, as the 
molecular abnormalities observed here are predominantly produced 
by genes on chromosomes other than 18 or 21. This discovery-driven 
genomic approach using discarded material suggests new avenues to Concurrent Sessions27
further understand abnormal fetal development.
c06.4*  Frequencies of 15q11-q13, 7q11.23 and 22q11.2 deletions 
and duplications in spermatozoa from Prader-Willi syndrome 
fathers.
Ò. Molina , E. Anton, F. Vidal, J. Blanco;  
Unitat de Biologia Cel·lular (Facultat de Biociències). Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genomic disorder mostly caused 
by 15q11-q13 deletions (70%) due to meiotic Non-allelic homologous 
recombination (NAHR) between flanking Low Copy Repeats (LCR). A 
higher rate of 15q11-q13-deletions and duplications was previously re -
ported in spermatozoa of fathers with PWS affected offspring. The aim 
of this work was to analyze the frequency of deletions and duplications 
of other regions with similar features (7q11.23 and 22q11.2) in order to 
assess whether a higher risk of transmitting other genomic disorders 
is present in this subjects.
Semen samples from 16 PWS fathers and 10 control donors were pro -
cessed and analyzed by triple-color FISH as standardized in our labo -
ratory. A customized combination of probes (Abbot Molecular Inc.) was 
used to assess the target regions allowing the discrimination between 
normal, deleted and duplicated sperm genotypes. A minimum of 10000 
sperm were analized per sample and region.
As a whole, higher rates of deletions and duplications were observed for 
15q11-q13 (0.9%±0.14) and 22q11.23 region (0.44%±0.09) compared 
with the control population (0.46%±0.07 and 0.27%±0.05 respectively) 
(Mann-Whitney test; P<0.05). Interestingly, all individuals with signifi -
cant increases of 7q11.23 and 22q11.2 had also been reported to have 
increases of 15q11q13-deletions and duplications. Moreover, a signifi -
cant correlation were observed between the frequencies of deletions 
and duplications of 15q11-q13 and 7q11.23 regions (r=0.87; P=0.02) 
and between 15q11-q13 and 22q11.2 regions (r=0.89; P=0.002).
Results suggest that other factors apart from architectural features in 
these regions could participate in the increases of NAHR events.
Acknowledgements: Grant UAB.PIF/2007.
c06.5*  Genome-wide single cell array analysis for 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis of a complex chromosomal 
rearrangement carrier
E. Vanneste1,2, C. Melotte1, U. Ullman3, C. Staessen3, I. Liebaers3, T. Voet1, 
S. Debrock2, A. Pexsters2, C. Tomassetti2, J. Fryns1, T. D‘Hooghe2, J. R. 
Vermeesch1;  
1Center for Human Genetics / K.U.Leuven - UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 
Belgium, 2Leuven University Fertility Center / UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 
Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics / UZ Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.
Patients carrying a complex chromosomal rearrangement (CCR) have 
an increased risk for chromosomally unbalanced conceptions, which 
either do not implant, are spontaneously lost during gestation or lead 
to severely handicapped children. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis 
(PGD) can select against these embryos carrying unbalanced rear -
rangements, however only 7 loci can be screened and an indication-
specific preparation is needed using the standard FISH-technique. 
Microarray technology, on the contrary, can detect imbalances as 
small as 10 Mb genome-wide at the single cell level. We performed for 
the first time microarray-based PGD for a CCR-carrier with karyotype 
46,XY,ins(3;2)(p23; q23q14.2),t(6;14)(p12.2; q13). In concurrence with 
the ethical committee, only the copy number status of the chromo -
somes involved in the CCR were diagnosed.
Two PGD cycles with single embryo transfer were performed, which 
resulted in a clinical pregnancy. The embryo that gave rise to the preg -
nancy was normal (or balanced) for the inherited CCR, but carried 
however a trisomy 8 and nullisomy 9 in one of the two biopsied blas -
tomeres. After 8 weeks of pregnancy the couple miscarried. Genetic 
analysis following embryo-hysteroscopy showed a diploid(90%)/tetra -
ploid(10%) mosaic chorion, while the gestational sac was empty. No 
aneuploidy 8 was detected in the chorion, while 8% of the cells carried 
a monosomy for chromosome 9.
We demonstrate that microarray enables to screen against the trans -
mission of the unbalanced meiotic products that can derive from (com -
plex) chromosomal rearrangements. In addition, the findings demon -
strate that the genomic constitution of the implanted embryo is not 
representing the chromosomal rearrangements detected in a single 
blastomere.c06.6*  Prenatal anomalies in a cohort of 40 Noonan syndrome 
patients
G. Baldassarre1, C. Rossi2, E. Banaudi1, M. Tartaglia3, A. Marinosci1, M. 
Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics - 
Policlinco S. Orsola Maplighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Cell Biology and 
Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a frequent autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by mutations in the genes of the RAS/MAPK pathway, be -
ing the most frequent PTPN11 and SOS1. Besides the well known 
post-natal heterogeneous clinical presentation characterized by short 
stature, congenital heart defects, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, 
cryptorchidism, lymphatic dysplasia; the prenatal phenotype is not pre -
cisely defined, as well as the related prognostic factors. Several NS 
anomalies can be observed in fetuses, such as those ones related 
to lympathic dysplasia (increased nuchal translucency, cystic hygro -
mas, hydrops fetalis, multiple effusions and polyhydramnios), cardiac 
defects, and growth retardation. In this retrospective study we evalu -
ated the incidence of abnormal prenatal findings in a cohort of 40 NS 
patients including 28 PTPN11, 8 SOS1, 1 KRAS, 1 BRAF, 1 RAF1 and 
1 SHOC2 mutated patients. Prenatal anomalies were found in 42.5% 
(17/40) of them : 40% (16/40) polydramnios, 17.5 % (7/40) increased 
fetal nuchal translucency, 17.5 % (7/40) hydrothorax and multiple ef -
fusions, 12.5% (5/40) premature rupture of membranes, 2,5 % (1/40) 
cardiac defects, 9 (22.5%) presenting multiple defects. In conclusion, 
prenatal anomalies can be found in an elevated fraction of NS patients, 
being the most common polyhydramnios, with a consistent portion of 
them presenting multiple anomalies. Interestingly, the observed anom -
alies do not correlate with the severity of the postnatal phenotype, both 
at birth and in the first years of life, suggesting that prenatal diagnosis 
of NS is not burdened by an adverse prognosis.
C07.1  Identification of biomarkers for acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL) by allele-specific gene expression and DNA 
methylation analysis of primary ALL cells
L. Milani1, A. Lundmark1, J. Nordlund1, A. Kiialainen1, K. L. Gunderson2, T. 
Flaegstad3, E. Forestier4, M. Heyman5, G. Jonmundsson6, J. Kanerva7, K. 
Schmiegelov8, S. Söderhäll9, M. G. Gustafsson10, G. Lönnerholm11, A. C. 
Syvänen1;  
1Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden, 2Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States, 3Nordic Society 
of Pediatric Oncology, Norway, 4Department of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Umeå,, Umeå, Sweden, 5Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 
6Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7Nordic Society of 
Pediatric Oncology, Helsinki, Finland, 8Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 9Nordic Society of Pediatric Oncology, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 10Clinical Pharmacology and Informatics, Department of Medical 
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 11Department of Women‘s and 
Children‘s Health Medical Sciences, University Childrens Hospital,, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
We used genome-wide allele-specific expression (ASE) patterns to 
identify genes with cis-acting factors that regulate gene expression in 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells. We determined the allelic 
expression levels of 8,000 genes in bone marrow or peripheral blood 
samples from 197 children with ALL, by quantitative genotyping of sin -
gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in RNA. This analysis identified 
391 genes that displayed ASE. Extended promoter regions of these 
genes were subjected to DNA methylation analysis in cells from 401 
patients with childhood ALL. We found that CpG sites located outside 
“CpG islands” had higher methylation levels and larger variability in 
CpG site methylation than CpG sites within “CpG islands”. We identi -
fied 47 genes with an inverse correlation between CpG site methyla -
tion and ASE in our ALL sample set, and for 24 genes we observed a 
correlation between CpG site methylation and ASE levels in individual 
ALL samples. Using supervised learning, we constructed multivari -
ate classifiers by external cross-validation procedures, and identified 
genes where the DNA methylation levels allowed accurate discrimina -
tion between ALL cells and control cells, between T-lineage and B-cell 
precursor (BCP) ALL and between the main cytogenetic subtypes of 
BCP ALL. We also identified 20 genes with DNA methylation levels that 
predicted relapse of ALL. Most of the genes high-lighted in our study 
are novel, with no reported connection with ALL. Our findings open 
up perspectives for more detailed studies on DNA methylation as a Concurrent Sessions2
molecular event that leads to ALL and affects the treatment response 
and clinical outcome.
c07.2*  correlation of telomere length shortening with promoter 
methylation profile of p16/Rb and p53/p21 pathways in breast 
cancer
Z. Barekati , R. Radpour, C. Kohler, R. Asadollahi, X. Zhong;  
Laboratory for Prenatal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology, Basel, 
Switzerland.
Unregulated cell growth, a major hallmark of cancer, is coupled with 
telomere shortening. Measurement of telomere length could provide 
important information on cell replication and proliferation state in 
cancer tissues. Telomere shortening and its potential correlation with 
downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory elements were studied by the 
examination of relative telomere length and methylation status of the 
TP53, P21 and P16 promoters in tissues from breast cancer patients. 
Telomere length was measured in 104 samples (52 tumors and paired 
adjacent normal breast tissues) by quantitative PCR. Methylation 
profile of selected genes was analyzed in all samples using a matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry 
(MALDI-TOF MS). Our results demonstrated a significant shortening 
of tumor telomere regions compared to paired adjacent normal tis -
sues (P<0.001). Similarly, telomere lengths were significantly shorter 
in advanced stage cases and in those with higher histological grades 
(P<0.05). Telomere shortening in cancer tissues was correlated with a 
different level of hypermethylation in the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters 
(r=-0.33, P=0.001; r=-0.70, P<0.0001 and r=-0.71, P<0.0001, respec -
tively). The results suggested that inactivation of p16/Rb and/or p53/
p21 pathways by hypermethylation may be linked to critical telomere 
shortening, leading to genome instability and ultimately to malignant 
transformation. Thus, telomere shortening and promoter hypermethyl -
ation of related genes both might serve as breast cancer biomarkers.
c07.3*  Discovery of molecular targets for therapy by expression 
profiling of thyroid cancer cases
D. Nikolova1,2, I. Dimova1, H. Zembutsu2, T. Sechanov3, K. Vidinov3, L. Kee4, R. 
Ivanova3, E. Becheva1, D. Toncheva1, Y. Nakamura2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
2Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Clinic of 
Endocrine Surgery, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Thyroid cancer represents a heterogeneous entity and its clinical char -
acteristics vary widely. Gene-expression profiling studies have identi -
fied a variety of potential molecular markers to help distinguish benign 
from malignant thyroid neoplasms.
To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the progression and to iden -
tify novel therapeutic targets, we assessed the genome-wide expres -
sion in normal and tumor thyroid tissues.
Pure populations of malignant and healthy cells were isolated by ap -
plying the technology of LCM. We compared the gene expression 
patterns of 18 malignant thyroid samples and 13 samples of normal 
epithelial non-transformed cells using the GeneChip trademark from 
Affymetrix.
We identified 243 probes that were significantly differentially over-ex -
pressed and whose ratio tumor/control was more than 5 in more than 
50% of the analyzed samples. Among the top overexpressed genes 
in thyroid carcinoma were: FN, CHI3L1, FAM20A, SEACAM6, NMU, 
LPL etc. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering separated papillary from 
medullar carcinoma samples. The differential expression of 7 genes 
was validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Two of those candidates 
(RGS4  and QPCT ) were confirmed by immunohistochemistry, North -
ern blot analyses and further functional analysis, including siRNA ex -
periments.Based on this result, we consider RGS4  as a good molecu -
lar target for therapy of thyroid cancer. Thus, the molecular signatures 
unique to thyroid carcinoma provide a molecular basis for therapeutic 
target discovery.
c07.4*  A new approach for ovarian cancer screening - 
characterization of miRNA profiles in peripheral blood
S. F. M. Häusler1, A. Keller2, A. Chandran3, J. Wischhusen4;  
1Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Biomarker 
Discovery Center Heidelberg and febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 
3Graduate School for Life Sciences, Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 4Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research, 
Universitäts-Frauenklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
Screening is an unsolved problem for ovarian cancer, especially as 
late detection is equivalent to poor prognosis. Thus, we investigated 
whether ovarian cancer patients display characteristically deregulated 
miRNAs in blood cells that could form the basis of a test for disease 
progression or even for preventive screening. To this aim, blood-borne 
miRNA profiles from 15 patients with ovarian cancer and 15 age- and 
sex-matched healthy controls were compared and biostatistically 
evaluated. This showed that 51 out of >900 tested miRNAs were de -
regulated by unadjusted Student´s t-test. While some candidates had 
already been linked with cancer (e.g. miR-155), most had never been 
connected to a specific disease before. Bioinformatics further enabled 
us to define a miRNA profile which allowed for discrimination between 
blood samples of ovarian cancer patients and healthy controls with 
an accuracy and specificity of >70%. When only cancers of the se -
rous subtype were considered and compared with an extended control 
group (n=37), sensitivity exceeded 90%.
Taken together, our proof-of-principle study strengthens the hypothesis 
that neoplastic diseases generate characteristic miRNA fingerprints in 
blood cells. Thus, we propose that the combination of microarray-based 
miRNA-profiling from peripheral blood with other markers might improve 
the notoriously difficult but important screening for ovarian cancer .
C07.5*  Methylation Profiles of 22 Candidate Genes in Breast 
cancer Using High-throughput mALDi-t OF mass Array
R. Radpour , Z. Barekati, C. Kohler, X. Zhong;  
Laboratory for Prenatal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology, Women’s 
Hospital/Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Alterations of DNA methylation patterns have been suggested as bio -
markers for diagnostics and therapy of cancers. Every novel discovery 
in the epigenetic landscape and every development of an improved 
approach for accurate analysis of the events may offer new opportunity 
for the management of patients. Using a novel high-throughput mass 
spectrometry on MALDI-TOF silico-chips, we determined quantitative 
methylation changes of 22 candidate genes in breast cancer tissues. 
For the first time we analysed the methylation status of a total of 42,528 
CpG dinucleotides on 22 genes in 96 different paraffin-embedded tis -
sues (48 breast cancerous tissues and 48 paired normal tissues). A 
two-way hierarchical cluster analysis was used to classify methylation 
profiles. In this study, 10 hypermethylated genes ( APC, BIN1, BMP6, 
BRCA1, CST6, ESRb, GSTP1, P16,  P21 and TIMP3 ) were identified 
to distinguish between cancerous and normal tissues according to the 
extent of methylation. Individual assessment of the methylation status 
for each CpG dinucleotide indicated that cytosine  hypermethylation in 
the cancerous tissue samples was mostly located near the consensus 
sequences of the transcription factor binding sites. These hypermeth -
ylated genes may serve as biomarkers for clinical molecular diagnosis 
and targeted treatments of patients with breast cancer.
c07.6  Unraveling the complexity of Primary and metastatic Ewing’s sarcoma Using Helicos single molecule sequencing
P. Kapranov1, R. J. Arceci2, J. Buckley3, G. Reaman4, P. Reynolds5, P. 
Sorensen6, J. Thompson1, P. Milos1, T. Triche3;  
1Helicos BioSciences Corporation, Cambridge, MA, United States, 2John 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Children’s Oncology Group, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, United 
States, 6University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Ewing sarcoma is a high-risk childhood cancer that represents a major 
treatment challenge, as survival has not improved significantly despite 
aggressive chemotherapy. Elucidation of molecular changes in pro -
gression of this cancer towards the metastatic and chemo-resistant 
states offers the potential to better understand the fundamentals of 
biological processes responsible for poor disease outcome. We have 
applied Helicos single-molecule sequencing to build unbiased whole-
genome profiles of the transcriptome, methylome and DNA of two cell 
lines derived from the primary tumor of a Ewing sarcoma patient and 
her chemo-resistant metastasis. This simple system is ideal for gen -
eration of hypotheses on relationships between coding and non-cod -
ing RNAs, the epigenome, primary DNA sequence, and the malignant 
phenotype. Unlike work on primary tumors, it also allows for biologic 
validation.Concurrent Sessions2
Large differences between the primary and metastatic cells exist at 
both the genomic and transcriptome levels, including differential ex -
pression and methylation as well as copy number and sequence vari -
ants suggesting clonal evolution from the primary to the metastatic 
tumor. A significant fraction of the genome was found to represent 
RNAs expressed at different levels between the cell lines, of which 
~60% corresponded to un-annotated transcripts. In some instances, 
the latter could span large (100’s of kb) genomic regions that contain 
no annotated transcripts. About 25% of the transcripts upregulated in 
the metastatic clone were found to be associated with promoter de -
methylation when compared to the primary tumor, suggesting that 
promoter demethylation is specifically associated with up-regulation 
of transcripts in the metastatic/chemo-resistant tumor in a selective 
manner.
C08.1  Treacher Collins syndrome - detailed genetic and 
phenotypic analysis
D. Wieczorek1, S. Seland1, H. J. Lüdecke1, S. Böhringer1,2, L. Klein-Hitpass3, 
C. Daumer-Haas4, N. Elcioglu5, H. Hameister6, H. Kayserili7, A. Kobelt8, D. 
Müller8, O. Rittinger9, S. Spranger10, G. Strobl-Wildemann11, J. Vodopiutz12, R. 
Brekelmans13, D. R. Lohmann1, U. Hehr14;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 
2Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical 
Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), 
BioChip-Labor, Essen, Germany, 4Pränatal-Medizin München, München, 
Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey, 6genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 7Department of Medical 
Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Institut 
für Medizinische Genetik, Klinikum Chemnitz gGmbH, Chemnitz, Germany, 
9Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, 
Austria, 10Praxis für Humangenetik, Klinikum Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 
11Praxis für Humangenetik, Ingolstadt, Germany, 12Department of Pediatrics 
and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 13MRC 
Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14Zentrum für Humangenetik, Universität 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
The Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS, OMIM #154500) is an autoso -
mal dominant condition characterised by craniofacial dysmorphism 
consisting of downslanting palpebral fissures, lower eyelid coloboma, 
hypoplasia of facial bones and microtia. Mutation analysis of the 
TCOF1  gene identifies pathogenic mutations in more than 90% of pa -
tients with typical TCS.
In 226 patients referred to us as having TCS, we performed TCOF1  
sequence and MLPA (26/28 exons) analyses. Point mutations scat -
tered throughout the gene were identified in 78 of them, but no deletion 
or duplication was found in the remaining 148. By careful evaluation 
of all available clinical data of these 148 patients, we could confirm 
the suspected diagnosis of TCS in only 10 of them. These were then 
subjected to SNP-array analyses, but no deletion or duplication was 
found.
We will report in detail on the clinical findings in 49 index patients, in -
cluding 21 new ones, and their affected family members with a patho -
genic mutation in the TCOF1  gene and will show average 2D faces we 
created from standardized photographs. We observed a wide inter- 
and intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Possibly stochastic variation or 
unidentified genetic modifiers, most likely not in cis might contribute to 
the phenotypic variability.
Some members of families with molecularly proven TCS are so mildly 
affected that they do not even fulfill the minimal diagnostic criteria de -
fined earlier (Teber et al., 2004). Thus, a genotype phenotype corre -
lation can not be made. The widened phenotypic spectrum must be 
considered in genetic counselling.
C08.2  Genomic rearrangements of the GREM1-FMN1  locus 
cause Oligosyndactyly, Radio-Ulnar synostosis, Hearing loss, 
Renal defects syndrome and cenani-Lenz-like non-syndromic 
Oligosyndactyly
B. I. Dimitrov1, T. Voet1, L. De Smet2, J. R. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, J. 
Fryns1, P. Debeer1,2;  
1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
2Department of Musculoskeletal Science, Division of Orthopaedics, University 
Hospitals Leuven, Pellenberg, Belgium.
Limb development is a complex process requiring proper spatio-tem -
poral expression of a network of limb specific morphogens. Grem1 and Fmn1 play an important role in mouse and chick limb development. 
The mouse limb deformity  (ld) phenotype with digit reduction, syndac -
tyly, radio-ulnar synostosis, variable renal defects and absent fibulae is 
caused by loss of Grem1 function. This could be due to either coding 
Grem1  homozygous mutations or homozygous deletions of the neigh -
bouring Fmn1  gene, which also removes limb specific regulatory se -
quences of Grem1 . Recent studies reinforce the hypothesis that a loss 
of Fmn1 protein could also contribute to the observed ld anomalies. 
In addition, an over-expression of Grem1  in developing chick limbs 
represses the programmed cell death in the interdigital mesenchyme, 
resulting in interdigital webbing and truncation of distal cartilage ele -
ments.
We report here, for the first time, chromosomal imbalances in the 
GREM1 -FMN1  region in individuals with limb defects. A 263Kb homo -
zygous deletion of FMN1  was associated with oligosyndactyly, radioul -
nar synostosis, hearing loss and renal defects, features identical to ld 
mice. A 1.7Mb duplication encompassing both the GREM1  and FMN1  
genes was detected in an isolated Cenani-Lenz-like oligosyndactyly 
of the hands, resembling the transgenic chick wings in which Grem1  
was over-expressed. The phenotypes of the patients represent new 
entities/syndromes within the Cenani-Lenz clinical spectrum- (1) an 
autosomal recessive Oligosyndactyly, Radio-Ulnar Synostosis, Hear -
ing loss and Renal defect syndrome and (2) an autosomal dominant 
Cenani-Lenz-like non-syndromic Oligosyndactyly.
C08.3  An inherited arthritis is caused by mutations in TRPV4
R. Savarirayan1, S. Lamande1, Y. Yuan2, I. Gresshoff1, C. Little3, L. Rowley1, K. 
Kaluarachchi1, E. Botzenhart4, D. Amor1, W. Cole5, P. McIntrye6, J. Bateman1;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Dept. 
Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 33Raymond 
Purves Bone & Joint Research Laboratories, Sydney, Australia, 
44Universitatsklinikum Freiburn, Institut fur Humangenetik und Anthropologie, 
Freiburg, Germany, 56Stollery Children’s Hospital/University of Alberta 
Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 6Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Melbourne, Australia, Melbourne, Australia.
Familial Digital Arthropathy-Brachydactyly (FDAB; OMIM 606835) is 
a dominantly inherited condition involving aggressive osteoarthritis of 
the fingers and toes and consequent shortening of the middle and dis -
tal phalanges. We show, in two unrelated families, that the disorder is 
caused by missense substitutions (G270V, R271P and F273L) in the 
intracellular ankyrin repeat domain of the transient receptor potential 
cation channel TRPV4 . Functional testing of mutant TRPV4  in stably 
transfected HEK293 cells revealed the mutant proteins showed poor 
cell surface localization, despite being expressed at similar levels to 
wild type protein, and calcium influx in response to the TRPV4 agonist 
GSK1016790A was significantly reduced. Others have recently shown 
that gain of function TRPV4  mutations cause a range of skeletal dys -
plasias and peripheral neuropathies. Our data, showing tightly clus -
tered TRPV4  mutations that reduce channel activity in a third pheno -
type, inherited osteoarthritis, demonstrate the importance of TRPV4  
activity in articular cartilage homeostasis and raises the possibility that 
this cation channel might play a role in age-related osteoarthritis.
C08.4*  Mutations in PITX1  cause a human patellar malformation 
syndrome: Delineation of a recognisable lower-limb phenotype
E. M. H. F. Bongers1, J. Schoots1, F. Stock2, N. V. A. M. Knoers1, J. W. M. 
Gardeniers3, A. van Kampen3, J. de Rooij4, L. Hoefsloot1;  
1Dept of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig 
AöR, Leipzig, Germany, 3Dept of Orthopaedic Surgery, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept of Radiololy, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The identification of gene defects in human patellar malformation syn -
dromes and mutant animal models proved to be important in unravel -
ling key molecules involved in patellar development and musculosk -
eletal patterning. The nail patella syndrome phenotype emphasised 
that the LIM homeodomain transcription factor  LMX1B is critical in 
dorsoventral and anteroposterior patterning of the upper- and lower-
limbs, as well as the formation of patellar/iliac/radial bones. Phenotype 
studies of the small patella syndrome (SPS) determined that the T-box 
transcription factor TBX4 is implicated in dorsoventral and anteropos -
terior patterning of the lower-limb and late skeletal development of 
patellar/ischiopubic/(meta)tarsal bones. We aimed at elucidating the Concurrent Sessions0
molecular cause in four classical SPS families and six families with a 
SPS-like phenotype, in which sequencing of TBX4,TBX2, and LMX1B 
was found normal. The paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 
PITX1  was selected as a strong candidate gene for congenital patellar, 
pelvic and foot malformations, based on its role as an upregulator of 
Tbx4  in the determination of lower-limb identity in chicken and mice. 
Pitx1  knockout mice showed absent patellae and lower-limb bones re -
sembling an upper limb-like morphology. We identified two different 
putative loss-of-function mutations (one missense and one nonsense) 
in PITX1  in one four-generation and one two-generation SPS-like fam -
ily, respectively. The phenotypic spectrum comprised aberrant patellar 
size and morphology, unilateral clubfoot and iliac/tibial/fibular/talus/cal -
caneal bone malformations. The present identification of PITX1  mu-
tations in man, together with the phenotype of animals lacking Pitx1  
delineates a recognisable autosomal dominant patellar malformation 
syndrome resulting from disrupted anteroposterior patterning and left-
right directional asymmetry of the lower-limb.
C08.5*  TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias: a clinical, 
radiographic, and molecular study in 18 families.
E. Andreucci1,2, J. Bateman3, S. Aftimos4, E. Haan5, W. Hunter6, B. Kerr7, G. 
McGillivray2, R. J. McKinlay Gardner4, M. Patricelli8, D. Sillence9, S. Lamandé3, 
R. Savarirayan2;  
1Dept. of Clinical Pathophysiology and Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s 
Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Genetic Health Services 
Victoria and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children‘s Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal 
Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, 4Northern Regional 
Genetics Service, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zeland, 5South 
Australian Clinical Genetics Services, SA Pathology, Women‘s and Children‘s 
Hospital and Department of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
Asutralia, 6Paediatrician Midcentral District Heath Board Palmerston North 
New Zealand, 7Genetic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester M139WL, 
UK, 8Servizio di Genetica, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 9Department of 
Genetic Medicine, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 protein (TRPV4) is a cal -
cium-permeable ion channel that responds to many different stimuli, is 
widely expressed, and participates in an extraordinarily wide range of 
physiologic processes.
Autosomal dominant brachyolmia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia 
Kozlowski type (SMDK) and metatropic dysplasia are three distinct 
skeletal dysplasias which share some common features, including 
short stature, platyspondyly, and progressive scoliosis. SMDK and 
metatropic dysplasia also have significant but variable metaphyseal 
involvement on radiographs.
In the past two years, mutations in the gene encoding TRPV4 have 
been found to be responsible for these three skeletal phenotypes, con -
firming that they are allelic disorders and suggesting that they might 
represent different parts of a phenotypic spectrum.
We analysed the clinical, radiographic and molecular data on 21 pa -
tients from 18 families, all of whom had a clinical diagnosis of one of 
the conditions described above: 12 with metatropic dysplasia; 3 with 
SMKD; and 3 with brachyolmia. Our study identified 7 different muta -
tions in 14 out of the 18 studied families, two previously described, 
and 5 novel.
These data have uncovered new genotype-phenotype correlations 
and suggest that these three conditions represent a continuum of 
severity with areas of phenotypic overlap between conditions, even 
within the same family. We hope that these data will also add to the 
understanding of the molecular basis of these disorders and identify 
possible pharmacologic targets for therapy.
C08.6  Clinical and molecular findings on 20 patients with 
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
I. Stefanova1, C. Grünberg2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Klinik für Orthopädie und 
Unfallchirurgie, Allg. Krankenhaus Hagen, Hagen, Germany.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) (MIM 135100) is a rare 
genetic disorder of progressive extraskeletal ossifications. The hetero -
zygous mutation c.617G>A (p.R206H) in the ACVR1 gene is regard -
ed as the cause of FOP in classically affected individuals worldwide 
(Shore et al.2006).
We report on clinical findings of 20 patients (10 female, 10 male pa -tients, aged eight months to 38 years) with FOP and on molecular 
findings of 13 of them. Most of them show a typical hypoplasia/aplasia 
and valgus deviation of the great toe (17/20). A common symptom are 
painful swellings on shoulders and face beginning to arise approxi -
mately at an age of three years (15/20). Hand anomalies, such as 
thumb hypoplasia (18/20) and clinodactyly of the fifth finger (15/20) 
are common. Some patients have hypoacusis. Further features are re -
stricted mobility of the spine and contractures of other joints as a result 
of heterotopic ossifications. Some patients show craniofacial features 
like hypomimia, sparse eyebrows and hair and teeth anomalies.
Sequence analysis of the ACVR1 gene were performed on 13/20 pa -
tients. Ten patients show the typical mutation p.R206H. Two patients 
with an atypical phenotype show different mutations (G328W and 
G356D).
We analysed the metacarpophalangeal profile (MCPP) on X-rays of 
seven patients. We suggest that there is a typical MCPP pattern in 
classical FOP, which could be used as an additional diagnostic tool.
We discuss the clinical, radiological and molecular findings of our pa -
tients and compare them with the literature. Our study contributes to 
the understanding of the FOP phenotype and possible genotype-phe -
notype correlations.
c09.1  chromosome-wide mapping of long-range interactions 
involved in smith-magenis and Potocki-Lupski syndromes
N. Gheldof1, B. Lajoie2, G. Ricard1, J. Chrast1, J. Molina3, J. R. Lupski4, K. 
Walz3, J. Dekker2, A. Reymond1;  
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 3University of Miami, Miami, FL, 
United States, 4Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Copy number variations (CNVs) affect expression levels of the genes 
that map within the affected region, but also of genes located in the 
flanking regions. To understand the mechanisms at play, we studied 
gene expression and chromatin conformation in mice models of Smith-
Magenis (SMS) and Potocki-Lupski (PTLS) syndromes, containing a 
microdeletion and its reciprocal microduplication, respectively, on 
mouse chromosome 11 (MMU11). We profiled the transcriptome of 
embryonic fibroblasts of mice with one, two, three and uniallelic two 
copies of the SMS/PTLS region in an otherwise identical genetic back -
ground. As expected, the most differentially expressed transcripts are 
mapping to the SMS/PTLS interval, but a significant proportion of most 
differentially expressed genes also map to the rest of MMU11. We 
hypothesized that these chromosome-wide effects might be caused 
by changes in long-range interactions along the entire chromosome. 
We therefore analyzed the chromatin structure of these four mouse 
strains by using the chromosome conformation capture carbon copy 
(5C) technology. This will allow comparing the chromatin structure and 
the presence of physical contacts between functionally interacting ge -
nomic elements in genotypes differing only by the number of copies 
of a CNV, and correlating these interaction maps with the observed 
differential gene expression. Detailed investigations of the different 
mechanisms by which CNVs alter the architecture of chromosomes 
are warranted to shed light on how CNVs influence gene expression. 
In addition, this study will provide a first comprehensive chromatin in -
teraction map of an entire mouse chromosome.
C09.2*  Kidney-specific inactivation of Ofd1 leads to renal cystic disease associated to upregulation of the mt OR pathway
B. Franco1, D. Iaconis1, A. Barra1, A. Cantone2, N. Messaddeq3, G. Capasso2, 
P. Dolle3, P. Igarashi4, A. Zullo1;  
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Chair of 
Nephrology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 3Institut de Génétique 
et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch Cedex, France, 4Department 
of Internal Medicine and Division of Basic Sciences, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States.
The Oral-Facial-Digital type I syndrome (OFDI; MIM 311200) is a rare 
syndromic form of inherited renal cystic disease. It is transmitted as an 
X-linked dominant, male lethal disorder and is caused by mutations 
in the OFD1 gene. Previous studies demonstrated that OFDI belongs 
to the growing number of disorders ascribed to dysfunction of primary 
cilia. We generated a conditional inactivation of the mouse Ofd1 gene 
using the Ksp-cre transgenic line, which resulted in a viable model 
characterized by renal cystic disease and progressive impairment of 
renal function. The study of this model allowed us to demonstrate that Concurrent Sessions1
primary cilia initially form and then disappear after the development 
of cysts, suggesting that the dysfunction of primary cilia is a conse -
quence rather than the primary cause of renal cystic disease. Immu -
nofluorescence and western blotting analysis revealed upregulation of 
the mTOR pathway in both dilated and non dilated renal structures. 
Treatment with rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of the mTOR pathway, 
resulted in a significant reduction in the number and size of renal cysts 
and a decrease in the cystic index compared with untreated mutant 
animals, suggesting that dysregulation of this pathway in our model is 
mTOR-dependent. The animal model we have generated could thus 
represent a valuable tool to understand the molecular link between 
mTOR and cyst development, and eventually to the identification of 
novel drug targets for renal cystic disease.
c09.3  Lack of mid1, the mouse ortholog of the Opitz syndrome 
gene, causes abnormal development of the anterior cerebellar 
vermis
A. Lancioni1, M. Pizzo1, B. Fontanella1, R. Ferrentino1, L. M. R. Napolitano2, E. 
De Leonibus1, G. Meroni2,1;  
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Cluster in 
Biomedicine (CBM), Trieste, Italy.
Opitz G/BBB Syndrome (OS) is a genetic disorder characterized by 
midline developmental defects. Male patients with the X-linked form of 
OS, caused by loss-of-function mutations in the MID1  gene, show high 
variability of the clinical signs. MID1  encodes a ubiquitin ligase that 
controls Phosphatase 2A but its role in the pathogenesis of the disease 
is still unclear. Here we report a mouse line carrying a non-functional 
ortholog of the human MID1  gene, Mid1 . Mid1  null mice show the brain 
anatomical defect observed in patients, i.e. hypoplasia of the anterior 
portion of the medial cerebellum, the vermis. We found that the pres -
ence of this defect correlates with motor coordination, procedural and 
non-associative learning impairments. The defect is limited to the most 
anterior lobes of the vermis, the region of the developing cerebellum 
adjacent to the dorsal midbrain. Analyses at mid-gestation reveal that 
lack of Mid1  causes the shortening of the posterior dorsal midbrain; 
the rostralization of the midbrain/cerebellum boundary; and the down-
regulation of a key player in the development of this region, Fgf17 . 
Thus, lack of Mid1  causes a mis-specification of the midbrain/cerebel -
lar boundary that results in an abnormal development of the most an -
terior cerebellar lobes. This animal model provides a tool for further in 
vivo studies of the physiological and pathological role of the Mid1  gene 
and a system to investigate the development and function of anterior 
cerebellar domains.
c09.4*  Global gene transfer in the cNs and phenotypic 
correction of mLD model mice by systemic neonatal injection of 
serotype 9 AAV vector
N. Miyake , K. Miyake, N. Asakawa, M. Okabe, M. Yamamoto, T. Shimada;  
Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are important targets for enzyme 
replacement and gene therapy. The success of gene therapy for LSDs 
with neurological involvement such as metachromatic leukodystro -
phy (MLD) depends on the development of efficient delivery of lyso -
somal enzymes and/or vectors across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to 
achieve wide distribution of enzyme throughout the brain. Since both 
the immune system and the BBB are developmentally immature during 
the perinatal period, neonatal gene transfer may be a highly promising 
strategy to treat genetic neurological disorders. To treat MLD mice, 
we generated serotype 9 AAV vector expressing human arylsulfatase 
A (AAV9/ASA) and IV injected into neonatal MLD mice (n=7). ELISA 
analysis showed that sustained expression of ASA was detected in the 
brain (cerebral cortex: 24.5±8.7, cerebellum: 7.8±4.5 ng/mg protein) for 
more than one year. Alcian blue staining and quantitative analysis of 
sulfatide contents by biochemical assay showed significant decrease 
of the amount of stored sulfatide in AAV9/ASA treated MLD mice com -
pared to non-treated mice (cerebral cortex: 12.0±5.3 vs. 29.7±12.7, 
p<0.03; cerebellum: 34.8±6.3 vs. 73.2±5.0, mg/mg protein, p<0.05). 
Furthermore, in the behavior test, AAV9/ASA treated mice showed 
a significant improvement in their ability to traverse narrow balance 
beams, as compared to non-treated MLD mice (Latency: 9.2±1.5 
vs. 13.0±0.4 sec, P<0.05; Slips: 3.5±1.9 vs. 4.3±1.4 times, P<0.05). 
These data clearly demonstrate that MLD model mice can be treated 
by systemic neonatal injection of AAV9/ASA. Therefore, neonatal gene therapy may be an important option for parents faced with the prenatal 
diagnosis of a genetically affected child.
c09.5*  the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is sumoylated in both human and mouse: sumoylation affects its stability, 
localization, and activity
M. Marongiu1, M. Deiana1, A. Meloni1, L. Marcia1, A. Puddu1,2, A. Cao1, D. 
Schlessinger3, L. Crisponi1;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Monserrato (CA), Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, 
Italy, 3National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States.
The FOXL2 forkhead transcription factor is expressed in ovarian gran -
ulosa cells, and when mutated causes the Blepharophimosis, Ptosis 
and Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome (BPES) and predisposes to pre -
mature ovarian failure. Inactivation of Foxl2 in mice demonstrated its 
indispensability for female gonadal sex determination and ovary de -
velopment and revealed its antagonism of Sox9, the effector of male 
testis development.
To define FOXL2 regulatory activities we looked for interacting proteins. 
Based on yeast two-hybrid screening, we found that FOXL2 interacts 
with PIAS1 and UBC9, both parts of the sumoylation machinery. We 
confirmed the interactions by co-immunoprecipitation and we demon -
strated that human FOXL2 is sumoylated in transfected cell lines, and 
that endogenous mouse Foxl2 is comparably sumoylated. Confocal 
microscopy allowed us to demonstrate that FOXL2 co-localizes with 
SUMO-1 in structures resembling PML (promyelocytic leukaemia) 
bodies in transfected cells and that FOXL2, SUMO1 and UBC9 co-
localize in vivo in 4 weeks old mouse ovary.
We identified 7 putative sumoylation sytes using Abgent 
SUMOplot™software, and created FOXL2 mutants in which the ly -
sines of the higher score putative sumoylation sytes (K25, K87, K114, 
K150) were changed to arginine. Our results indicate that K114 and 
K150 are involved in FOXL2 sumoylation and nuclear localization 
and that all mutations influenced FOXL2 transcriptional activity. Fur -
thermore we demonstrated that sumoylation results in an increase of 
FOXL2 protein levels, likely due to an increase in protein stability. It is 
intriguing that similar sumoylation and regulatory consequences have 
also been reported for SOX9, the male counterpart of FOXL2 in so -
matic gonadal tissues.
c09.6  sAHA ameliorates the smA phenotype in two mouse 
models for spinal muscular atrophy
M. Riessland1, B. Ackermann1, A. Förster1, M. Jakubik1, J. Hauke1, L. Garbes1, 
I. Fritzsche2, Y. Mende1, I. Blumcke2, E. Hahnen1, B. Wirth1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular 
Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Neuropathology, 
University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal re -
cessively inherited neuromuscular disorder determined by functional 
impairment of α-motor neurons within the spinal cord. SMA is caused 
by functional loss of the survival motor neuron gene 1  (SMN1 ), where -
as disease severity is mainly influenced by the number of SMN2  cop-
ies. SMN2 , which produces only low levels of full-length mRNA/pro -
tein, can be modulated by small molecules and drugs, thus offering a 
unique possibility for SMA therapy.
Here, we analysed suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a FDA-
approved histone deacetylase inhibitor, as potential drug in two severe 
SMA mouse models each carrying two SMN2  transgenes: US-SMA 
mice with one SMN2  per allele ( Smn-/-;SMN2tg/tg) and Taiwanese-SMA 
mice with two SMN2  per allele ( Smn-/-;SMN2tg/wt), both on pure FVB/N 
background. The US-SMA mice were embryonically lethal with hetero -
zygous males showing significantly reduced fertility. SAHA-treatment 
of pregnant mothers rescued the embryonic lethality giving rise to SMA 
offspring. By using a novel breeding strategy for the Taiwanese model 
(Smn-/-;SMN2tg/tg x Smn-/+ mice) we obtained 50% SMA offspring that 
survive ~10 days and 50% control carriers in each litter. Treatment 
with 25 mg/kg/2x/day SAHA increased lifespan of SMA mice by 30%, 
significantly improved motor function abilities, reduced degeneration 
of motor neurons within the spinal cord and increased the size of neu -
romuscular junctions and muscle fibers compared to vehicle-treated 
SMA mice. SMN  RNA and protein levels were significantly elevated in 
various tissues including spinal cord and muscle. Hence, SAHA, which 
lessens the progression of SMA, might be suitable for SMA therapy.Concurrent Sessions2
c10.1  copy number variable regions in 13 European 
populations
T. Esko1,2, G. Escramis3, R. Rabionet3, P. Palta2, M. Nelis1, F. Zimprich4, D. 
Toncheva5, M. Macek6, L. Peltonen7,8, B. Melegh9, D. Toniolo10, P. Gasparini11, J. 
Klovins12, V. Kučinskas13, J. Lubinski14, S. Limborska15, S. E. Antonarakis16, C. 
M. van Duijn17, M. Remm2, X. Estivill3, A. Metspalu1,2;  
1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute 
of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Center 
for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF) and CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, 
4Department of Clinical Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 6Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Cystic Fibrosis 
Centre, University Hospital Motol and 2nd School of Medicine, Charles 
University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Institute of Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum, 
Helsinki, Finland, 9Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, 
University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 10Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San 
Raffaele Research Institute, Milano, Italy, 11Medical Genetics, Department of 
Reproductive Sciences and Development, IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo, University 
of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 12Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, 
Riga, Latvia, 13Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, 
Vilnius, Lithuania, 14International Hereditary Cancer Center, Pomeranian 
Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 15Institute of Molecular Genetics, 
Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 16Department of 
Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 17Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
At present time there is no comprehensive copy number variable re -
gion (CNVR) map of European population although it is a prerequisite 
for the European-wide collaborative GWA studies. Most of the efforts 
so far have been directed into the characterization of the fine-scale 
CNVR structure in HapMap but Europe as a whole, especially the 
Eastern part, has not been covered in sufficient detail.
We have studied about 2,000 individuals from thirteen cohorts from 
Europe (including about 900 Estonians) and focused on describing 
the genetic structure, especially the copy number variable regions 
(CNVR), in Eastern Europe and in Europe as whole.
In total we identified more than 2,500 CNVR in 1,080 individuals (in -
cluding only 100 randomly chosen Estonians). When analyzing only 
the Estonians, we identified more than 5,010 CNVR (maf cut-off 1%) 
and the majority of CNVR’s had a very low frequency in the population. 
For the identified regions, principal component (PC) analysis were ap -
plied and the resulting map was not as informative geographically as 
in the case of SNP data. The CNVRs included in the 20 first PC show 
an important contribution from the HLA region, and the Immunoglobu -
lin variable regions, while GO pathway analysis identifies a cluster of 
genes for sensory perception of chemical stimulus.
In addition to SNP’s, CNV’s are being used as additional genetic mark -
ers in GWAS studies for disease gene mapping. The results presented 
here add new data to European genetic map of the structural varia -
tions that will greatly facilitate inter-population genetic studies.
c10.2  A founder mutation in LEPRE1 causes lethal recessive 
type Viii Osteogenesis imperfecta and occurs in West Africans 
and African Americans
W. A. Cabral1, A. M. Barnes1, A. Adeyemo2, K. Cushing3, D. Chitayat4, F. D. 
Porter5, S. R. Panny6, F. Majid6, T. R. Rebbeck7, S. A. Tishkoff8, J. E. Bailey-
Wilson9, L. C. Brody3, C. N. Rotimi2, J. C. Marini1;  
1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United 
States, 2Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, NHGRI, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Genome Technology Branch, NHGRI, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Hospital for Sick Children, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, 
MD, United States, 6Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 
Baltimore, MD, United States, 7University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine 
and Abramson Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8Departments 
of Genetics and Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United 
States, 9Inherited Disease Research Branch, NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, MD, 
United States.
Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by defects in car -
tilage-associated protein (CRTAP) or prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1/
LEPRE1), which form the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex 
with cyclophilin B (PPIB). Deficiency of P3H1 causes severe to lethal type VIII OI (OMIM #610915). We have identified a LEPRE1 mutation, 
IVS5+1G>T, in unrelated African Americans (AA) and contemporary 
West Africans (WA) immigrants. Screening of gDNA from a Mid-At -
lantic AA cohort determined a carrier incidence of 0.30-0.50% for this 
mutation, predicting occurrence of homozygous lethal type VIII OI in 
about 1/250,000 births in this population. To trace the mutationorigin, 
we screened gDNA from a contemporary WA cohort. Nineteen of 1284 
unrelated individuals (1.48%) from Nigeria and Ghana were heterozy -
gous carriers, half of whom were from the Yoruba or Ibo ethnic groups 
of Nigeria. The high carrier frequency for this founder mutation among 
WAs predicts that this mutation alone would cause recessive OI in 
1/18,250 births in WAs, equal to the incidence of de novo dominant OI 
in North America. To estimate the mutation age, we examined micro -
satellites and short tandem repeats spanning 4.2 MB surrounding the 
LEPRE1 gene. Disease allele haplotypes were determined from 12 
contemporary WA and 3 AA families. WA carriers share a haplotype of 
175-425Kb. Using the linkage disequilibrium analysis method of Ran -
nala & Slatkin (2000), the mutation was estimated to have originated 
800-960 years ago (1050-1210 C.E.). This timing is consistent with the 
model that this West African allele was transported to the Americas via 
the Atlantic slave trade (1450-1860 C.E.).
c10.3  Paleogenetic study for reconstruction of genealogy of 
first Moldavian princes from 14th century
A. Rodewald1, G. Cardos2, C. Tesio3;  
1Institute of Human Biology, Hamburg, Germany, 2National Institute „Victor 
Babes“, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of Biology- University Bucharest, 
Bucharest, Romania.
We performed paleomolecular genetic analysis on skeletal remains of 
7 princes of Moldavia from the last half of the 14th century,buried in the 
„Saint Nicholas“ Church from Radauti-Romania, in order to reconstruct 
their genealogy. We used the Amelogenin gene for identifying the ge -
netic sex of the old individuals and we analysed mitochondrial (HVR 
I region)and nuclear DNA (VWA31A, TPOX, DYS392 and DYS393 
Microsatellites)polymorphisms to reveal their genetic kinship along 
both maternal and paternal lineages.Ancient DNA was extracted by 
a phenol-chloroform-based method and amplified by PCR.The HVR 
I mitochondrial DNA sequences and nuclear DYS392 and DYS393 
polymorphic markers were sequenced, and the other nuclear DNA 
markers were separated and identified on Polyacrylamide gels( Ag-
stained).Our results revealed the genetic kinship between the 7 Molda -
vian princes, showing two male lines with a maternal linkage between 
the two groups. The first male line consisted of two individuals close 
related to each other and differed from the other 5 individuals also 
closed related among them as concerns the paternal line. This evi -
dence argued that two princely dynasties succeeded on the Moldavian 
sceptre in the last half of the 14th century,contrary to the historiogra -
phy version which had considered the existence of only one dynasty 
and succession exclusively along the paternal line.
Acknowledgement:we thanks to:Dr. Nicolae Miritoiu and Lia and Adri -
an Batrana for providing skeletal remains;Angelika Kroll for technical 
support
c10.4*  modelling haplotype structure in isolate populations for 
population sequencing
K. Palin , K. Rehnstrom, L. Peltonen, R. Durbin;  
The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Isolated founder populations are a powerful tool for disease genetics. 
By sequencing a modest number of individuals, we should be able 
to identify most founding haplotypes present in current individuals, 
then use long-range phasing and imputing to derive accurate and near 
complete genome sequence for all genome wide genotyped individu -
als within the population.
To design such a study, we have developed a method to fit popula -
tion history simulations to the observed pairwise IBS segment length 
distribution from dense genotype data. Using this approach with 7505 
markers on chromosome 20, we created a genetic model for Kuusamo, 
a well known isolate population in North Eastern Finland. According to 
historical records, Kuusamo had small indigenous Lapp population un -
til its „resettlement“ by 34 families, totalling 136 chromosomes, in the 
1680s. The current census population size is 25108, including some 
recent immigrants.
Our best fit model has a population of 100 founding individuals ex -Concurrent Sessions
panding first rapidly, then more slowly, to a current effective population 
size of 7930 in 12 generations, rejecting significant historic immigration 
after the initial resettlement. The simulation suggests that out of the 
200 founding haplotypes only 108±10 survive today per locus, the rest 
having been lost by genetic drift. On average, 80% of a present day 
chromosome is inherited from the founders in fragments of length 6cM 
or more. The results suggest that a sample of 200 individuals would 
cover 93-98% of current indigenous chromosome population. We are 
exploring using this approach to model other European isolates.
c10.5*  inverse mapping approach implies the role of large cNVs 
in intellectual deficits and learning difficulties in a population 
cohort
O. P. H. Pietiläinen1,2, K. Rehnström2, E. Jakkula1, S. Service3, E. Congdon3, 
C. Tilgmann2, T. Paunio1, S. Ripatti1, M. Järvelin4,5, M. Isohanni6, C. Sabatti7, A. 
Palotie2, N. B. Freimer3, L. Peltonen2,1;  
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Center for 
Neurobehavioral Genetics, Gonda Center, University of California Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Department of Epidemiology and Public 
Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of 
Child and Adolescent Health, Institute for Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland, 
6Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland, 7Department of Human Genetics , University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
The availability of genome wide data on representative population 
samples provides an opportunity to apply a strategy of inverse map -
ping for correlating human traits with genotypes. Whereas the tradi -
tional forward mapping aims to define genotypic sharing accounting 
for a common phenotype among group of individuals, the inverse map -
ping seeks to discover phenotypic features shared among individuals 
demonstrating allelic similarity. This approach would avoid the inherent 
imprecision in phenotype definition that makes it difficult to determine 
a priori which individuals are sharing a phenotype. Here we provide a 
proof of principle of this inverse mapping approach by systematically 
scanning all CNVs >500 kb in a population cohort (N= 4,932). The 
participants were drawn from a prospective birth cohort of all individu -
als born in 1966 in North of Finland. Routine follow-ups have resulted 
in extensive phenotype database collected from the study participants. 
We identified 634 large CNVs observed in 529 individuals. To narrow 
down our data inquiries to a reasonable number of phenotypes, we 
focused on a category of traits postulated to relate with previous CNV 
findings in neuropsychiatric deficits. We observed significantly higher 
frequencies of cognitive defects defined as 8 among carriers of large 
deletions (5.0%) compared to non carriers (1.4%) (p <0.0024). Intrigu -
ingly, the deletion carriers were also more likely to present with sub 
clinical learning difficulties than the general population (10% vs. 3.9%; 
p=0.00088). The study highlights the opportunity to utilize inverse map -
ping as a strategy to characterize phenotypic consequences related to 
genetic variants in an unbiased population sample.
c10.6*  A novel approach to analysis of raw illumina microarray 
data to assess the contribution of copy number variations to 
obesity and gene expression
J. C. Andersson1,2, A. J. Walley1, J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, P. Jacobson2, M. 
Jernås2, A. Bibi3, A. Siddiq3, L. Sjöström2, A. I. F. Blakemore1, P. Froguel1,4, L. M. 
S. Carlsson2, M. Falchi1;  
1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of 
Molecular and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic 
Research, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom, 4CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur 
Institute, Lille, France.
Introduction:
Obesity is a major contributor to ill health worldwide. Exploration of the 
genetic contribution to obesity using genome wide approaches has re -
vealed both SNP and CNV associations. Here, we have used a novel 
approach to analysis of microarray-derived GWAS data to assess the 
contribution of CNVs to obesity and gene expression.
Subjects and Methods:
The SOS SibPair cohort consists of 154 nuclear families (732 indi -
viduals), each containing a body mass index-discordant sib pair (≥10 kg/m2 difference). Gene expression and genotyping data was gener -
ated from 349 siblings using the Affymetrix Human U133 Plus 2.0 and 
Illumina Infinium Human 610K Quad platforms, respectively. RNA was 
extracted from subcutaneous adipose tissue and DNA was extracted 
from blood. Analysis was performed modelling genotyping signal inten -
sity levels (LogR Ratio and B Allele Frequency) and gene expression 
levels in a variance component framework.
Results:
We detected more than 10 genomic regions where signal intensity 
was significantly associated with expression levels. For example, in a 
region on chromosome 6 overlapping the MHC, we identified 34 mark -
ers associated with transcript expression level at genome wide signifi -
cance (p≤10-7). As expected, these regions are listed in the Database 
of Genomic Variants, i.e. they are CNVs.
Conclusions:
Using quantitative analysis of raw Illumina microarray data, we have 
identified more than 10 genomic regions that are associated with ex -
pression levels (p≤10-7). We will investigate these further, comparing 
them to the genes that are differentially expressed between obese and 
lean subjects, to identify candidate genes for obesity.
c11.1  Policy Recommendations of the PPPc on direct-to-
consumer genetic testing for health purposes
P. Borry1, C. Patch2, M. Cornel; on behalf of the PPPC3;  
1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, 3000, Belgium, 2Guy‘s Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom, 3VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
An increasing number of private companies are now offering direct-to-
consumer (DTC) genetic testing services, ranging from tests for single 
gene, highly penetrant disorders to susceptibility testing for genetic 
variants associated with common complex diseases or with specific 
traits. The Professional and Public Policy Committee of the European 
Society of Human Genetics is concerned about the way commercial 
companies are currently introducing new genetic tests into the market 
and outside of the scope of the traditional health care system. There -
fore, it is currently in the process of drafting policy recommendation on 
the topic of direct-to-consumer sales and/or advertising of genetic tests 
for health purposes. This presentation wants to draw the attention to 
this document and intensify the debate on this topic. The presentation 
will discuss following topics: the right to information, the advertising of 
genetic tests, the quality of genetic testing services (the quality of the 
genetic tests -in terms of validity and utility-, the quality of laboratories 
and the quality of the persons providing the genetic services), the in -
dividualized medical supervision, information and genetic counseling, 
informed consent, genetic testing of minors, respect for private life, 
research, oversight of genetic testing, and the impact on the health -
care system.
c11.2*  Reporting genetic research results: A quasi-experimental 
approach to understanding researchers‘ judgments
R. Z. Hayeems , F. A. Miller, L. Li, J. P. Bytautas;  
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Background: Ethicists suggest that researchers are obliged to report 
individual genetic research findings to study participants. Opponents 
contend that promising or reporting provisional knowledge may cause 
harm and that clinical follow-up regarding these findings may not be 
available to research participants. Methods: A cross-sectional quasi-
experimental survey using vignettes to understand factors that influ -
ence researchers’ judgments about this obligation was administered 
to cystic fibrosis and autism researchers, internationally. Results: 80% 
of 342 researchers agreed that individuals in whom a genetic variation 
is identified should be informed of this finding if judged to be clinically 
significant. Researchers felt 30-70% less confident that a given finding 
was clinically significant when it was related to autism research, less 
scientifically robust, incidental to the index condition, and when barri -
ers to receiving clinical services were perceived (p<.05). Research -
ers were 30% less likely to report scientifically weaker findings and 
40% less likely to report findings when they lacked capacity to provide 
requisite medical care (p<.05). Compared to molecular and statistical 
researchers, clinical researchers were 1.8 times more likely to endorse 
the significance of a given finding and 1.5 times more likely to report it 
to participants (p<.05). Conclusion: Judgments about reporting genetic 
research results are influenced not only by scientific parameters, but 
also by the role of the researcher and his/her capacity to meet par -Concurrent Sessions
ticipants’ clinical needs when provisional knowledge is reported. Given 
the complexity reflected herein, we question the appropriateness of 
an unequivocal imperative to disclose individual research findings to 
study participants.
c11.3  Direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies: what are 
their policies regarding testing in minors?
H. C. Howard , P. Borry;  
KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Advances in genetic knowledge and technologies have increased the 
possibilities of testing asymptomatic minors for late-onset diseases, 
carrier status and susceptibility to common complex disorders. In ad -
dition, there has been a recent increase in companies offering genetic 
tests directly-to-consumers and bypassing the traditional face-to-face 
encounter with a health care professional from the established health-
care system. With this in mind, we gathered information regarding poli -
cies on testing in minors from the websites of 29 companies offering 
direct-to-consumer (DTC) health-related genetic testing. The results 
of this study showed that almost half of the companies did not present 
any information regarding a policy for testing in minors, and that many 
of the remaining companies had ambiguous statements regarding this 
issue. Therefore, as a follow up to this content analysis, we sent sur -
veys to 37 companies (including the 29 companies that were part of 
our initial study) asking them specific questions about their policy on 
genetic testing in minors. The analysis of survey responses is under -
way and will provide information not only about companies’ policies, 
but also about the actual demand for testing in this population. Given 
the concerns about the ethical, legal and psychological implications of 
performing genetic tests in healthy children, it is important to monitor 
the activities of DTC genetic testing companies in this regard.
c11.4*  Genetic counsellors‘ Views Regarding their Role in 
Delivering a Pharmacogenetic service
A. V. E. Callard , W. Newman, K. Payne;  
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Currently, there is no clear resolution on which healthcare profession 
should play a role in delivering a pharmacogenetic service. In addition, 
there is limited published evidence on healthcare professionals’ views 
on pharmacogenetic services. This study aimed to explore the views 
of genetic counsellors on pharmacogenetic services. Semi-structured 
face-to-face interviews were carried out with 14 genetic counsellors 
from two regional genetics clinics in England. The interviews com -
prised open questions designed to explore their views on potential 
(dis)advantages of pharmacogenetic testing and the role of counsel -
lors and other professionals in delivering a pharmacogenetic service. 
In addition, four vignettes describing types of pharmacogenetic tests 
were used to elicit the counsellors’ views on specific clinical applica -
tions. Data were analysed using the constant comparative method to 
identify key themes. Opinions on whether genetic counsellors should 
be involved in a pharmacogenetic service were varied. The genetic 
counsellors interviewed did see a potential role for their profession but 
further training may be needed due to their limited knowledge of phar -
macogenetics and drug prescription. A regional genetics centre was 
perceived to be an inappropriate clinical setting for a pharmacogenetic 
service. However, employing genetic counsellors in a specialist role 
within a multidisciplinary clinic could be beneficial. Genetic counsel -
lors’ responses to the vignettes suggested that different pharmaco -
genetic tests are likely to have different issues, in terms of setting up 
models of service delivery, and implications for patients. Therefore any 
clinical service model developed for pharmacogenetic testing will need 
to be adapted according to the specific issues each test presents.
c11.5  informed consent for large-scale biobank research: 
experience and attitudes of cancer patients
J. Mancini1,2, C. Chabannon3,4, I. Pellegrini1, F. Viret3,4, N. Vey3,4, C. Julian-
Reynier1;  
1Inserm UMR912 SE4S, Marseille, France, 2Aix-Marseillle Université, Marseille, 
France, 3Inserm UMR891 CRCM, Marseille, France, 4Institut Paoli-Calmettes, 
Marseille, France.
Background: The transfer of biological samples between biobanks is 
developed to foster the development of large-scale multicentric proj -
ects. However, the “commercial” use of samples and the indispensable 
concomitant transfer of clinical data associated might be a concern for cancer patients.
Objectives: We assessed patients’ experience and attitudes towards 
the biobank informed consent process.
Methods: A mixed-methods design was used. Nineteen patients (aged 
28-82) were in-depth interviewed using grounded theory methodol -
ogy and 574 patients (aged 20-89, response rate=77.0%) treated for 
colorectal, breast cancer or a haematological malignancy answered to 
a self-administered questionnaire.
Findings: Two hundred thirteen patients (37.1%) declared they had 
given consent. Among them less than the half (41.7%) understood that 
the consent included an authorisation to access to medical files.
The interviews pointed out that while contribution to biobanks is con -
sidered an act of solidarity and reciprocity, persons were more reluc -
tant to consider financial issues. Most of the patients (82.4%) would 
accept that a biological sample could be given to another public labo -
ratory. This rate was higher than considering a transfer to a private 
laboratory (62.9%; p <0.001). Acceptance that tumour samples could 
be sold were very low for both types of laboratories even more for a 
public laboratory (10.6% vs 13.2%; p= 0.017).
Conclusion: Quality of biobank informed consent should be improved. 
Specific information should be provided on the potential transfer of 
samples and associated clinical data for large-scale multicentric re -
search. Education should also stress financial issues in science, for 
the purposes of transparency and efficacy.
c11.6  Biobanking cancer tissue. Patients consider excised 
(tumour) tissue to be ‘connective tissue’.
E. Vermeulen ;  
VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background Excised tissues are routinely stored in hospitals for fu -
ture diagnostic use. These tissues are also important for scientific re -
search. In the Netherlands ‘residual tissues’ are registered in a central 
pathological registry (PALGA), which makes this collection, consisting 
of millions of samples, a very large biobank.
Aim The presentation elucidates and analyses the underlying attitude 
of patients towards medical research with excised tissues and focuses 
on the use of the tissue in genetic medical research. Concepts of own -
ership in the context of increasing (commercial) value of tissues are 
discussed.
Methods The study is based on mixed methods design combining 
quantitative data (questionnaires) with qualitative data (transcripts 
from interviews) and observations during an intervention study at the 
Netherlands Cancer Institute. In total 260 patients were interviewed, 
61% of 426 patients who completed a written questionnaire.
Results Many (38%) patients considered themselves to be owner of 
stored tissue and 43% considered themselves owner of DNA in stored 
tissue. Most, 98%, endorse medical research with this tissue. For pa -
tients the stored tissue is ‘a hypercollective good’ that should remain in 
the public sphere in order to facilitate research. Patients consider the 
tissue to be connective because it connects them to others through 
research. Patients expect to be reciprocated by the tissue holder and 
be informed about findings of the research.
Conclusion Information about medical research with residual tissue 
should be improved. A more participatory and reciprocal model of bio -
banking is required.
c12.1  Homozygosity mapping of Primary microcephaly in 112 iranian Families: Novel mutations and Phenotypes
H. Darvish1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, M. Mohseni1, F. 
Behjati1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, I. Bahman1, P. Jamali1, S. Azimi1, F. 
Mojahedi1, A. Dehghan1, Y. Shafeghati1, A. Jankhah1, M. Falah1, M. Soltani 
Banavandi1, M. Ghani Kakhki2, M. Garshasbi3, S. Abedini1, s. Banihashemi1, s. 
arjangi1, F. Rakhshani1, A. Naghavi1, A. Tzschach3, H. Neitzel2, H. Ropers3, A. 
W. Kuss3, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1GRC, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Charité 
Medical University, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Germany.
Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
showing an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Affected indi -
viduals present with head circumferences more than three standard 
deviations below the age- and sex-matched population mean, accom -
panied by mental retardation without further associated malformations. 
Five genes ( mcph1, cdk5rap2, aspm, cenpj, STIL ) and two genomic Concurrent Sessions
loci, MCPH2, and 4 have been identified so far.
In this study, we investigated all seven loci in patients with primary mi -
crocephaly from 112 Iranian families. In addition to a thorough clinical 
characterization, karyotype analyses were performed for all patients. 
For linkage analyses, several microsatellite markers were selected for 
each locus and used for genotyping.
Our investigation enabled us to detect linkage to the MCPH5  (ASPM ) 
region in thirteen families. Three families showed linkage to MCPH2, 
eight to MCPH1 ( Microcephalin ), five to MCPH6 ( CENPJ ) and two 
families were linked to MCPH7  (STIL ). The remaining 81 families were 
not linked to any of the seven known loci. Subsequent sequencing 
revealed 10 novel mutations and one previously reported mutation in 
ASPM , 8 novel mutations in MCPH1  as well as a novel mutation in 
CENPJ .
In some families, additional features such as short stature, seizures or 
congenital hearing loss were observed in the microcephalic patients, 
which widens the spectrum of clinical manifestations of mutations in 
known microcephaly genes.
Our results show that the molecular basis of microcephaly is more 
heterogeneous in Iran than elsewhere, thus the Iranian population pro -
vides a unique opportunity for finding additional genes underlying this 
disorder.
c12.2*  combination of linkage mapping and microarray-
expression analysis identifies NF-κB signalling defect as a novel 
cause for autosomal recessive mental retardation
O. Philippe1, M. Rio1, A. Carioux2, J. Plaza3, P. Guigue1, F. Molinari1, N. 
Boddaert1, C. Bole-Feysot2, P. Nitschke3, A. Smahi1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1;  
1Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Plateforme de génomique de 
la fondation Imagine Paris, Paris, France, 3Plateforme de Bioinformatique de 
l’Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
Autosomal recessive inheritance accounts for nearly 25% of non-syn -
dromic mental retardation (MR) but the extreme heterogeneity of these 
conditions markedly hampers gene identification. Combining autozy -
gosity mapping and RNA expression profiling in a consanguineous 
Tunisian family of three MR children with mild microcephaly and white 
matter abnormalities identified the NIBP/TRAPPC9 gene, which en -
codes a NF-κB inducing kinase (NIK) and IκB kinase complex β (IKKβ) 
binding protein, as a likely candidate. Sequencing analysis revealed a 
nonsense variant (c.1708C>T, p.R570X) within the exon 9 of this gene 
responsible for an undetectable level of NIBP protein in patient skin 
fibroblasts. Moreover, TNF-a stimulation assays showed a defect in 
IkBα degradation, suggesting an impaired NF-κB signalling in patient 
cells. This study provides the first evidence of a NF-κB signalling de -
fect in isolated MR.
C12.3*  Targeted next generation sequencing identifies a 
mutation associated with cerebellar hypoplasia and mental 
retardation with quadrupedal locomotion
S. I. Gulsuner1, K. Bilguvar2, M. Tan3, U. Tan4, M. Gunel2, T. Ozcelik1;  
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, United States, 3Department of Neurology, Baskent University, 
Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Physiology, Cukurova University, Adana, 
Turkey.
We describe the utilization of next generation sequencing in the identi -
fication of a mutation associated with a rare and heterogenous Mende -
lian disorder characterized by cerebellar hypoplasia, mental retarda -
tion and quadrupedal locomotion (Uner Tan syndrome). Homozygos -
ity mapping, sequence capture (Nimblegen) of the disease locus on 
chromosome 17p13 and massively parallel DNA sequencing (454 GS 
FLX) of two affected and two carrier individuals yielded 362 to 403 mil -
lion base pairs of sequence information from each sample. Between 
96.6%-96.7% of all reads fell within the minimal critical region. Variants 
common to all samples were selected and binned into four groups (G): 
variants in coding regions, consensus splices-sites and RNA genes 
are G-1 (n=26), in 5‘UTRs & 3‘UTR s are G-2 (24), in introns are G-3 
(929). All remaining variants were classified as G-4 (577) (Table-1). A 
total of 17 novel exonic variants (four non-synonymous, two synony -
mous, one 5‘UTR and ten 3‘UTR) compatible with the expected auto -
somal recessive inheritance model of the disease allele was observed 
(Mendelian compatibility). An exclusion based population screening 
approach was adopted to distinguish the disease causing variant from novel polymorphisms by genotyping all non-synonymous variants in 
300 healthy controls. All but one variant was observed in the controls 
with allele frequencies of 0.003, 0.005, 0.016. These results indicate 
that next generation sequencing is a powerful tool to identify mutations 
associated with rare diseases.
Table 1. Direct identification of a disease-associated
mutation by next generation sequencing.
carrier
mothercarrier
fatherAffected
child 1Affected
child 2
Number of mapped bases 403,546,905 362,750,092 410,247,834 399,184,755
mean covarage 48.4x 40.5x 47.4x 48.9x
coverege of targeted regions 
(≥5)99.3% 99.2% 99.3% 99.2%
All variants 26,751 27,471 24,115 24,690
dbsNP129 10,564 10,694 8,200 8,289
Novel variants 16,157 16,777 15,915 16,401
High confidence variants
Heterozygous sNPs 4,874 5,076 408 596
Homozygous sNPs 4,647 4,523 7,095 7,563
Novel heterozygous variants 1,331 1,600 513 458
Novel homozygous variants 1,090 1,602 1,789 2,029
common variants to all 
samples1555
G-1 (coding, splice site, 
RNA)26
G-2 (5’’ and 3’’UtR) 24
G-3 (intronic) 929
G-4 (intergenic) 577
G-1 mendelian compatibility 4
After population screening 1
c12.4*  the Arg164X mutation in SAMHD1  leads to a novel 
variant of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome by modulating cytokine 
expression
M. du Moulin1, H. Thiele2, K. Barczyk3, C. George1, M. Frosch1, W. Schwindt4, 
J. Roth3, P. Nuernberg2, F. Rutsch1;  
1University Children‘s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Cologne Center for 
Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute for Immunology, 
Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 4Department of Clinical 
Radiology, Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany.
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a rare inborn multisystemic dis -
ease, resembling intrauterine viral infection resulting in psychomotor 
retardation, spasticity and chilblain-like skin lesions. Diagnostic criteria 
include intracerebral calcifications and elevated interferon-alpha and 
pterins in cerebrospinal fluid. Patients present early in infancy and 
death usually occurs during childhood in a state of decerebration. We 
report on four adult siblings of Turkish origin with unknown neuro-de -
generative disease presenting with stenoses of intracranial vessels, 
stroke and glaucoma in childhood, two of whom died at the age of 
40 and 29 years. Genome wide homozygosity mapping identified 170 
candidate genes embedded in a common haplotype of 8Mb on chro -
mosome 20q11-13. Next generation sequencing of the entire region 
identified the c.490C>T (p.Arg164X) mutation in SAMHD1 , a gene 
most recently described in AGS, on both alleles in all affected siblings. 
Clinical diagnosis of AGS was then confirmed by demonstrating intra -
cerebral calcifications on cranial computed tomography and elevated 
pterin levels in cerebrospinal fluid in the two surviving siblings. In pa -
tient fibroblasts SAMHD1 protein was undetectable, while basal ex -
pression of interleukin-8 was increased and stimulated expression of 
interferon-ß was reduced. We conclude that the Arg164X mutation in 
SAMHD1  by modulating intravascular cytokine expression leads to a 
novel phenotypic variant of AGS.
c12.5  systematic mutation search in families with X-linked 
mental retardation by next-generation sequencing
V. M. M. Kalscheuer1, W. Chen1,2, S. Haas1, H. Hu1, A. Emde1, C. Menzel1, M. 
Bienek1, T. Zemojtel1, R. Ullmann1, S. O‘Keeffe1, M. Vingron1, K. Wrogemann1, 
A. Tzschach1, A. de Brouwer3, H. van Bokhoven3, N. Lebrun4, M. Raynaud5, H. 
Van Esch6, H. H. Ropers1;  Concurrent Sessions
1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Delbrück 
Center, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4INSERM 129-ICGM, Faculté de 
Médecine Cochin, Paris, France, 5INSERM, U930; Centre Hospitalier Régional 
Universitaire de Tours, Service de Genetique, Tours, France, 6Center for 
Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) affects 1-2/1,000 males and ac -
counts for 10% of all forms of mental retardation. Recent screening of 
X-linked genes has revealed truncating mutations in 25% of the fami -
lies studied (Tarpey et al, 2009). Previous studies had indicated that 
mutations in known XLMR genes account for at least 42% of XLMR 
families (de Brouwer et al, 2007). To resolve this discrepancy and to 
shed more light on the molecular causes of XLMR, we have combined 
genome partitioning techniques and Next Generation Sequencing 
(NGS) to find the causative gene defect in another 200 families from 
the European MRX Consortium.
Here we report the results on the first 100 families. About 25% of 
the families carried potentially pathogenic mutations in known XLMR 
genes. Many other families carried non-synonymous, possibly patho -
genic changes in novel genes, but only 3 pathogenic truncating muta -
tions were observed. There are several plausible explanations for this: 
prior to these investigations, many of these large families had already 
been screened for mutations in known XLMR genes and positional 
candidates. Secondly, the EuroMRX cohort is enriched for families 
with non-syndromic XLMR, and it is conceivable that complete loss of 
function will often result in severe syndromic forms or even lethality. 
Thus, the majority of genes whose loss gives rise to non-syndromic 
XLMR may already be known. Finally, the fundamental defect may not 
reside in coding regions of the X-chromosome. Sequencing of entire 
sorted X-chromosomes is being performed to shed more light on these 
issues.
Supported by BMBF and Max-Planck-Society.
C12.6  Deep sequencing leads to the identification of 3 
independent mutations in the st3GAL3 gene in patients 
with autosomal recessive intellectual disability from 3 consanguineous iranian families
A. W. Kuss1, H. Hu1, M. Garshasbi1, I. Bahman2, S. Ghadami2, M. M. 
Motazacker1, L. Abbasi-Moheb1, S. Esmaeeli-Nieh1, L. Puettmann1, M. 
Mohseni2, M. J. Soltani Banavandi2, H. Darvish2, P. Jamali3, P. Nikoui4, F. 
Soleimani2, K. Kahrizi2, A. Tzschach1, W. Chen1, H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics 
Research Center of the University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahroud Welfare Institution, 
Sharoud, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Bandar Abbas Welfare Institution, Bandar 
Abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Most mutations causing intellectual disability (ID) are thought to affect 
autosomal genes, yet to date only six are known to play a role in the 
etiology of autosomal recessive ID (ARID). By identifying 12 additional 
loci in 78 families with non-syndromic ARID (NS-ARID) we have previ -
ously shown, that the molecular basis of NS-ARID is extremely hetero -
geneous (Najmabadi et al., 2007, Hum.Genet. 121(1):43-8). Indeed, 
only twice have more than one independent NS-ARID causing muta -
tion so far been found to affect the same gene (TUSC3, TRAPPC9). 
We have now identified three consanguineous families where linkage 
analysis yielded overlapping homozygous intervals on chromosome 
1p34. Using Chromosome sorting to enrich Chr1 from lymphoblas -
toid cell lines of patients from two of these families followed by deep 
sequencing, we found two different missense mutations affecting the 
ST3GAL3 gene. Subsequent screening of ST3GAL3 in the remaining 
family revealed an additional mutation with a putatively damaging splic -
ing effect. All three changes co-segregate with the disease and were 
absent in more than 150 controls. This supports the assumption that 
ST3GAL3 might have a considerably increased mutation frequency in 
ARID, at least in Iran. The ST3GAL3 gene product is a type II mem -
brane protein, which catalyzes sialic acid transfer from CMP-sialic acid 
to galactose-containing substrates. Together with colleagues from the 
Hannover Medical School (M. Muehlenhoff et al.), we are presently 
investigating the impact of the mutations on ST3GAL3 protein function 
to understand the pathology of MR in these patients and thus also gain 
new insights into human brain function.c13.1  A recurrent 14q32.2 microdeletion mediated by expanded tGG repeats
F. Béna1, S. Gimelli1, E. Migliavacca2, N. Brun-Druc3, K. Buiting4, S. E. 
Antonarakis1,5, A. Sharp5;  
1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Department of Genetic Medicine 
and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 
3Service of General Pediatrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, 
Germany, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of 
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
Nearly all recurrent microdeletion/duplication syndromes described 
to date are characterized by the presence of flanking low copy re -
peats that act as substrates for non-allelic homologous recombina -
tion (NAHR) leading to the loss, gain or disruption of dosage sensi -
tive genes. We describe an identical 1.11 Mb heterozygous deletion of 
14q32.2 including the DLK1 /GTL2  imprinted gene cluster in two unre -
lated patients. In both patients the deleted chromosome 14 was of pa -
ternal origin, and consistent with this both exhibit clinical features com -
patible with UPD(14)mat. Using a high-resolution oligonucleotide array 
we mapped the breakpoints of this recurrent deletion to large flanking 
(TGG)n tandem repeats, each approximately 500bp in size and sharing 
≥ 88% homology. These expanded (TGG)n motifs share features with 
known fragile sites and are predicted to form strong guanine quadru -
plex secondary structures. We suggest that this recurrent deletion is 
mediated either by NAHR between the TGG repeats, or alternatively 
results from their inherent instability and/or strong secondary structure. 
Our results define a recurrent microdeletion of the 14q32.2 imprinted 
gene cluster mediated by flanking (TGG)n repeats, identifying a novel 
mechanism of recurrent genomic rearrangement. Our observation that 
expanded repeats can act as catalysts for genomic rearrangement ex -
tends the role of triplet repeats in human disease, raising the possibil -
ity that similar repeat structures may act as substrates for pathogenic 
rearrangements genome-wide.
c13.2  Recurrent chromosomal t ranslocations mediated by 
Genomic interchromosomal NAHR
S. W. Cheung1, P. Stankiewicz1, A. M. Breman1, J. Wiszniewska1, L. M. 
Cooper1, S. T. South2, S. Kang1, A. Patel1, J. R. Lupski1, Z. Ou1;  
1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, United States, 2Department of Pediatrics and Pathology, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
Sequence analysis of the breakpoints were performed in 4 unrelated 
families with the same unbalanced translocation der(4)t(4;11)(p16.2;p
15.4) and revealed the presence of large 200-300 kb low copy repeats 
(LCRs) on 4p16.2 and 11p15.4 of 94% interchromosomal sequence 
identity. The breakpoints for both the short arms of chromosomes 4 
and 11 were mapped within the homologous subunits; consistent with 
nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) as the mechanism for 
translocation. To investigate the potential involvement of interchro -
mosomal LCRs in recurrent chromosomal translocation formation, 
we performed computational genome-wide analysis and identified 
470 interchromosomal LCRs substrate pairs, greater than 30 kb in 
size and sharing >94% sequence identity, that may mediate chro -
mosomal translocations. Several predicted recurrent translocations 
were identified, initially at the G-band level of resolution from clinical 
cytogenetic databases; in two translocations, t(4;8)(p16.1;p23.1) and 
t(8;12)(p23.1;p13.31), the breakpoints of seven cases and two cases, 
respectively, were mapped molecularly to the predicted LCRs. We 
show that interchromosomal LCRs in 11p15.4 mediate the recurrent 
constitutional translocation t(4;11)(p16.2;p15.4) via NAHR, provide a 
computationally determined “recurrent translocation map” and demon -
strate its utility, and further suggest that NAHR may mediate recurrent 
translocations throughout the human genome.
c13.3  the interpretation of copy number gains detected by high resolution array cGH in routine diagnostics; a practical 
guideline
C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts , N. M. Hanemaaijer, G. van der Vries, T. 
Dijkhuizen, R. Hordijk, A. van Essen, B. Leegte, K. Kok, B. Sikkema-Raddatz;  
Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Concurrent Sessions7
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
The introduction of high resolution array Comparative Genomic Hy -
bridisation (CGH) has led to the detection of large numbers of copy 
number variations (CNVs) in patients with developmental delay and/or 
multiple congenital anomalies (DD/MCA) as well as in healthy individu -
als. The detection of a CNV in DD/MCA does not automatically imply 
a phenotypic effect. The interpretation of copy number gains is even 
more complicated than of copy number losses, because of the milder 
and more variable phenotype associated with microduplications. The 
aim of the present study was to develop a guideline for the interpreta -
tion of gains detected by array-CGH.
All copy number gains of at least 4 adjacent oligonucleotides but less 
than 10 Mb in size, detected in 300 consecutive patients analysed by 
custom made105K Agilent oligo array were collected and the clinical 
relevance was evaluated using an interpretation scheme.
Of a total of 797 gains, 45% were de novo and 55% were familial. 
95% of all de novo and 87% of all familial  gains were concluded to 
be benign CNVs. Fifteen pathogenic gains, sized 288-7,912 kb, were 
detected. These gains were significantly larger than benign gains and 
gains of unknown clinical relevance (p<0.001). Surprisingly, they were 
more often familial (10/14) than de novo (4/14)  (not statistically sig -
nificant).
A threshold of 200 kb for the detection of gains in routine diagnostics 
was concluded to be satisfactory at the moment. A practical guideline 
to interpret copy number gains was formulated and validated using an 
independent patient cohort. This guideline will be discussed.
c13.4  Paternal origin of de novo constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11)
T. Ohye1, H. Inagaki1, H. Kogo1, M. Tsutsumi1, T. Kato1, M. Tong1, M. V. E. 
Macville2, L. Medne3, E. H. Zackai3, B. S. Emanuel3, H. Kurahashi1;  
1Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, 
Toyoake, Japan, 2University of Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 
3The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
The constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11) is a well-known recurrent non-
Robertsonian translocation in humans. While translocations generally 
occur in a random fashion, the breakpoints of t(11;22)s are concen -
trated within several hundred base pairs on 11q23 and 22q11. These 
regions are characterized by palindromic AT-rich repeats (PATRRs), 
which could cause the genomic instability. De novo  t(11;22)s are de -
tected in sperm from healthy males at a frequency of 1/104-105, but 
never in lymphoblasts, fibroblasts or other human somatic cell lines, 
suggesting that the generation of a t(11;22) is linked to gametogenesis. 
However, female germ cells have not been tested since the number of 
human oocytes that can be examined is limited. To investigate whether 
the translocation is gametogenesis-specific or male germ cell specific, 
we attempted to determine parental origin of de novo  t(11;22) cases.
We studied 8 carriers of de novo  t(11;22)s and their parents. The 
PATRRs and flanking regions on chromosome 11, 22, der(11) and 
der(22) were amplified by PCR and the nucleotide sequences were 
determined. The highly polymorphic nature of the PATRRs allowed us 
to determine the parental origin of the de novo  t(11;22)s. All of the 
eight translocations were found to be of paternal origin. This result 
implicates a possible novel mechanism of sperm-specific generation 
of t(11;22)s. It is proposed that replication errors during the numer -
ous cell divisions in pre-meiotic spermatogenic cells or conformational 
changes of the DNA during chromatin remodeling in the post-meiotic 
stages of spermatogenesis might contribute to male-specific formation 
of de novo  t(11;22)s.
c13.5  AL t-immortalized human cells are critically dependent 
on the Fanconi anemia protein FANcD2 to limit BLm-dependent 
recombination and amplification of telomeric repeat DNA
H. Root, A. Larsen, D. Bazett-Jones, S. Meyn ;  
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disorder characterized by bone 
marrow failure, cancer predisposition and congenital malformations. 
FA proteins are implicated in homologous recombination (HR), a pro -
cess involved in Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) pathways. 
The FA protein FANCD2 interacts with other HR proteins, however the 
precise role of FANCD2 in HR is unclear. We now find FANCD2’s abil -
ity to limit BLM-dependent telomeric recombination and amplificiation 
events is critical for human ALT cell telomere maintenance and sur -
vival.FANCD2 visibly localizes to telomeric foci and PML bodies in ALT, but 
not in telomerase-positive cells. FANCD2 almost always localizes to 
telomeric foci containing BLM, and telomeric localization of FANCD2 
is BLM-dependent. FANCD2 depletion results in ALT-specific telomere 
dysfunction characterized by increases in telomeric DNA synthesis, 
entanglements, recombination events, and association with DNA dam -
age response proteins. Amplified telomeric DNA in FANCD2-depleted 
cells is primarily extrachromosomal, accumulating both outside of and 
within PML bodies. We previously reported that BLM overexpression 
causes a similar phenotype of rapid, large scale ALT-specific amplifica -
tion of telomeric DNA. Co-depletion of BLM with FANCD2 completely 
suppresses the telomere phenotypes caused by FANCD2 knockdown, 
suggesting that the FANCD2-depletion phenotype requires functional 
BLM. In contrast, co-depletion of RAD51 with FANCD2 does not sup -
press the FANCD2-depletion phenotype, suggesting that human ALT 
is RAD51 independent.
We propose that FANCD2 restrains BLM-dependent, RAD51-indepen -
dent recombination and amplification of telomeric DNA in ALT cells by 
limiting production of ssDNA gapped regions in telomeric DNA, and/or 
by affecting stability of recombination/replication intermediates.
c13.6  Delineating complex genomic architecture involving 
chromosome segmental duplications
W. A. Khan , J. H. M. Knoll, P. K. Rogan;  
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
Complex genomic architectures predispose to chromosomal rearrange -
ments. The rearrangements can cause a diverse range of phenotypes 
due to haploinsufficiency or positional effects from genes in cis with 
families of segmental duplications (SDs). Genomic regions flanked 
by SDs in Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes (AS/PWS) show a 
great proclivity for such chromosomal structural changes. The most 
common rearrangements in AS/PWS involve large (Class I) and small 
(Class II) deletions sharing a common telomeric region of breakage. 
FISH can detect juxtaposed DNA sequences in normal and abnormal 
chromosomes which can delineate the locations of these sequences 
within individual SD elements based on differences in their respec -
tive genomic contexts. In this study, we computationally designed and 
developed 47 single copy (sc) and low copy (lc) sequence-defined 
FISH probes to delineate proximal and distal ends of the chromosome 
15q11-q13 deletion in Class I and Class II deletions. Departure from 
the expected fluorescent signals using a two-step hybridization algo -
rithm directed which sc and lc FISH probe combinations were used in 
subsequent hybridizations. In situ  analysis demonstrated variations in 
deletion extent at both the proximal and distal ends within each patient 
group. Delineated genomic intervals suggest that SDs of both high and 
low sequence homologies as well as regions adjacent to SD blocks are 
giving genesis to the dynamic breakage activity in this highly unstable 
region. These strategies should be useful for delineation of rearrange -
ment boundaries for other disorders associated with SDs and can pro -
vide unifying mechanisms by which complex genomic architectures 
cause instability in human chromosomes.
c14.1  Dysostin, a new gene involved in cDG and affecting pH 
homeostasis
F. Foulquier1, J. Jaeken2, M. Amyere3, R. Zeevaert2, L. Keldermans4, M. 
Vikkula3, E. Van Schaftingen3, G. Matthijs4;  
1Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Lille, France, 2Center for 
Metabolic Disease, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3de Duve Institute, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 4Center for Human 
Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
The correct structure of the oligosaccharides on glycoproteins de -
pends on the enzymatic activities of numerous glycosyltransferases 
and remodeling glycosidases, but also on a precise Golgi localization 
of these enzymes and an adequate intracellular environment. Genetic 
defects affecting this glycosylation pathway cause a range of diseases 
known as Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG).
Through a combination of homozygosity mapping and expression 
analysis in fibroblasts, we have been able to identify a novel gene 
involved in CDG in a single, nuclear family, and pinpoint the defect to 
a deep intronic mutation. We subsequently identified missense muta -
tions in 2 other, unrelated cases. Because of the patients’ phenotype, 
we named it ‘dysostin’.
In the patients’ fibroblasts, a dilated Golgi morphology associated with Concurrent Sessions
a fragmentation of the trans Golgi network was observed. A slight de -
lay in the retrograde translocation of Golgi membranes to the endo -
plasmic reticulum was detected after treatment with brefeldin A, sug -
gesting that intracellular trafficking is compromised. Co-localization of 
the fluorescently-tagged protein with relevant markers revealed a late 
endosomal/lysosomal localization, which is peculiar in view of the gly -
cosylation defect. pH measurements in late endocytic structures using 
the Lysosensor dye revealed a higher staining - and hence a more 
pronounced acidity - in those compartments in the patients. This result 
was reproducible in Hela cells, using a siRNA strategy to knockdown 
dysostin. In summary, the powerful combination of genetic and expres -
sion studies allowed us to discover a novel CDG gene; the cellular 
assays revealed completely novel connections between lysosomal pH, 
glycosylation and intracellular trafficking.
c14.2  A new inborn error of glycosylation due to DPm2 
deficiency
V. Race1, R. Bammens1, W. Vleugels1,2, R. Barone3,4, A. Fiumara4, F. Foulquier2, 
G. Matthijs1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Unité 
de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle UMR/CNRS 8576, IFR147, Lille, 
France, 3Department of Neuroscience, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 
4Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
Congenital Disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of complex 
metabolic diseases. About 40 types have been identified. Most CDG 
with a type I pattern on transferrin isolectric focusing (CDG-I) result 
from defects in the glycosyltransferases and sugar transporters, need -
ed for glycan assembly in the endoplasmic reticulum.
We report on a CDG-I patient with severe developmental delay, epi -
lepsy and dysmorphic features,. Analysis of the lipid-linked oligosac -
charides (LLO) showed an accumulation of dol-PP-GlcNAc2-Man5. 
This pattern is compatible with a defect in DPM1, ALG3 or MPDU1, 
in which mutations have been described; however, no mutations were 
detected. We decided to further analyze the DPM2 and SAC1 genes. 
The patient was found to be compound heterozygote for 2 mutations 
in DPM2: a splice mutation (c.4-1G>C) and a missense mutation 
(c.68A>G, p.Y23C).
Hence, this patient presents with a novel type of CDG.The human doli -
chol-phosphate-mannose (DPM) synthase is a heterotrimeric complex 
composed of DPM1, DPM2 and DPM3. Until now, only mutations in 
DPM1 (the catalytic subunit) and more recently in DPM3 have been 
described. DPM2 is a hydrophobic protein of 84 amino acids, whose 
function is still not clear. It is reported in the literature that DPM2 could 
be involved in the regulation of the DPM synthase complex but also in 
the regulation of the glycosylphosphatidylinositols-N-acetylglucosami -
nyltransferase, and a defect in DPM2 may also affect GPI-anchored 
proteins - a feature which has not been studied so far in CDG patients. 
Further investigation of the DPM2 mutations by complementation in 
Lec15 hamster DPM2-deficient cells is ongoing.
c14.3*  A single-nucleotide deletion in the POMP 5’ UtR causes 
a transcriptional switch and an altered epidermal proteasome 
distribution in KLicK genodermatosis
J. Dahlqvist1, J. Klar1, N. Tiwari2, J. Schuster1, H. Törmä3, J. Badhai1, R. Pujol4, 
M. van Steensel5, T. Brinkhuijzen5, L. Gijezen5, A. Chaves6, G. Tadini7, A. 
Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden, 2Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, 
Universtiy of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical Sciences, 
Uppsala University and University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department 
of Dermatology, Hospital del Mar IMAS, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department 
of Dermatology, University Hospital Maastricht, and the GROW school for 
oncology and developmental biology, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, 
Netherlands, 6Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Infanta Cristina, 
Badajoz, Spain, 7Institute of Dermatological Sciences, Fondazione Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
KLICK syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive skin disorder char -
acterized by palmoplantar keratoderma, linear hyperkeratotic papules 
over joints, sclerotic constrictions around fingers and ichthyosiform 
scaling. We identified twelve cases, from five European countries, 
that share the specific KLICK manifestations. Using genome-wide 
SNP-based homozygosity mapping we identified a 1.5-Mb homozy -
gous candidate region on chromosome 13q. Sequence analysis of the ten annotated genes in the candidate region revealed homozy -
gosity for a single-nucleotide deletion at position c.-95 in the protea -
some maturation protein ( POMP)  gene, in all patients. The deletion 
was associated with a shift in expression of POMP  transcript variants 
with a marked increase of transcripts with elongated 5’ untranslated 
regions (UTRs) in keratinocytes. POMP functions as a chaperone for 
proteasome maturation and immunohistochemical analysis of skin bi -
opsies from KLICK patients revealed an altered distribution of POMP, 
the proteasome subunit proteins α7 and β5 and the ER stress marker 
CHOP in the most differentiated skin layers. Furthermore, the KLICK 
patients showed a deviant expression of the skin differentiation marker 
filaggrin. Our results suggest that KLICK syndrome is caused by a 
single-nucleotide deletion in the 5’ UTR of POMP,  resulting in altered 
distribution of POMP and proteasomes in epidermis and a perturbed 
formation of the outermost layers of the skin. These findings imply that 
the proteasome has a prominent role in the terminal differentiation of 
human epidermis and that elevated ER stress is a disease mechanism 
in genodermatoses.
c14.4*  mutation in SHOC2  promotes aberrant protein N-
myristoylation and underlies Noonan-like syndrome with loose 
anagen hair
V. Cordeddu1, E. Di Schiavi2, A. Ma’ayan3, A. Sarkozy4,5, V. Fodale1, S. 
Cecchetti1, G. Zampino6, L. Mazzanti7, M. C. Digilio8, S. Martinelli1, E. Flex1, F. 
Lepri4, D. Bartholdi9, K. Kutsche10, G. B. Ferrero11, A. Selicorni12, C. Anichini13, 
C. Rossi14, R. Tenconi15, M. Zenker16, B. Dallapiccola4, R. Iyengar3, P. 
Bazzicalupo2, B. D. Gelb3, M. Tartaglia1;  
1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica e Biofisica “A. 
Buzzati Traverso”, Naples, Italy, 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, United States, 4IRCCS-CSS Istituto Mendel, Rome, Italy, 5Institute of 
Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 
6Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 7Università di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy, 8Ospedale “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy, 9Institute of Medical 
Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 10Universitätsklinikum 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 11Università di Torino, Turin, Italy, 
12IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy, 13Università di Siena, 
Siena, Italy, 14Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 15Università di 
Padova, Padua, Italy, 16University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
N-myristoylation is a common form of co-translational protein fatty 
acylation resulting from the attachment of myristate to a required N-
terminal glycine residue. We show that aberrantly acquired N-myris -
toylation of SHOC2, a leucine-rich repeat-containing protein that posi -
tively modulates RAS-MAPK signal flow, underlies a clinically distinc -
tive condition of the neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous disorders family. 
Twenty-five subjects with a relatively consistent phenotype previously 
termed Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair [OMIM 607721] 
shared the 4A>G missense change (Ser2Gly) in SHOC2  that introduc -
es an N-myristoylation site, resulting in aberrant targeting of SHOC2 
to the plasma membrane and impaired translocation to the nucleus 
upon growth factor stimulation. Expression of SHOC2S2G in vitro en -
hanced MAPK activation in a cell type-specific fashion. Induction of 
SHOC2S2G in Caenorhabditis elegans  engendered protruding vulva, a 
neomorphic phenotype previously associated with aberrant signaling. 
These results document the first example of an acquired N-terminal 
lipid modification of a protein causing human disease.
c14.5*  Another gene for autosomal recessive ALX-related 
frontonasal dysplasias: Disruption in ALX1 (CART1)  causes 
anophthalmia and severe facial clefting
E. Uz1, Y. Alanay2, D. Aktas1,2, I. Vargel3,4, S. Gucer5, G. Tuncbilek4, F. von 
Eggeling6, E. Yilmaz7, O. Deren8, N. Posorski6, H. Ozdag9, T. Liehr6, S. Balci2, 
M. Alikasifoglu1,2, B. Wollnik10,11, N. A. Akarsu1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Hacettepe 
University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of 
Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgery, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey, 4Department 
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey, 5Pathology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey, 6Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics and 
Antropologie, Jena, Germany, 7Department of Medical Biology, Hacettepe 
University, Ankara, Turkey, 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynocology, 
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 9Biotechnology Institute of Ankara 
University, Ankara, Turkey, 10Center For Molecular Medicine, University of Concurrent Sessions
Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Molecular genetics of recessively inherited frontonasal dysplasias 
(FNDs) are largely unknown. In 2009, two studies have drawn at -
tention to the critical role of aristales-related homeobox transcription 
factors, ALX3  and ALX4 , in the molecular pathogenesis of autosomal 
recessive-FND in humans (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2009; 84: 698 and 
Hum Mol Genet. 2009; 18: 4357, respectively). We present a new au -
tosomal recessive frontonasal dysplasia in two families characterized 
by bilateral anophthalmia/microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft, 
complete cleft palate, hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge with hypoplasia 
of ala nasi, and low set and posteriorly rotated ears. Using Affymetrix 
250K SNP Array genotyping and homozygosity mapping, we mapped 
this clinical entity to chromosome 12q21. In one of the families with 
three affected sibs, CNV analysis of the critical region detected a ho -
mozygous 3.7 Mb deletion containing the ALX1 (CART1)  gene. In the 
second family, we identified a homozygous donor splice site mutation 
(c.537+1 G>A), which is predicted to disrupt the functionally essential 
homeodomain structure of the ALX1  protein. These results provide 
evidence that loss of ALX1 function causes severe impairment of early 
craniofacial development. Unlike its murine ortholog, complete loss of 
human ALX1  does not result in neural tube defects, however, severely 
affects the orchestrated fusions between frontonasal, nasomedial, na -
solateral, and maxillary processes in early embryogenesis. This study 
further expands the spectrum of the recently recognized autosomal 
recessive “ALX-related FND” phenotypes in humans. The study was 
done within the CRANIRARE consortium supported by the European 
Research Area Network, “E-RARE” through Turkish Scientific Coun -
cil.
c14.6*  High-throughput mutation screening in combination with 
cellular complementation of rare variants aid gene identification 
in mitochondrial disorders
K. Danhauser1, F. Madignier1, M. Herzer1, T. Haack1, B. Haberberger1, P. 
Freisinger2, B. Rolinski3, R. Horvath2, H. Mayr4, W. Sperl4, V. Tiranti5, M. 
Tesarova6, B. Plecko7, S. Biskup8, D. Boehm8, A. Giovanetti5, B. Garavaglia5, M. 
Zeviani5, T. Meitinger1, H. Prokisch1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich and 
Helmholtz Zentrum, München, Germany, 2Technical University of Munich, 
Stoffwechselzentrum Kinderklinik, München, Germany, 3Klinikum München 
GmbH Medizet Stoffwechselzentrum, München, Germany, 4Universität 
Salzburg, Kinderklinik, Salzburg, Austria, 5Division of Molecular Neurogenetics, 
National Neurological Institute, „C. Besta“, Milano, Italy, 6University of Prague, 
Department of Paediatrics, Prag, Czech Republic, 7Department of Pediatrics, 
Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 8CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany.
Mitochondria are key players in the maintenance of cellular energy 
metabolism through the process of oxidative phosphorylation. This 
task requires five multimeric respiratory chain complexes, with com -
plex I with 45 subunits being the largest one. Complex I deficiency 
is a major cause of mitochondrial diseases, presenting with an array 
of phenotypic features and the elucidation of the molecular correlate 
remains a challenge.
We performed a multi-centre large-scale mutation screen of 70 candi -
date genes in 150 patients with isolated complex I deficiency by high 
resolution melting curve analysis and Sanger sequencing.
For the first time we identified pathogenic mutations in the mitochon -
drial respiratory chain complex I subunit NDUFB9. Additionally, we 
identified causative mutations in another 16 genes, which have previ -
ously been associated with complex I deficiency: 5 mtDNA encoded 
subunits, 3 tRNA genes, 6 nuclear encoded subunits and 3 assembly 
factors. The causality of newly identified missense mutations was es -
tablished by complementation of complex I activity in patient-derived 
fibroblast cell lines by lentiviral expression of wildtype cDNA.
We have initiated an exome sequencing approach starting with familial 
cases to identify mutations in the 70% of patients with no mutations 
found yet. Taking advantage of the complementation approach, we will 
be able to discriminate pathogenic from non-pathogenic variants.c15.1*  Genome-wide association study of regional brain volume 
suggests involvement of known psychiatry candidate genes, 
identifies new candidates for psychiatric disorders and points to 
potential modes of their action
A. Arias-Vásquez1, B. Franke1, J. Veltman2, H. Brunner2, P. Hagoort3, G. 
Fernandez3;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Departments of Psychiatry 
& Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
3Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen (Medical Centre), 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Psychiatric diseases are highly heritable disorders with complex etiol -
ogy partially explained by combinations of genes with small effect size 
interacting with each other and with environmental factors. The small 
effect sizes of genetic risk factors have hampered the identification of 
genes predisposing to these diseases. A possible way to aid identifica -
tion of risk genes is the use of intermediate phenotypes. These can be 
defined e.g. at the level of brain function and of regional brain struc -
ture. Both are highly heritable, and regional brain structure is linked to 
brain function.
Within the Brain Imaging Genetics (BIG) study at the Radboud Uni -
versity Nijmegen (Medical-Centre) we performed a genome-wide as -
sociation study (GWAS) in 600 of the currently 1400 healthy study 
participants. For all BIG participants, structural MRI brain images were 
available. Gray and white matter volumes were determined by brain 
segmentation using SPM software. FSL-FIRST was used to assess 
volumes of specific brain structures. Genotyping was performed on 
Affymetrix 6.0 arrays.
Known candidates from studies on psychiatric genetics and mental 
disorders are implicated in the regulation of regional brain structure. 
E.g., CDH13, associated with ADHD, schizophrenia and substance 
abuse, was associated with amygdala, hippocampus and white matter 
volumes (P<10E-05); CANA1C, associated with bipolar disorder, was 
found associated with brainstem volume (p<10E-05) and three SNPs 
on the PLXNA2 gene showed p-values <10E-05 with caudate nucleus 
volume.
Our data suggests that genes involved in psychiatric and mental disor -
ders are also associated with the variance of intermediate phenotypes 
based on brain volumes from healthy individuals.
c15.2  NXF/ARNt2/sim2, RET Expression regulation and specific 
HscR Associated DNA Variants
R. M. W. Hofstra1, Y. Sribudiani1, M. Metzger2, J. Osinga1, A. Rey1;  
1UMCG, RUG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
Two non-coding RET variations, the T allele of SNP rs2435357 (Enh1-
T) and the A allele of SNP rs2506004 (Enh2-A) proved strongly as -
sociated with Hirschsprung (HSCR) susceptibility. Furthermore, in 
two SNPs are in strong linkage disequilibrium and both located in an 
enhancer element in intron 1 of the RET gene. For Enh1 it has been 
shown that the disease associated T allele results in reduced expres -
sion in Luciferase experiments, via reduced SOX10 binding, when 
compared to non-disease associated C allele. The goals of this study 
were to determine whether Enh2-A also is a functional variant, i.e. af -
fect RET expression. We generated reporter constructs containing 
both alleles of the two SNPs, separately or in combinations, coupled 
to the Luciferase  gene. Luciferase  assays showed that not only the 
Enh1-T allele but also the Enh2-A allele decreased reporter gene, 
showing that both SNPs do contribute independently. MatsInspector  
software identified the sequences of Enh2-C (non-disease associated 
variant) and its surroundings sequences (-ACGTG-) as a potential 
binding site for the (heterodimer) transcripton activator NXF/ARNT2, 
and the (heterodimer) transcription repressors SIM2/ARNT2. Binding 
affinity of NXF/ARNT2 to Enh2-C was confirmed by Electrophoresis 
Mobility Shift Assays and Supershift. Transfections of NXF/ARNT2 or 
SIM2/ARNT2 into Neuroblastoma cell lines increase and decrease 
RET expression respectively as expected. Interestingly SIM2 is locat -
ed on chromosome 21 and trisomy 21 strongly increases the risk on 
HSCR. Most importantly, our data shows that more than one SNP on 
an associated haplotype might influence disease development making 
polygenic diseases even more complex than originally thoughtConcurrent Sessions0
c15.3  Genomewide association of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms with subcutaneous adipose tissue gene 
expression.
A. J. Walley1, M. F. Falchi1, J. Andersson1, P. Jacobson2, A. Bibi1, M. Jarnas2, A. 
Siddiq1, L. Sjostrom2, L. M. S. Carlsson2, P. Froguel1,3;  
1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Molecular 
and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, 
The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3CNRS 8090-Institute of 
Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.
Exploration of the genetic control of gene expression in adipose tis -
sue could provide valuable insights into the genetic architecture of 
common human obesity. Using whole genome microarrays, a genome 
wide association analysis was carried out using gene expression lev -
els measured in subcutaneous adipose tissue samples from obesity-
discordant sibpairs as quantitative traits.
The SOS SibPair cohort was utilised, which consists of 154 nuclear 
families (n=732), each containing an obesity-discordant sib pair (Body 
Mass Index difference ≥10 kg/m2). RNA was extracted from subcu -
taneous adipose tissue and DNA was extracted from blood. Gene 
expression and genotyping data was generated from all 349 siblings 
using the Affymetrix Human U133 Plus 2.0 and Illumina Human 610K 
arrays, respectively. Analysis of the genomewide gene expression and 
genotype data was carried out using Merlin.
Approximately 10% of all transcripts (~5500) were associated with 
SNP markers in the genome, either in cis or in trans , using the very 
stringent threshold of a Bonferroni correction of p=3.6 x 10-12. For a 
False Discovery Rate of 10%, 4400 transcripts differentially expressed 
between lean and obese siblings were detected. Using a Bonferro -
ni correction of p=1x10-7, approximately 350 of the differentially ex -
pressed transcripts were also cis-eQTLs and approximately 150 were 
also trans -eQTLs. In the next stage, differential expression analysis 
and incorporation of the obesity status in the association framework 
will allow the identification of SNP markers and pathways involved in 
obesity susceptibility.
c15.4  mutations of VANGL1 in patients with neural tube defects
P. De Marco1, C. M. Bosoi2, E. Merello1, A. Reynolds2, S. Lachance2, J. R. 
McDearmid3, P. Gros4, A. G. Bassuk5, A. Cama1, K. Zoha2, V. Capra1;  
1Neurosurgery Department, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2CHU Sainte 
Justine Research Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3The Center for Research in Neuroscience, 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, and Department of 
Pathology and Cell Biology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 
4Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 
5Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Neural tube defects (NTD) are congenital malformations resulting 
from failure of neurulation. Recent years witnessed a breakthrough in 
elucidating the role of planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway in neurula -
tion and how molecular lesions in this pathway lead to NTD in animal 
models and humans. PCP is controlled by the non canonical Fz/Dvl 
signalling pathway that involves a number of additional core gene, in -
cluding Stbm /Vang , Fmi, Pk, and Dgo. The Loop-tail  (Lp) mouse that 
develops craniorachischisis carry missense mutations in the Vangl2  
gene, that is the mammalian homolog of the Drosophila Stbm /Vang  
gene required for establishing planar cell polarity in many tissues. This 
mouse provided the first line of evidence for involvement of PCP path -
way in NTD in mammals. Vangl1 , a vertebrate homolog of Vangl2 , en-
codes for a transmembrane protein containing a PDZ-domain binding 
motif involved in protein-protein interactions. We sequenced human 
VANGL1  gene in a cohort of 810 NTD patients and we identified 8 
missense mutations both in familial (V239I, R274Q, S83L, and R181E) 
and sporadic (M238T, F153S, L202F, and A404S) cases. These mu -
tations affect highly conserved residues and were not found in 1200 
controls. We demonstrated that V239I mutation abrogates in vitro  the 
interaction between VANGL protein and DVL, strongly suggesting a 
pathogenic effect on the protein function. Finally, we demonstrated that 
two human mutations, V239I and M238T, affect convergent extension 
in zebrafish and we hypothesize that they most likely affect a similar 
process in humans. These results support a role for VANGL1  as ge -
netic risk factor for NTD.c15.5  Functional analysis of fatty acid desaturase (FADs) gene 
cluster polymorphisms
E. Lattka1, S. Eggers1, G. Moeller2, K. Heim3, M. Weber3, D. Mehta3, H. 
Prokisch3,4, J. Adamski2,5, T. Illig1;  
1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany, 
2Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Neuherberg, 
Germany, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, 
Neuherberg, Germany, 4Technische Universität München, Institute of Human 
Genetics, Munich, Germany, 5Technische Universität München, Lehrstuhl für 
Experimentelle Genetik, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.
Fatty acid desaturases play a pivotal role in the endogenous forma -
tion of n-6 and n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs). 
Several studies reported associations of single nucleotide polymor -
phisms (SNPs) in the human desaturase encoding genes (FADS1, 
FADS2) with LC-PUFA levels, with an amazingly high genetically ex -
plained variance (28.5%) for arachidonic acid. Moreover, SNPs in this 
cluster were associated with more complex phenotypes such as cho -
lesterol and triglyceride levels as well as glucose levels. The functional 
relevant SNP(s) could not be identified by these association studies, 
because all associated SNPs are in high linkage disequilibrium. The 
aim of our study is therefore to identify the causative variant(s) to learn 
more about the regulatory pathways involved in LC-PUFA homeosta -
sis.
We identified two interesting polymorphisms (rs3834458 and rs968567) 
in the FADS2 gene promoter by bioinformatics analysis. Luciferase re -
porter gene assays revealed that the minor T allele of SNP rs968567 
leads to a significant increase in promoter activity in cell lines, whereas 
rs3834458 showed no significant effect. Competitive electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays showed allele-specific binding of nuclear proteins 
for the rs968567 surrounding region, but no differential results were 
obtained for rs3834458. One of the proteins binding to the rs968567 
surrounding region in an allele-specific manner was identified as tran -
scription factor ELK1. Altogether, our results indicate that rs968567 
influences FADS2 transcription, probably by genotype dependent 
ELK1 binding, and offer first insights into modulation of FADS2 gene 
transcription by SNPs.
c15.6  mutation and functional analysis of the iRAK-m gene in 
asthmatic patients.
S. Sanna1,2, C. A. Caria1, F. Anedda1, A. Loi1, F. Virdis1, N. Olla1, L. Balaci1, G. 
Sole1, M. Uda1, S. Naitza1;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Monserrato, Monserrato, Italy, 2Regione Autonoma della Sardegna, 
Italy.
Asthma is a complex disease caused by the interaction between 
genes and environment. Since its prevalence and associated mortal -
ity is largely increasing in the latest years, there is a great interest 
in understanding the molecular basis of this pathology. In 2007 we 
identified IRAK-M as an asthma susceptibility gene in the Sardinian 
population and replicated the study in two genetically distant popula -
tions. To better understand the role of IRAK-M in the pathogenesis of 
asthma, we first conducted a mutation screen in affected individuals 
and in controls to identify the functional variations responsible of the 
association. Our analysis revealed a clustering of rare coding muta -
tions in patients and functional studies in different cell lines showed 
that some affect downstream activation of NF-κB, a transcription fac -
tors involved in innate immunity and inflammation negatively regulated 
by IRAK-M. Combining bioinformatics analysis and deletion studies 
in cell lines, we identified a region upstream of IRAK-M with promoter 
activity, containing several binding sites for transcription factors known 
to modulate inflammatory responses (c-REL, AP1, NFAT). EMSA ex -
periments for the predicted binding sites demonstrated specific binding 
in monocyte cell lines stimulated with LPS, whereas site directed mu -
tagenesis showed that destruction of the binding sites greatly reduced 
activity of the IRAK-M promoter region. These data further support a 
potential role of IRAK-M in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammation 
and asthma.Concurrent Sessions1
c16.1  the revised Ghent nosology for the marfan syndrome 
(mFs)
B. L. Loeys1, J. De Backer1, B. Callewaert1, H. Dietz2, A. De Paepe1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium, 2Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
The diagnosis of MFS relies on a set of international criteria, outlined 
by expert opinion. In 1996, the initial Berlin nosology was redefined 
because of the risk of overdiagnosis into the Ghent nosology, a more 
stringent set of major and minor criteria.
These Ghent criteria have proven to work well since with improving 
molecular techniques, confirmation of the diagnosis is possible in 
over 95% of patients. However, concerns with the Ghent criteria are 
that some of the diagnostic manifestations have not been validated 
as thresholds and others necessitate cumbersome imaging studies. 
Moreover, in the absence of aortic dilation, the diagnosis can be stig -
matizing, hamper career aspirations and restrict life-insurances op -
portunities. The label “MFS” may cause psychosocial burden by “re -
stricted exercise permission”.
Following an international expert meeting, we propose a revised Ghent 
nosology in which aortic root aneurym and ectopia lentis are cardi -
nal features. In absence of family history, the presence of these two 
manifestations is sufficient for the unequivocal diagnosis of MFS. In 
absence of any of these two, the presence of bonafide FBN1 mutation 
or a combination of systemic features is required. For the latter a new 
scoring system has been designed and validated. In this way FBN1 
testing is not mandatory but useful when available.
The proposed new nosology puts more weight on the cardiovascular 
manifestations of the disease. We anticipate that the new nosology 
can delay a definitive diagnosis of MFS but decreases the risk of pre -
mature or mis-diagnosis and facilitates discussion of risk and manage -
ment guidelines.
c16.2  Acquired uniparental isodisomy as a common somatic 
2nd-hit explains multifocality of glomuvenous malformations
M. Vikkula1, V. Aerts1, F. Duhoux2, P. Brouillard1, M. Wassef3, O. Enjolras4, J. 
Mulliken5, H. Antoine-Poirel2, O. Devuyst6, L. Boon7, M. Amyere1;  
1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, 
Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium, 3Service d’anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, 
Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Pediatric Vascular Clinic, Departement of 
Maxillofacial and Plastic Surgery, Hôpital d’enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, 
France, 5Vascular Anomalies Center, Division of Plastic Surgery, Children’s 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Unit of 
nephrology, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 7Centre for 
Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-
Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
Inherited vascular anomalies are commonly characterized by autoso -
mal dominant inheritance with high penetrance, highly variable expres -
sivity regarding size, number and localization of malformations, and 
small size of postnatal lesions. In 1994, when we identified the ge -
nomic locus linked to inherited cutaneomucosal venous malformations 
(VMCM), we hypothesized that the Knudson’s double-hit model for reti -
noblastoma could be applicable to inherited vascular anomalies. Rarity 
of accessible resected inherited vascular malformations has hindered 
such studies. In 2002, we reported a somatic second-hit in one glomu -
venous malformation (GVM) and in 2009 another one in VMCM. In this 
study, we screened 16 GVM tissues for somatic 2nd-hit mutations using 
DNA extracted from whole tissue or laser capture microdissected tis -
sue, cDNA made of total tissular RNA, or whole tissular DNA for DNA 
microarray-based analyses. We identified a somatic 2nd-hit in 11/16 le -
sions (65%). Three were intragenic changes leading to altered mRNA 
splicing, one was a 1p21-22 deletion and seven were acquired uni -
parental isodisomies (aUPID) of the whole short arm of chromosome 
1. Difficulty of identification, enrichment of somatic mutations by LCM 
and cDNA studies, and the need for pairwise copy number analysis 
suggests important tissular heterogeneity for the 2nd-hits. The cellular 
double-hits lead to localized complete glomulin loss-of-function. Thus, 
the inherited mutations are phenotypically recessive and need a co-
existing somatic mutation, a hallmark of paradominant mode of inheri -
tance. The data demonstrate, for the first time, that aUPID is involved 
in non-malignant disorders and although the 1p aUPID was specific to GVMs, somatic UPID may have wide implications.
c16.3  ‘Lethal Vascular syndrome from south india due to a Novel mutation in Fibulin 4’
S. Nampoothiri1, M. Kappanayil1, A. De Paepe2, B. Loeys2, L. Van Laer2, R. 
Kannan1, M. Faiyaz-Ul-Haque3, R. Krishna Kumar1;  
1Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, Kerala, 
India, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 
3King Faizal Hospital, Saudi Arabia.
We report a lethal disorder characterized by a distinct phenotype and 
arterial tortuosity in a unique cohort of sixteen infants, caused by a 
novel mutation in the Fibulin 4 gene.
Methods: Prospective, hospital-based study (Jan 2006 - Dec 2009)Re -
sults: Sixteen children (9M / 7F) were identified with arterial tortuosity 
and a distinct phenotype, characterized by long philtrum and thin up -
per lip (87%), cutis laxa (53%), sagging cheeks (47%), hypertelorism 
(53%),and long fingers(40%). All children presented with early onset 
respiratory symptoms (median age 1.5 months) and belonged to un -
related families from the same geographical (South India) background 
with a history of third degree consanguinity in seven families. Cardio -
vascular features were documented by echocardiography,cardiac CT 
and MRI which revealed marked dilatation and tortuosity of aorta and 
its branches. Thirteen patients died between 36 hours -17 months of 
age (median 2.5 months) due to respiratory failure. Genetic studies led 
to identification of a novel homozygous c.608A>C (p.Asp203Ala) muta -
tion in exon 7 of the Fibulin 4 gene in 15/16 patients. In the only patient 
surviving to the age of 6 years, compound heterozygosity was found 
for this mutation with a c.679C>T (p.Arg227Cys) mutation. Prenatal 
study in one couple identified an affected foetus. Haplotype analysis 
revealed a shared haplotype with Fibulin 4 gene, which strongly sug -
gested common ancestry for all probands due a relatively old founder 
mutation.
Conclusions: This is the first complete description of this lethal genetic 
disorder and illustrates that Fibulin 4 is critical to human elastogenesis 
and vascular integrity.
c16.4  A new locus for a syndromic form of thoracic Aortic 
Aneurysms maps to chromosome 15q
I. M. B. H. van de Laar1, R. A. Oldenburg1, B. de Graaf1, J. A. M. Verhagen1, 
Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, I. Frohn-Mulder2, J. Roos-Hesselink3, J. M. Kros4, B. A. 
Oostra1, M. W. Wessels1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center- 
Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) are familial in at least 
15-20% of the cases and can be classified in syndromic and non-syn -
dromic forms. The TGF-beta signalling pathway plays a central role in 
the pathogenesis of both syndromic and non-syndromic TAA.
Methods and results: We present a large four-generation family with a 
syndromic form of TAA. Thirty family members had an extensive physi -
cal and cardiologic examination. Eleven familymembers were consid -
ered affected on the basis of cardiac and/or skeletal and connective 
tissue abnormalities. Nine patients had an aortic or other large artery 
aneurysm. TAA patients had a high risk of aortic dissection or rupture 
at an early age. Many TAA patients had additional heart malforma -
tions, including mitral valve abnormalities, persistent ductus arteriosus 
and pulmonary valve stenosis. Histological examination of the aorta 
showed medial fragmentation, disarray of elastic fibres and excess of 
collagen deposition.
After excluding mutations in the known syndromic TAA genes ( FBN1, 
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, COL3A1 ), we performed a genome wide linkage 
analysis in this family using the Affymetrix 250K Nsp arrays. A new 
locus on chromosome 15q with a significant LOD score of 3.6 was 
identified within a critical region containing 120 genes. Sequencing of 
positional candidate genes is ongoing.
Conclusions: The clinical phenotype overlaps with known TAA syn -
dromes such as Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome and vascu -
lar type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Our data provide evidence for a new 
locus for a syndromic form of TAA. Identification of this novel gene will 
provide insight into the pathogenesis of arterial aneurysms.Concurrent Sessions2
c16.5  Loss of function ENPP1 mutations cause both 
generalized arterial calcification of infancy and autosomal 
recessive hypophosphatemic rickets
B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, D. Schnabel2, D. Tiosano3,4, G. Häusler5, T. M. Strom1,6;  
1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental 
Health, Inst. of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Charite-
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Berlin, 
Germany, 3Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Rambam Medical Center, Pediatric 
Endocrinology, Haifa, Israel, 4Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 5Medizinische Universität Wien, Department of 
Pediatrics, Vienna, Austria, 6Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität 
München, Inst. of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany.
The analysis of rare genetic disorders affecting phosphate homeosta -
sis led to the identification of several proteins that are essential for the 
regulation of phosphate homeostasis, for example fibroblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF23) a phosphaturic factor, which inhibits phosphate 
reabsorption and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D synthesis in the proximal 
renal tubules. Cases of hypophosphatemia remain, including familial 
and consanguineous ones, which do not show mutations in any of the 
three known genes - PHEX (XLH [MIM 307800]), FGF23  (ADHR [MIM 
193100]) and DMP1  (ARHP [MIM 241520]) which, if mutated, causes 
hypophosphatemic rickets. Here, we present three different homozy -
gous, presumable loss of function mutations in a further gene, ENPP1 
(ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase), in members of 
four families affected with hypophosphatemic rickets. Intact plasma lev -
els of FGF23 were clearly elevated in one of five affected individuals, 
providing a possible explanation for the phosphaturia and inappropri -
ately normal 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels. Surprisingly, ENPP1  loss 
of function mutations have previously been described in generalized 
arterial calcification of infancy (GACI [MIM 208000]), a severe auto -
somal recessive disorder with a hypermineralizing phenotyp, suggest -
ing an as yet elusive mechanism which balances arterial calcification 
with bone mineralization. With the identification of ENPP1  mutations 
as the cause of hypophosphatemia, we added a further component 
to the growing list of genes involved in the regulation of phosphate 
hoemostasis.
c16.6  Epigenotype-phenotype correlations in silver-Russell 
syndrome
E. L. Wakeling1, M. Alders2, J. Bliek3, H. Bullman4, D. H. Lim5, D. J. Mackay6,7, 
M. M. Van Haelst8, I. K. Temple6,7, J. M. Cobben9;  
1North West Thames Regional Genetic Service, North West London Hospitals NHS Trust, Harrow, United Kingdom, 2DNA laboratory, Department of Clinical 
Genetics, AMC University Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department 
of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
4Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital,, Salisbury, 
United Kingdom, 5Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Department 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham 
Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Wessex Regional Genetics 
Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 7Division 
of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United 
Kingdom, 8Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 9Department of Pediatric Genetics, Emma Kinderziekenhuis AMC, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is characterised by intrauterine growth 
restriction, poor postnatal growth, relative macrocephaly, triangular 
face and asymmetry. Maternal uniparental disomy (mUPD) of chromo -
some 7 and, hypomethylation of the imprinting control region (ICR)1 
on chromosome 11p15 are found in around 5-10% and up to 60% of 
patients with SRS, respectively. As many clinical features of SRS are 
non-specific and may change with time, the diagnosis remains diffi -
cult. Studies of patients in whom the molecular diagnosis is confirmed 
therefore provide valuable clinical information regarding the condition. 
We undertook a detailed, prospective study of 64 patients with mUPD7 
(n=20) or ICR1 hypomethylation (n=44). The considerable overlap in 
clinical phenotype makes it difficult to distinguish these two molecular 
subgroups reliably. ICR1 hypomethylation patients were more likely 
to be scored as ‘classical’ SRS. Asymmetry, fifth finger clinodactyly 
and congenital anomalies were more commonly seen with ICR1 hy -
pomethylation, whereas learning difficulties and referral for speech 
therapy were more likely with mUPD7. No correlation was found be -
tween clinical severity and level of ICR1 hypomethylation. Use of as -
sisted reproductive technology in association with ICR1 hypomethyl -
ation appeared increased compared with the general population. ICR1 
hypomethylation was also observed in siblings, though recurrence risk 
remains low in the majority of cases. Overall, a wide range in sever -
ity was observed, particularly with ICR1 hypomethylation. No clinical 
feature was present in all cases and even low birth weight only in 78%. 
We would therefore recommend a low threshold for investigation of 
patients with features suggestive, but not typical, of SRS.Concurrent Sessions
Abstracts of EsHG Posters
P01 Genetic counseling, including 
Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, 
Genetic services, and Public policy
P01.01  misunderstanding and misuse of Genetics counseling 
at the Expenses of medical Genetics Rules and Basic Human 
Rights
M. Shariaty , A. Daneil;  
Tehran Uni.Cancer Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Genetic counseling began with the Eugenics movement in Europe 
and USA around 1910 leading to very destructive inhuman negative 
effects on health and dignity of humankind. Fortunately the misuse 
of Eugenic was officially abandoned in 1944. Though it is persists 
in many developed and developing countries up to today in a rather 
hidden manner. Clinical genetic counseling based on DIGNITY and 
EQUALITY of mankind was introduced by Reed in 1944. In Iran and 
the Islamic countries Genetic counseling was introduced in 1968 by 
the first author on the same basic principles taught by his graduate 
mentor professors Yamada, Fuhrmann, Vogel and Reed. These Prin -
ciples give consideration to ALL of the Humanitarian, Ethical, Moral, 
Religious and Medical issues concerning the clients and their society 
On these principles, since 1968 in Iran the first author have provided 
a genetic counseling service to over 18500 couples seeking academic 
advice concerning consanguineous marriage, their risk assessments 
and promer medical advices.
Since 1980 due to higher demand for counseling services some unau -
thorized and un- or inadequately educated MD or PhD holders have 
started genetic counseling with improper advices or test recommenda -
tions in many occasions. These inappropriate or misused issues are 
NO Marriage, NO Child for many of carriers of monogenic diseases 
and clinically unjustified Karyotyping of quite normal and healthy young 
couples and forecasting all of the genetics abnormalities of concep -
tion from couples karyotypes .This last issue unfortunately is taken by 
the lay people as a MUST test for avoiding genetic diseases in their 
offspring. False positive and negative hopes as well as spending a 
very time consuming, expensive and inappropriate practice is among 
these malpractices of genetic counseling in Iran and many developing 
countries.
We feel it is time for WHO and international medical genetic congress -
es to address this very humanitarian and academic issue and draw a 
very precise nomenclature for the practice of Genetic Counseling all 
over the world. Also the very scientific fact of presence of a general 5-
7% chance of having an abnormal child for every healthy, normal and 
unrelated young couple without any clinical indications of a genetic 
abnormality is a fix and fusible fact cannot be avoided through couple 
testing. This is the price of nature for unknown biological task of con -
tinuing generations of mankind.
P01.02**  the use of stored tissue samples from children for 
genetic research. Ethical issues.
K. Hens , K. Dierickx;  
Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium.
Collections of biological samples have a great potential for genetic 
research. Much has been written in the last decade on the ethical as -
pects of the use of such samples from adults, but the ethical issues 
surrounding the use of stored tissue samples from minors continue to 
cause controversy. This was made clear this summer by the publica -
tion of a policy forum in Science. During the last three years we have 
conducted theoretical and empirical research on this topic, and will 
present the conclusions of this research in this talk. We discovered 
three main areas of interest. First, the requirement that research on 
vulnerable populations such as children should pose no more than 
minimal risk is problematic for biobank research, as it is as of yet un -
clear what risk is entailed in such research. We propose an approach 
of ‘burden and benefit’ rather than one of minimal risk to decide on 
the conditions for participation of children. Second, we reflected on 
the scope of parental consent. Should parents be allowed to give 
broad consent for any type of research and for an unlimited amount 
of time? If and when should the children themselves be involved? We propose a solution that is both respectful of the child’s preferences 
and that poses not too much administrative overhead for the research -
ers. Third, we discuss the issue of returning individual research results 
and incidental research findings for young participants. We argue that 
such results, when minors are concerned, deserve special attention in 
guidelines and recommendations.
P01.03  the scope of prenatal diagnostics: broad or narrow? 
Ethical reflections.
A. de Jong1,2, W. J. Dondorp1,3, G. M. W. R. de Wert1,3;  
1Maastricht University, Research Institute GROW, Maastricht, Netherlands, 
2Centre for Society and Genomics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Maastricht 
University, Research Institute CAPHRI, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Various new techniques of rapid aneuploidy diagnosis (RAD) challenge 
the tenability of karyotyping as the gold standard of prenatal diagnosis 
for pregnancies at ‘increased risk’. RAD, targeted at a few chromo -
somal abnormalities, generates less so-called unexpected findings. 
This would have the advantage of simplifying counselling, alleviating 
the burden of choice and preventing unnecessary abortions. Further -
more, RAD would allow mending the present rift between a narrow 
entrance gate to prenatal screening (risk-assessment for aneuploidy 
of chromosomes 21, 18, 13) and the much wider scope of subsequent 
karyotyping.
However, RAD misses some clinically relevant abnormalities and 
may therefore be seen as making suboptimal use of foetal material 
obtained through invasive and risky procedures. Moreover, it can be 
asked whether the advantages of having rapid and unequivocal results 
justify depriving pregnant women of potential useful information. Vari -
ous views on possible aims of prenatal screening are relevant to this 
debate, although not conclusive for determining the precise scope of 
prenatal testing. One possible option may be to provide women with a 
choice between karyotyping and RAD.
The opposing perspectives are also informed by various views on the 
principle of autonomy: should the emphasis be on optimizing the pro -
cess of decision-making or on maximising reproductive options? The 
latter view may imply welcoming the use of tests with an even broader 
scope than karyotyping.
Our preliminary moral assessment suggests that offering RAD as a 
stand alone test would unjustifiable trespass on reproductive auton -
omy and amount to a rather restricted view on the aim of prenatal 
screening.
P01.04  EPmA: Predictive, Preventive & Personalised medicine 
as a novel strategic trend in Europe
D. Radojkovic1, O. Golubnitschaja2, V. Costigliola3;  
1IMGGE, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Radiology,University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany, 3European Medical Association, Brussels, Belgium.
Predictive diagnostics is considered as the basis for targeted preven -
tive measures and consequent development of individualized treatment 
approaches. Of paramount importance is the communication among 
professionals - medical doctors, biotechnologists, computer-scientists, 
healthcare providers, policy-makers, educators, who are obligatorily in -
volved in the paradigm change from curative to predictive medicine.
The paradigm change can be achieved only by well-coordinated action 
towards : adequate investment in creating novel technologies, devel -
opment of non- or minimally-invasive diagnostic tools, well-organised 
exchange and transfer of knowledge among biomedical research enti -
ties and biotech industries for production of the advanced diagnos -
tic tools, quality assurance through the introduction of international 
standards for technological tools and devices, patenting and licenses, 
professional education in terms of the application of biotechnological 
high-tech in medicine, political regulations in the health-care sector: 
introduction of the obligatory guidelines and clear regulations for the 
health insurance industry to ensure patients needs are met, measures 
to ensure confidentiality of patient information and personal databank 
and distribution of relevant information among health-care profession -
als and users. The mission of the European coordinator  in this field 
is performed by the “European Association for Predictive, Preventive 
and Personalised Medicine” ( EPmA ). The Association is clearly struc -
tured in order to reach the possibly best coordination of the PPPM-re -
lated multifaceted activities over the whole Europe: there are National 
Representatives in all 27 Country-members of the European Union 
and the Associated-Countries (e.g. Israel, Serbia, etc).Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
P01.05  timE-trial: A multicentre study on the behavioural and 
psychosocial effects of rapid genetic counselling and testing in 
newly diagnosed breast cancer patients
M. R. Wevers1,2, M. G. E. M. Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1, D. E. E. Hahn1, T. 
Brouwer2, E. T. J. Rutgers1, R. van Hillegersberg2, F. Hogervorst1, R. B. van der 
Luijt2, H. Valdimarsdottir3, S. Verhoef1, N. K. Aaronson1;  
1Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
Background: In 15% of high-risk families, a BRCA1or BRCA2 gene 
mutation can be found. Female carriers with breast cancer have an 
increased risk of new primary tumours and may opt for preventive sur -
gery. Usually, genetic counselling and DNA-testing are offered after 
primary treatment and take 4-6 months. However, some Dutch labora -
tories can generate test results within 3-6 weeks. Little is known about 
the effect of such rapid genetic counselling and testing (RGCT) proce -
dures on treatment decisions and psychosocial health.
Methods: The TIME-trial is a prospective randomized study. Newly di -
agnosed breast cancer patients (N=255) with 10% or greater chance of 
having a BRCA mutation are being recruited from 12 Dutch hospitals. 
They are randomized on a 2:1 basis to either a RGCT-group (referral 
to a clinical geneticist within one week of diagnosis), or a usual care 
control-group. If needed, DNA-test results are made available within 
3-6 weeks. The primary study outcome is choice of surgical treat -
ment. Secondary outcomes include perceived cancer risk, cancer-re -
lated distress, health-related quality of life and decisional satisfaction. 
Psychosocial assessments take place at study entry and at 6 and 12 
months follow-up.
Results: Patient recruitment started in November, 2008. To date, 124 
women (response 82%) have been entered into the trial. Of the 80 
participants in the RGCT-arm, approximately one-third has opted for 
rapid DNA- testing .
Conclusion: This multicenter clinical trial of RGCT is recruiting well 
and, based on the figures available to date, a higher percentage of 
women is opting for rapid genetic testing than had been anticipated.
P01.06  introducing a patient‘s choice in how to learn the results 
of presymptomatic DNA testing for hereditary cancer
J. C. Oosterwijk , J. S. Voorwinden, J. ter Beest, B. K. Leegte, R. H. Sijmons, 
J. P. C. Jaspers;  
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands.
AIM: To test whether coping after DNA testing for hereditary cancer, is 
similar when counselees have the choice to learn the results by letter 
instead of in a face to face contact.
BACKGROUND: In pre-symptomatic testing for hereditary cancers, 
the availability of treatment /prevention seems to mitigate the impact of 
the test result, as compared to Huntingtons chorea. Moreover, coun -
selees indicated they preferred to learn the test results by letter for 
several reasons.
METHODS: Cases referred for pre-symptomatic testing for BRCA or 
Lynch syndrome were randomised between ‘standard care protocol’ 
(disclosure of DNA results in a face to face contact), and ‘choice pro -
tocol’ (the counselee gets the choice to either learn the result in a face 
to face contact or to be sent the results in a letter with a subsequent 
appointment). Included counselees filled out questionnaires covering 
knowledge, coping, stress and satisfaction before the intake session 
(t1), 2 days after DNA test result disclosure (t2) and 6 weeks later 
(t3).
RESULTS: In total 244 out of 340 ascertained cases consented in the 
study and returned the first questionnaire: 205 BRCA1/2 and 39 Lynch 
syndrome. Some refrained from or postponed DNA testing after intake 
and were excluded To date 48 cases got the standard protocol (20 
carriers, 28 non-carriers) and 82 cases got the choice protocol (26 car -
riers and 56 non-carriers). Of the 82 cases in the choice protocol, 58 
chose disclosure by letter and 24 chose disclosure in an appointment. 
The results of our analysis will be presented.P01.07  Cardiac genetics: the first 250 clinic patients
J. McGaughran1, J. Atherton2;  
1Genetic Health Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 2Department of Cardiology, 
Royal Brisbane and Women‘s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.
In February 2007, a monthly cardiac genetics clinic was commenced 
at the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital. The clinic was to ensure 
appropriate counselling, genetic testing and management of those 
with or at risk of an inherited cardiac condition. A range of conditions 
have been seen including; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, familial di -
lated cardiomyopathy, arrythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and long QT 
syndrome. Rarer conditions such a Fabry disease and Danon disease 
have also been seen. To date 250 patients have been seen through 
the clinic. Because of pressure on clinic space, a number of the pa -
tients referred to the genetic service have been seen in genetics clin -
ics at locations around the state. A number of challenges have been 
encountered: management of those with a mutation but no phenotype; 
testing of at risk children; funding for testing; waiting times with in -
creasing numbers of cases referred. The clinic also collaborates with 
the forensic pathology service and coroner in the assessment of those 
families where there has been a sudden unexplained death in a young 
individual. The data from the clinic will be presented
P01.08  Ethical aspects of Array Comparative Genomic 
Hybridisation (cGH) for mental retardation diagnosis and 
genetic counselling
S. JULIA1,2, A. Soulier2, D. Sanlaville3,4, E. Rial-Sebbag2, B. Keren5, D. Heron5, 
M. Till3, P. Edery3,4, P. Calvas1, G. Bourouillou1, A. Cambon-Thomsen2;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale,, toulouse, France, 2Inserm, U558, 
Epidemiology and analyses in public health and University Toulouse III, 
Toulouse, France, 3Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, CHU de Lyon, 
Bron, France, 4EA 4171, Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 
5Département de génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpetrière, Paris, France.
The recent rapid emergence of new technologies in genetic medicine 
contributes to the diagnosis and the understanding of the molecular 
basis of numerous diseases. The high throughput and the sensitivity of 
these technologies will create an unprecedented volume of information 
for patients, counsellors, and health care providers, raising also unique 
ethical challenges.
Although the applications of many of these techniques are still lim -
ited to research, Array Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (CGH) has 
evolved to a standard application in clinical genetics, especially in indi -
viduals with syndromic or non-syndromic mental retardation.
CGH allows a whole genome analysis at a resolution, 10-10 000 times 
higher than that of routine chromosome analysis by karyotyping. This 
method has revolutionized the present clinical practice in the detection 
and diagnosis of human chromosome abnormalities in mental retarda -
tion. Some ethical issues specifically challenge the transfer of these 
improved technologies from the research laboratory to their clinical 
applications. In our experience we have identified several situations 
asking ethical difficulties. They will be presented according to two main 
dimensions: uncertainty of results and incidental findings.
Ethical issues of genetic disease diagnostics and various health ap -
plications have already been addressed in numerous reports, but with 
the use of these screening technologies in the clinical setting, the “in -
cidental” becomes “usual,” representing new challenges for the clini -
cian.
Specific reference documents addressing the ethical issues of genetic 
testing in relation to CGH are still lacking.
P01.09  Evidence-based information guides to rare chromosome 
disorders for families and professionals
B. A. Searle1, P. Middlemiss1, S. Wynn1, M. Hulten2;  
1Unique, Caterham, United Kingdom, 2University of Warwick, Warwick, United 
Kingdom.
Purpose: To develop reliable, relevant, accurate leaflets for affected 
families and health professionals that fill an information gap about rare 
chromosome disorders .
Method: In 2003 Unique  surveyed information materials published in 
the UK about specific rare chromosome disorders: for over 93% of 
members no accessible disorder-specific information was available. 
Unique asked families what they most wanted to know at diagnosis Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
and what questions remained unanswered. Unique  prioritised 66 dis -
orders according to frequency on its database (7122 member families 
at February 2010) and absence of existing information accessible to 
families. Information was compiled from the medical literature; from 
Unique ’s database; and from detailed surveys sent to member fami -
lies. Draft texts were reviewed for accuracy by Unique ’s medical ad -
viser and by medical and genetics professionals expert in the specific 
disorders. Photographically illustrated draft leaflets were vetted for 
content by families.
Results: Leaflets have been developed on 113 topics including numeri -
cal and structural disorders; subtelomere deletions; mosaic disorders; 
emerging microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and a broad 
range of less common diagnoses.
Discussion: Twenty-one leaflets have been translated into at least one 
European language. Leaflets, available to families and health profes -
sionals in print format and online at www. rarechromo.org, improve 
families’ understanding and acceptance of a rare chromosome disor -
der and help diminish the acute stress and anxiety associated with 
diagnosis.
P01.10  t eaching the genetics of complex traits
M. J. Dougherty ;  
American Society of Human Genetics, Bethesda, MD, United States.
The primary goals of secondary and post secondary science education 
are to help prepare scientifically literate citizens and future scientists. 
Efforts to improve science education have focused on competency 
standards and the professional development of teachers, and recent 
efforts have promoted the use of high-stakes exams and benchmarks 
for school performance. In spite of this work, students in the United 
States continue to lag behind their peers in other countries. This un -
derperformance is true for genetics and for science and math in gener -
al, and it is particularly worrisome given the accelerating need for sci -
entists and engineers in an increasingly technology-driven economy. 
Unfortunately, even students in high-performing European countries, 
such as Finland and Slovenia, have relatively small percentages of 
students performing at the higher levels of proficiency.
Perhaps nowhere is the need for scientific literacy more personally 
meaningful and urgent than in genetics--because of its connection 
with medicine. Rapid changes in human genetics--in particular recent 
insights into the genetics of complex traits--have the potential to trans -
form healthcare. However, citizens are ill-prepared to participate in 
this transformation because the curriculum is outdated and remains 
focused on single-gene inheritance and simplified notions of risk. One 
potential solution is to modernize the genetics curriculum so that it 
matches the science of the 21st-century. This paper outlines the prob -
lems with current genetics instruction, highlights changes in human 
genetics that support a curricular reorganization, and proposes a new 
genetics curriculum for secondary and postsecondary education.
P01.11  molecular genetic study of polymorphic variations 
in genes within the cascade of reactions detoxification of 
xenobiotics with aromatic structure 
E. M. Vasilyeva , E. V. Vorobjeva, V. Y. Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical University of the name M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Development of industrial production around the world have led to a 
large number of chemical compounds that adversely affect human 
health. Toxic substances violate the metabolism, the structure of cells 
and tissues, resulting in abnormal reaction of the organism. The nega -
tive effect of xenobiotics depends on the activity of physical and bio -
chemical methods of protection, including the immune system and the 
system of biotransformation of alien connections.
We studied DNA samples - 714 „apparently healthy“ individuals in the 
two groups, differing in environmental conditions of residence in the 
same territory, examined polymorphism of genes within the cascade 
of reactions detoxification of xenobiotics with aromatic structure: CY -
P1A1/A4889G, CYP2E1/Ins 96,EPHX1/A4156,NQO1/C609T,C465T.
A group of environmental risk revealed a significant increase in the 
frequency of the protective genotype D / D polymorphism Ins96 gene 
CYP2E1 (79,74% against 58.44%).
Comparative analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes and 
alleles of polymorphism C609T gene NQO1 revealed a statistically sig -
nificant difference by increasing the frequency of the protective geno -type C/C in the group of environmental risk
(68.2% versus 59.87% in the comparison group, P = 0.0478). For a 
comprehensive analysis was studied genotypes of the five polymor -
phism in the studied genes. Revealed a statistically significant in -
crease of genotypes for the study of polymorphism at environmental 
risk (AADDAGCCCC: χ2 = 9,69, P = 0.0027, AGDDAACCCC: χ2 = 
9,47, P = 0.003), may determine that a combination of data most effi -
cient biotransformation of xenobiotics and reduces the negative impact 
of environmental factors and some carcinogens in the body.
P01.12  medical and genetic counseling of families with cystic 
fibrosis in the Republic of Moldova
N. I. Barbova ;  
State Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, 
Republic of.
Cystic fibrosis is an important medico-social problem for the Republic 
of Moldova, which is associated with low life expectancy of patients 
(average age - 13,5 years), the difficulties of clinical and molecular 
diagnostics, low economic level of the population and lack of social 
support for families with cystic fibrosis.
An important step in the prevention of cystic fibrosis is a medico-ge -
netic counseling in families at high risk. We are presenting an 18-year 
experience of retrospective counseling of 58 families in which there 
were 69 children suffering from cystic fibrosis aged from 1 month to 18 
years (35 boys and 34 girls).
In 56 families there were moral and ethical difficulties with improve -
ment of the diagnosis. Most families (63.8%) lived in rural areas, 66,4% 
of parents had secondary education. The survey showed that 72% of 
parents knew that the disease has a genetic nature. The results of 
DNA testing showed mutations in both alleles in 14 families, mutation 
of one allele in 25 families and 19 families were non-informative for 
molecular diagnosis. The prenatal diagnosis carried out in 6 families 
resulted to 4 healthy children.
Of the 58 families observed in 52 families there are no children with 
CF, that is, the effectiveness of genetic counseling was 89.7%. Infor -
mation of parents about the presence of high risk have genetic nature 
of CF lead to positive changes of reproductive behavior. The prenatal 
diagnosis in affected families can allow decrease the frequency of ill 
children.
P01.13  the opinion of cF patient’s parents about different 
aspects of genetic services in Russia
L. Y. Ivanova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2, I. V. Zhuravleva1, E. K. Ginter2;  
1Institute of Sociology of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
The newborn screening for CF started in Russia in 2006. The opinion 
of CF patient’s parents to different aspects of genetic services in Rus -
sia was estimated. 68 respondents were participated in the research. 
Majority of parents (90 %) have learnt about hereditary character of 
their child disease from the pediatrician, only 81 % of them have been 
referred to genetisist, and 67 % have been held DNA testing. However 
90% respondents have consider, that they have understood the infor -
mation about repeated genetic risk for CF. However only 50% of them 
could correctly specify the value of recurrence risk of CF, and only 30 
% of them could correctly attribute a risk category. The birth of the 
CF child has affected reproductive plans in 30 % of CF families, only 
35% of families wanted to have more children. 80 % of CF children’s 
parents knew about possibility of prenatal diagnostics of CF, however 
almost 40 % from them have learnt about it not from experts, but from 
the press. Prenatal diagnostics of CF was acceptable for 66% of re -
spondents, and the abortion of a CF foetus is morally acceptable for 
82% of them. Only 4 % of respondents have answered that they didn’t 
want to terminate the CF foetus pregnancy. In 11/15 women who were 
pregnant after the birth of CF child, prenatal diagnostics of CF was 
done: 7 foetuses were healthy, 4 - with CF. All CF foetus pregnancies 
have been terminated.
P01.14  Psychosocial aspects of genetic paternity testing 
ordered by courts: does biological relatedness create a father?
H. Machado1, S. Silva2, S. Costa3, D. Miranda3, A. Amorim4, C. Alves5;  
1Department of Sociology, University of Minho and Center for Social 
Studies, University of Coimbra, Portugal, 2Institute of Public Health (ISPUP), Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Porto Medical School, 
Portugal, 3Center for Social Studies, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Institute of Molecular 
Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP) and Faculty 
of Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal, 5Parentage testing and Genetic 
Identification Unit, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the 
University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Portugal.
Many European societies support efforts to establish genetic parent -
age of children born outside marriage when no father is listed on the 
birth registration. This State effort is usually part of public policies to 
ensure that children are cared for not only financially but also with 
regards to education and upbringing. There are also medical reasons 
to establish genetic parentage, and the importance of parents in the 
psychological development of infants.
We discuss the benefits and/or disadvantages of genetic paternity 
testing from the point of view of mothers and fathers. We focus on 
cases ordered by Portuguese courts of law and rely on data proceed -
ing from interviews conducted with women and men who went through 
the process of DNA paternity testing. Some topics of debate are: psy -
chosocial aspects of submission to genetic paternity testing; informed 
consent; access to information about genetic testing procedures and 
communication of results; perceptions of the role of genetic related -
ness in defining fatherhood.
The results suggest that there are important psychosocial impacts 
produced by genetic paternity testing which question the value of the 
legal primacy of biological relatedness in forming fatherhood and in 
serving the best interests of the child. We recommend better practices 
of informed consent, communicating the results of paternity tests and 
even psychological counseling to motivate mothers and fathers for the 
necessity of creating and continuing a relationship with the child and 
between the progenitors. These practices demand a more effective 
coordination between courts of law and laboratories and specific train -
ing of personnel.
P01.15  DOUBLE cOUsiN mARRiAGE iN tHE iRANiAN 
PROViNcE OF HORmOZGAN (2002-2009)
P. Nikuie , G. Tabasi, F. Hajizadeh;  
Bandarabbas soicial welfare organization, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Background: Double first cousins arise when siblings of one family re -
produce with siblings of another family. The resulting children are re -
lated to each other through both parent‘s families. Double first cousins 
share both sets of grandparents in common and have double the de -
greeof consanguinity than ordinary first cousins.Genetically, they are 
as related as half -sibling sharing 25 %of their DNA. A consanguineous 
couple especially double cousin couple is at increased risk for both 
autosomal recessive disorders and several congenital malformations.
Material and methods: In seven years from 2002 to 2009,we performed 
genetic counseling for 2400 couples.The consanguinity between 34 
couples was double cousin.(1.4%)Familial pedigree established and 
risk of genetic disorders for their children was calculated.
Results: 1428 couples (59.5%) had consanguinity and 34 couples 
(1.4%) were double cousins.
-13 couples (38.3%) came premariage, 17 couples preconception 
(50%) and 4 couples (11.7%) during pregnancy.
-inbreeding coefficient in 15 couples (44.1%) was more than 1/8. -
-18 couples (52.9%) had positive history of genetic disorders in family.
-15couples had children and in 14 of them (93.3%) at least one child 
was involved with genetic disorders.
-3 couples (8.8%) were carrier of beta thalasemia and referred for pre -
natal diagnosis.
Conclusion:  Based on high risks for genetic disorders in double cous -
in marriage and according to all of couples announced “if they knew 
about these risks, they would avoid marriage“. Performing genetic 
counseling is recommended before all consanguious marriages espe -
cially double cousin type.
P01.16  Management deficiencies of Duchenne Muscular 
Dystrophy: A reality that we can changes
A. Dobrescu1, F. Leturcq2, M. Ioana3, M. Alexianu4, L. Sirbu5, I. Tudorache6;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Craiova, Romania, 2Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Cochin 
Institut, Paris, France, 3Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 4Department of Neuropathology, Colentina Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 5Psychiatric Hospital, Poiana Mare, 
Romania, 6Romanian Parent Project Association, Craiova, Romania.
The right management of Duchenne‘s muscular dystrophy (DMD) 
should include several steps: a) clinical and genetic diagnosis and 
counseling, b) refer to a specialist and multidisciplinary team, c) infor -
mation and support for the family.
Our study was conducted for 16 Romanian boys affected by DMD and 
their families.
We examined how the diagnosis was made, the application of specific 
treatment with corticosteroids, tracking of supportive therapy protocol, 
involvement of a team of specialist in the disease management, ge -
netic counseling and psychosocial support for families.
The results of this study revealed a system of management of this 
disease “fractured” at all levels:
- Late clinical diagnosis (4 cases), late genetic diagnosis (8 cases)
- Incomplete diagnosis - lack of immunohistochemical diagnosis and/
or molecular diagnosis (6 cases)
- Wrong diagnosis (2 cases, although diagnosed with DMD, after mo -
lecular analysis it is being evaluated for a different type of dystrophy).
- Lack of therapeutic instrument provided by a multidisciplinary team of 
specialists, inadequate treatment (15 cases)
- Lack of genetic counseling (5 cases) and psychosocial support to 
families (15 cases)
From the 16 children, only one benefits by a correctly and completely 
mangement of the disease.
In the context of the emergence of the first innovative treatment (PTC 
124, exon-skipping), if we want Romanian children to have access to 
clinical trials, it is vital to have a standard of care compatible with the 
European one; the management of DMD by a network of specialists 
can buy time for our children and stop the reappearance of the dis -
ease.
P01.17  Population-based study of dystrophin mutations in canada
G. Yoon1, J. K. Mah2, K. Selby3, C. Campbell4, A. Nadeau5, M. Tarnopolsky6, 
A. McCormick7, J. Dooley8, H. Kolski9, A. Skalsky10, G. Smith11, D. Buckley12, P. 
Bridge2, P. N. Ray1;  
1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 
2University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 
5Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada, 7University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 8Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 9University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 
10University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 11Queen‘s University, 
Kingston, ON, Canada, 12Memorial University, St. John‘s, NL, Canada.
Background: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DBMD) are 
allelic disorders caused by mutations of the dystrophin gene on Xp21. 
This study describes the diagnostic methods and mutation frequency 
among the patients of the Canadian Pediatric Neuromuscular Group 
(CPNG).
Methods: De-identified data containing the clinical phenotypes, diag -
nostic methods, and mutational reports from DBMD patients followed 
by CPNG centers during 2000-2009 were analyzed using descriptive 
statistics. Patients were considered to have had complete genetic test -
ing if all 79 exons of the dystrophin gene were examined and if this was 
negative, sequencing of the gene. Diagnosis solely by muscle biopsy 
or PCR analysis of a subset of exons was considered incomplete ge -
netic testing.
Results: 773 DBMD patients had a confirmed diagnosis based on ge -
netic testing (97%), muscle biopsy (2.3%), or family history (0.7%). 
573/773 (74%) had complete deletion/duplication analysis of all 79 
exons or gene sequencing resulting in 366 (64%) deletions, 64 (11%) 
duplications, and 143 (25%) point mutations. The most common point 
mutations were nonsense (47%), followed by frameshift (31%), splic -
ing (15%), and missense/amino acid deletions (7%). Access to com -
plete genetic testing was variable and ranged from 88% for patients 
from ON to 35% for patients from NS.
Conclusion: This is the first comprehensive report of dystrophin  muta -
tions in Canada. It highlights the need for complete genetic testing 
of patients with dystrophinopathy, and the necessity for collaboration 
among academic centers and neuromuscular disease registries to en -
sure that patients are receiving optimal care and are eligible for muta -
tion-specific therapies.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy7
P01.18  Influencing how genetics is taught in UK secondary 
schools: the Nowgen schools Genomics Programme
L. E. Holmes1,2, P. Finegold2, I. Starling1,2, K. Dack1,2, A. Hall3, J. Worthington2, 
J. Harris2, A. Read2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2, D. Donnai1,2;  
1Nowgen, A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
2Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Nuffield Foundation, London, United Kingdom.
Current research in human genomics has great potential for sparking 
interest amongst secondary school students, yet it is not prominent 
in UK school curricula. The Nowgen Schools Genomics Programme  
aims to redress that situation; narrowing the gap between genomics 
research and classroom genetics.
The genetics content of UK school curricula currently concentrates on 
‘single-gene’ genetics with few references to more recent approaches 
exploring the human genome. Funded by a three-year grant from The 
Wellcome Trust, the Nowgen Schools Genomics Programme  brings 
together leading scientists, clinicians, educationalists and bioethicists 
to contribute to a range of approaches designed to equip young people 
to assess the real potential of genomics, and to make informed deci -
sions about future healthcare. The programme will introduce genome-
wide association studies, pharmacogenetics and genetic medicine to 
teachers and their students, and will support them to:
- explore genetic and lifestyle contributions to disease;
- consider the methodological challenges contemporary large popula -
tion studies require;
- examine the social and ethical challenges to society;
- explore the potential impact of data arising from contemporary genet -
ics.
P01.19  DNA Day:a good starting point to disseminate genetic 
education in high school
B. Zanini1, M. Borriello2,3, V. Marini4, R. Ravazzolo1;  
1University of Genoa,Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2University of 
Naples,Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3Istituto Marco Polo, Genova, Italy, 4University 
of Genoa, Genova, Italy.
DNA Day-a special day-initiated in 2003 to commemorate the comple -
tion of the Human Genome Project in April of that year, and the discov -
ery of the DNA double helix fifty years earlier!
In 2008 The European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) joined the 
American Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) in making a Europe-
wide celebration of genetics and its promises and decided to expand a 
very successful initiative: the DNA Day Essay contest.
That contest is one of several ongoing initiatives to promote knowl -
edge and understanding of genetics in secondary schools.
In Italy, the Dna Day contest has been a fantastic tool and occasion to 
propose an advandced knowledge in genetics, increasing need of an 
accurate education at school.
The collaboration and support between teachers, the Italian Society 
of Human Genetics (SIGU) and the University of Genova has carried 
on inititives of lectures by geneticists in order to close high school stu -
dents to research topics, facilitate and stimulate a much more wide 
reflection on the essays proposed by the contest.
In 2008, in Genova 400 people (students and teachers) attended the 
conference at the Faculty of Medicine and in 2009, more than 250 peo -
ple were present at the theatre of Advanced Centre of Biotecnology.
This year,the SIGU has set up a more strict plan to promote a genetic 
education project:
- addressing a letter to the high school teachers
- publishing a banner on the national website
- having a national selection and awarding three italian students at the 
national meeting
P01.20  Feedback of individual genetic data to research 
participants: a qualified disclosure?
A. L. Bredenoord , J. J. M. van Delden;  
University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius Center, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Last years, a debate evolved regarding the question whether individual 
genetic research results should be disclosed to research participants 
in genetic/genomic research, and if so, which data, and by whom. With 
genetic research results we refer to a broad category of information, 
including validated and non-validated, highly and poorly predictive, 
and more or less probabilistic genetic data generated by a medical 
scientific study. On the one end of the spectrum, it is argued that full disclosure of individual genetic data to research participants is ethi -
cally imperative. On the other end of the spectrum, it is argued that no 
individual genetic research results should be disclosed whatsoever. 
An intermediate position is defended by those who opt for a ‘qualified 
disclosure’.
Although most commentators adopted a variant of this latter position, 
their underlying argumentation and the conditions for disclosure varies 
widely. Some for example argue that individual genetic data should 
only be disclosed when these data are of analytic validity and clini -
cal relevance. Others argue that the decisive factor concerns the re -
lationship between participant and researcher; for example, the more 
intense this relationship, the stronger the obligation to disclose would 
be.
Clarity on the appropriate standard of disclosure is important in view 
of the changing genetic landscape, such as the current genome wide 
association studies, the impending whole genome sequencing-studies 
and the upcoming commercial activities. In this paper, we present the 
results of our systematic search and explore whether and when indi -
vidual genetic data should be returned to research participants.
P01.21  construction of an ethics policy for a bioinformatics 
European project: GEN2PHEN
A. Cambon-Thomsen1, A. Pigeon1,2, E. Rial-Sebbag1, E. U. GEN2PHEN 
Consortium3;  
1Inserm, U558 & University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Centre de droit 
des affaires, Université Toulouse 1 Capitole, Toulouse, France, 3University of 
Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Genomic technologies including bioinformatics methods and creation 
of genomic databases have become increasingly important for the sci -
entific community but have increased faster than its possible framing 
by an appropriate legislation. However theses activities must be de -
veloped with respect to fundamental values such as dignity, privacy, 
autonomy.
The lack of a binding instrument regulating all aspects of these issues 
and the varied and disparate legal and ethical frameworks has resulted 
in confusion for professionals working in genomics to construct their 
own ethics policies. Compliance with the various international, Euro -
pean, and National ethical and legal instruments requires a more con -
sidered approach.
We analysed how a specific bioinformatic European project, GEN -
2PHEN, is dealing with this issue in the development of its ethics policy. 
To provide ethical oversight, analysis, and guidance for GEN2PHEN, 
we considered texts and existing guidelines reviews, an international 
consortium questionnaire survey of opinions, discussion in general as -
sembly, consultation with relevant EU and international projects and 
review of recent literature.
The main issues identified were requirements for entering data into 
the system, managing them over time in federated databases and 
conditions for their accessibility. A process for checking the computer 
tools produced for ethics compliance was elaborated. The policy takes 
into account the differences between various types of data, manda -
tory items of consent and modalities of their verification, clarification 
of responsibilities within and outside the project, data and database 
ownership issues and transparency of the process. It involves a project 
ethics oversight committee and specifies relations with local research 
ethics committees.
P01.22  Eurogene: a pan-european e-learning service in human 
genetics
M. Dutto1, Z. Zdrahal2, E. Sklavounou3, M. D. Teare4, F. Clerget-Darpoux5, G. 
Romeo1;  
1European Genetics Foundation, Bologna, Italy, 2The Open University 
(Knowledge Media Institute), Milton Keynes, United Kingdom, 3Systran, Paris, 
France, 4University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 5Université Paris-
Sud, Paris, France.
The primary objective of the Eurogene project is to develop the means 
for accessing, sharing and reusing high quality educational resources 
in human genetics with multilingual support. The Eurogene portal of -
fers access to learning resources produced by a network of profession -
als in the field represented by universities, hospitals and educational 
centres across Europe. The scope of Eurogene includes statistical, 
medical and molecular genetics and the content is targeted at people 
with different levels of previous knowledge ranging from the lay person Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
to the expert practitioner.
Working towards this goal Eurogene has created a genetic domain 
ontology and a hierarchy of terms that are first used to annotate and 
enrich the e-learning resources. This automatic annotation forms struc -
ture to support the suite of web based tools developed specifically for 
providing, finding and translating digital educational content in the field 
of genetics. Interactive machine translation tools allow approved us -
ers to refine, train and hence validate the genetic context multilingual 
dictionary.
The Eurogene portal exploits technology which makes it easy to navi -
gate and explore the available articles, images and videos. Educators 
can thus move toward “blended learning” in an interactive and natural 
way, while students are given the opportunity to finally become “actors” 
in the educational process.We will demonstrate the main features of 
the tools offered by the Portal. This will include viewing recent sample 
content, illustration of the annotation process and machine translation 
options, and construction of learning packages.
EUROGENE is a 36 month project supported by the EC’s e-Content 
Plus program.
P01.23  Detection of FMR1  cGG repeat expansions from 
genomic DNA and single cells - a direct triplet-primed PcR 
approach
C. Teo1, C. G. Lee2,3, S. S. Chong1,4;  
1Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department of Biochemistry, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore, 3Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Center, Singapore, 
Singapore, 4University Children’s Medical Institute and Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common cause of heritable men -
tal retardation. It is mostly caused by the hyperexpansion and hyper -
methylation of CGG repeat expansions in the 5’ untranslated region of 
FMR1 , leading to gene silencing. There are 4 allelic classes of FMR1 
CGG repeats: normal (5-44 repeats), gray zone (45-54 repeats), pre -
mutation (55-200 repeats), and full mutation (>200 repeats). Full muta -
tion alleles are associated with FXS, while unmethylated premutation 
alleles have been associated with premature ovarian failure (POF) in 
females and with late-onset fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syn -
drome (FXTAS) in males. Molecular diagnosis of FXS usually involves 
PCR across the CGG repeat to determine repeat length, supplement -
ed by Southern blot analysis for male samples with null amplification 
or female samples with a single allele size by PCR. We describe a 
highly specific direct triplet-primed PCR (dTP-PCR) approach to de -
tect FMR1  premutation and full mutation expansions. Unique capillary 
electropherogram patterns also enable determination of repeat lengths 
and structures of normal, gray zone and small premutation alleles in 
all males and some females. Detection sensitivity is at the single cell 
level, paving the way for direct detection of expanded FMR1  alleles in 
preimplantation embryos. For more rapid single-step screening, dTP-
PCR products can be immediately subjected to melting curve analysis 
in the presence of SYBR Green dye to yield distinct, clearly differenti -
ated melting peaks from normal versus expanded alleles, demonstrat -
ing the utility of this homogeneous assay as a rapid first-line screen for 
FXS, POF and FXTAS.
P01.24  Linking a genealogical database and a cancer 
Registry to generate comprehensive pedigrees for cancer risk 
assessment. 
V. Stefansdottir1, O. T. Johannsson1, H. Skirton2, L. Tryggvadottir3, H. Tulinius4, 
J. J. Jonsson1,5;  
1Landspitali, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United 
Kingdom, 3Icelandic Cancer Society, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4The Icelandic 
Genetics committee., Reykjavik, Iceland, 5The Department of Genetics and 
Molecular Biology, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Genetic cancer counselling is generally based the counselee’s pedi -
gree, i.e. information provided by the counselee and confirmed, when 
possible through hospital records and occasionally a cancer registry. 
Electronic genealogical databases allow quick construction of an ex -
tensive pedigree, encompassing individuals beyond the counselee’s 
knowledge. The Icelandic Genetics Committee Database (IGCD) 
holds accurate genealogical information based on official demographic 
records about individuals living in Iceland since 1850. The Icelandic Cancer Registry is a population-based databank with all individual 
cancer information recorded since 1955. A database-generated pedi -
gree (DGP) can be made by linking IGCD pedigrees to records in the 
Cancer Registry using personal identification numbers. This results 
in a very comprehensive cancer family history, potentially supporting 
more efficient assessment of the individual’s inherited cancer risk.
In Iceland, cancer genetic counselling based on DGP has been offered 
since 2007 and 310 counselees have used the service, the majority 
(97%) because of a breast cancer family history. A counselee’s pedi -
gree is constructed as well as a DGP (3-4 generations with 150-1600 
individuals on each side). The DGP is not revealed at the personal lev -
el to the counselee for privacy reasons. Risk assessment for cancer, 
including possible indication for molecular testing, is based on both the 
counselee’s pedigree and the DGP. We are not aware of this approach 
resulting in any problems or privacy concerns.
The DGP and the counselee’s pedigree need to be compared includ -
ing cost efficiency and predictive power. If advantages are demonstrat -
ed, other communities could address legal issues and generate their 
genealogical databases.
P01.25  Participation of nurse in genetic counseling; present 
status in Japan
S. Izumi1,2, H. Yokoyama3,2, M. Ishii3, M. Mizoguchi3,2, A. Kondo1,2, K. 
Takahashi1,2, Y. Onuki2,4;  
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University School of 
Medicine, Isehara, Japan, 2Dept. Clinical Genetics, Tokai University Hospital, 
Isehara, Japan, 3School of Health Sciences, Tokai University, Isehara, Japan, 
4Department of Neurology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
Objective: Since 2005, Tokai University had started a Master course of 
“genetic nursing” in School of Health Science, which is only one course 
in Japan. To improve this condition, we are continuously emphasizing 
several merits in participation of genetic nurses in genetic counseling 
clinics. In this study we tried to elucidate the present status of partici -
pation of nurse(s) in clinical genetic counseling in Japan, as well as the 
expected roles of nurse(s) from other medical professionals in genetic 
counseling team.
Method: Questionnaires were mailed on January 2009 to 129 facilities, 
which are registered as genetic counseling clinics in Japanese Society 
of Obstetrician and Gynecologist. We focus in the prenatal diagnosis, 
which is the most common subject in the a genetic counseling clinic,
Results: Answers were retrieved from medical doctor, nurse, and psy -
chologist, where the response rate was highest (36.2%) from doctors. 
Nurses are incorporated in the team on 37.0% of responded facilities, 
where their role is “guidance on the patient’s daily activity” before and 
after the amniocentesis. On the other hand, they give crucial informa -
tion about the procedure in fewer occasions. Medical doctors expect 
nurses in a future to collect the information for counseling, to make a 
precise pedigree, and to shape up the client’s will.
Conclusion: Comparing our previous research result, more nurses par -
ticipate in genetic counseling than double of those on 2000. However, 
the distribution imbalance between the facilities becomes more promi -
nent than the past.
P01.26  Developments in Genetic counselling: a European 
Perspective
H. Skirton1, M. Voelckel2,2;  
1Faculty of Health, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, 
Marseille, France.
The European Network of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors was formed 
in 2008 and now exists under the auspices of the Ad Hoc Genetic 
Nurse and Counsellor Accreditation Committee of the European So -
ciety of Human Genetics. Currently there are almost a hundred mem -
bers. There is wide variation in the profession across Europe, with 
many registered practitioners in some countries, and few or none in 
others. In the interests of patient safety, common minimum standards 
are required. The aims of the network are to ensure that professionals 
using the title ‘genetic counsellor’ are competent to practice. Through a 
series of workshops and consultation with the membership, guidance 
for the future of the profession has been agreed.
The role of the genetic counsellor includes: identifying the needs of 
the family, collecting and interpreting genetic information relevant to 
genetic counselling, making a genetic risk assessment and communi -
cating information about the risk and options available to the family. It Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
is envisaged that by 2020 the standard training and education for a ge -
netic counsellor will be the Master degree in genetic counselling. The 
content of these educational and training programmes must include: 
human genetics, medical genetics, counselling skills and clinical expe -
rience. Genetic counsellors will be expected to practice according to 
the Code of Professional Practice for genetic counsellors in Europe.
Further details will be presented and work is now required to consult 
widely with those from other professional disciplines to ensure that 
best practice in genetic counselling is adopted in Europe.
P01.27  Ethical Aspects of Genetic t esting in Russia
V. L. Izhevskaya , V. I. Ivanov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Studies of ethical problems concerning the application of genomic 
technologies in public health care in Russia commenced in the late 
1980s in connection with the works according to the Russian pro -
gramme „Human Genome“. These studies showed that the majority 
of Russian medical geneticists were inclined to be too directive, espe -
cially in cases of genetic counselling concerning prenatal detection of 
foetal pathology. A substantial part of the specialists (approximately 10 
- 20 %) were inclined to in some way or another exert pressure on the 
woman‘s procreation choices (i.e., trying to impose or convey a feeling 
of an incorrect nature of the actions being taken, to persuade a woman 
not to have children). Russian specialists turned out rather reluctant to 
reliably protect the patient‘s confidentiality. For example, a consider -
able part of geneticists in Russia (about 60 %) strongly believed that 
bank-stored DNA samples should be readily available to the blood 
relatives of the patient without prior consent of the latter.
Hence, the substantial part of Russian geneticists were inclined to both 
paternalistic decisions and directiveness. This was largely predeter -
mined by insufficient legal regulation of the genetic service‘s activity 
in Russia, the peculiarities of the system of organization of the genetic 
service, poor availability and accessibility of the facilities engaged in 
providing proper treatment of hereditary diseases, as well as medical 
and social rehabilitation.Based on the obtained findings, studying of 
ethical issues in medical genetics was included into the professional 
training programmes.
P01.28  Genetic Counselling in Forensic Medicine
A. Kondo , I. Hasegawa, Y. Onuki, Y. Nishijima, M. Ikeda, H. Yokoyama, M. 
Mizoguchi, S. Izumi;  
Tokai University, Isehara, Japan.
Background: Genetic counselling is becoming more general medical 
service these days. In our country, this situation is same as other coun -
tries and Genetic Counsellor and Clinical Geneticist are increasing re -
cently. However they are not enough for covering all patients still now. 
In fact there is no report of collaboration between Clinical Genetics and 
Forensic Medicine at present.
Aim: To develop good relationship with Forensic Medicine and provide 
fair genetic support after sudden death of family member because of 
genetic disease.
Methods: To elucidate the better situation of genetic counselling, we 
examine our previous two cases and estimate needs of genetic sup -
port from national and our University’s sudden death statistics.
Result: In our previous medical service system, it was difficult to make 
any contact with genetic staffs from the family members because fo -
rensic medicine is not a clinical department. However, at our University 
Hospital, we had 41(7.2%) sudden death cases related to genetic con -
dition out of 569 sudden death in total (2005-2008). Most cases were 
male between 20’s - 40’s and had genetic heart condition (hypertrophic 
cardiomegaly, long QT syndrome, familial hypercholesterolemia, Bur -
gada syndrome , etc), Marfan syndrome and Polycystic Kidney.
Conclusion: For the bereaved family, we could provide more efficient 
medical service not only physically but also mentally. It will make the 
family members to see doctors for regular check up and avoid another 
future sudden death. It is very important that the collaboration between 
Genetics and Forensic medicine.P01.29  MPAG - first steps of a competences-centred programme 
for genetic counsellors in Portugal
M. Paneque , J. Sequeiros;  
IBMC, ICBAS - Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Genetic counselling is an essential area in healthcare. Educational 
programmes for non-physicians exist since 1969, in the USA. In Eu -
rope, the first started in 1992, in the UK (Manchester and Cardiff). In 
the last 5 years, new master courses began in Europe (Bergen, Mar -
seille, Genoa, Barcelona, Groningen and Uppsala).
In 2009, we initiated a two-year full-time master programme (120 
ECTS). It is limited to 5-6 students (nurses, clinical psychologists), with 
some previous clinical experience. Its main objective is to train profes -
sional counsellors, to join multidisciplinary teams at medical genetic 
services and consultations.
A structured curriculum was based on the ESHG core-competences 
for genetic counsellors. The course consists mainly of small-group tu -
torials and has a large practical component. Educational areas are (1) 
principles and practice of genetic counselling; (2) human and medical 
genetics; (3) communication skills, clinical psychology, mental health, 
and psychosocial genetics; (4) public health, community genetics, or -
ganization of services, health policy and health economy; (5) quanti -
tative and qualitative methods and research methodologies; and (6) 
bioethics and medical ethics. Nuclear disciplines in these areas are re -
quired, as are clinical rotations (prenatal diagnosis, paediatrics, neuro -
logical disorders, cancer genetics, clinical psychology); a large range 
of optional disciplines and clinical rotations are also offered as part of 
the first curricular year. The second year is fully in training at a medical 
genetics unit, and includes a research seminar.
We expect this to harmonize with other European programmes and 
help moving toward recognition of the profession of genetic counsel -
lors in Portugal and in Europe.
P01.30  Genetic counsellors and predictive medicine : the 
profession and her evolution in France
C. Cordier1,2, M. Voelckel3,2;  
1Department of Cytogenetic, Mulhouse, France, 2French Association of Genetic 
Counsellors, Marseille, France, 3Department of medical genetic, Marseille, 
France.
The professional master of Human Pathology, „Genetic Counsellor 
and Predictive Medicine“ welcomed the first students of this special -
ity in France in the academic year 2004-2005. Today, 72 graduates 
have been trained to practise this new profession of health, which is 
governed by a law, in different genetics services throughout France 
and abroad.
Using data from the French Association of Genetic Counsellors, we 
present this phase in the evolution of the dynamic and multidisciplinary 
profession of genetic counselling. This course has a vital role in the 
recruitment and training of these practitioners.
The diversity of skills acquired through the course include, for ex -
amples, to establish relationship and to clarify patient‘s concerns and 
expectations, to make appropriate and accurate genetic risk assess -
ment, to work with a multidisciplinary health team, to integrate ethical 
and legal aspects, to use information systems, and to contribute to the 
research and education.
Genetic counsellors have been integrated into multidisciplinary centers 
for prenatal diagnosis and are involved in consultations and the predic -
tive diagnosis of assisted reproduction. Graduates are also working in 
different services like medical genetics and oncology, cardiology and 
neurology.
We also assist in the efforts made by the french genetic counsellors 
to integrate national professionals in genetics into the FFGH (French 
Federation of Human Genetics) and the Group of Genetics and Can -
cer. French genetic counsellors are also participating with the ESHG 
and the European Network of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors to write 
the professional and educational standards for genetic counsellors in 
Europe.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy0
P01.31  Reporting on genetic disorders and syndromes in 
cyprus
V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, E. S. Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, T. Delikurt1;  
1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, 
Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Service, Makarios Medical Center, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Cyprus is a small island, of 867,600 inhabitants, in the eastern Medi -
terranean. First human activity in 10,000 BC was followed by a Greek 
settlement (1400BC-1050 BC) and many invaders added to the ge -
netic pool.
This study reports on the diversity of diagnosis established for 3400 
individuals in the years 1995-2009. A registry reports on medical and 
demographic data. The population, initially mainly Greek-Cypriots, 
few Turkish Cypriots, Maronites, and Armenians, gradually became 
of mixed descent or more multiethnic. Referrals included all common 
indications.
1007 patients were diagnosed. Monogenic disorders represented the 
largest category while chromosomal aberrations were less frequent. 
Neurofibromatosis type 1 and Trisomy 21 were the commonest ac -
cordingly. 96 patients were reported with multifactorial congenital 
anomalies and exposures accounted for 24 patients. 986 individuals 
were referred for genetic counseling for various indications (except 
Thalassemia which is managed by the National Thalassemia center). 
Presymptomatic genetic counseling and testing was offered to 290 in -
dividuals. Several rare and very rare syndromes were recognized.
Discussion: Founders’ effect is evident in several communities and 
geographical areas. Congenital anomalies are under-represented 
probably due to the inconsistency in reporting and a high uptake of 
prenatal surveillance leading several affected pregnancies to termina -
tion. Genetic counselling initially was not appreciated but is now in -
creasingly demanded.
In conclusion, we are reporting on the evolution of clinical genetics 
services and the epidemiology of genetic disorders in Cyprus in the 
years 1995-2009.
P01.32  the genetic testing offer in Europe: the need for cross-
border testing
M. Jovanovic1, E. Dequeker2, L. Desmet2, M. Morris2, J. Cassiman2, S. Aymé1;  
1Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium.
Genetic tests are now offered internationally, through both public and 
private sector genetic testing services. Physicians prescribing these 
tests and biologists receiving the samples need to know which tests 
are available, where they are performed and whether identified labo -
ratories meet quality standards. To fulfill this need, www.orpha.net  was 
launched thirteen years ago to set up a database of clinical labora -
tories in the field of rare diseases. Data was collected in 1 country in 
1997, 15 in 2003, 26 in 2006 and 38 in 2010, with resources from the 
EC DG Public Health. In collaboration with the EuroGentest Network 
of Excellence, information on quality management has been added to 
the Orphanet database over the past four years. Information on ge -
netic testing in Orphanet can be searched by disease name or gene 
(symbol or name in English) as well as by laboratory or professional. 
The information provided on laboratories includes data on quality man -
agement. Currently, 956 laboratories offering tests for 1,559 genes are 
registered. The test offer differs greatly from one large country to an -
other: Germany (1,141 genes), France (874 genes), Italy (625 genes), 
Spain (582 genes), UK (414 genes). Medium and small-sized coun -
tries’ test offer ranges from 1 to 233 genes. This situation explains the 
large cross-border flow of specimens, highlighting the need to provide 
access to services in other countries when necessary, especially for 
very rare diseases. According to available data, only testing for Cystic 
fibrosis is provided by every country. The distribution of this test offer 
will be presented.
P01.33  Achieving change in clinical management: results from a 
genetics education intervention
M. Bishop1, S. Burke2, P. Farndon1;  
1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
While there is a continual emphasis on the need to educate non-genet -
ic specialists in genetics, does education actually make any difference 
to the clinical management of patients? To answer this question, the 
UK National Genetics Education and Development Centre developed a half-day workshop for general practitioner (GP) trainers involved in 
supporting the genetic component of the national curriculum for gen -
eral practice training. Instead of delivering the content as a series of 
didactic lectures, the workshops were designed so that content was 
provided using interactive case studies. This allowed GPs to draw on 
their own clinical experience, and highlighted where genetics was rel -
evant in primary care practice. Sessions were evaluated using a multi-
staged approach, including evaluation forms immediately after the 
workshop (n=51), and follow-up questionnaires (n=17) and interviews 
(n=4) several months afterwards. Findings showed that the structure 
and delivery of the workshop served as a model for good teaching 
practice, with participants using similar interactive case studies in their 
own teaching sessions. In addition, participants reported how using 
the clinical scenarios in the workshops allowed reflection on their own 
practice, which has resulted in GPs changing their clinical manage -
ment. All GPs trainers (n=17) who returned the follow-up questionnaire 
reporting changes in their clinical practice such as: changes to referral 
patterns; use of family history within consultations and improved com -
munication with patients about genetic issues. The National Genetics 
Education and Development Centre is now offering this course to GP 
trainers throughout the UK.
P01.34  Large normal („intermediate“) [27-35 cAGs] and reduced penetrance [36-39 cAGs] alelles are not a rare event in 
Huntington disease (HD)
J. Sequeiros1,2, E. Ramos1, J. Cerqueira1, M. Costa1, A. Sousa1,2, J. Pinto-
Basto1,2, I. Alonso1;  
1IBMC, Univ. Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Portugal.
Four classes of alleles exist in HD, according to (CAG)n size; never -
theless, only two outcomes (‘carrier’ or ‘non-carrier’) are usually dis -
cussed in genetic counselling, as the possible results of presymptom -
atic testing (PST). Though large normal alleles may produce ‘de novo’ 
expansions, little is known about their prevalence and impact in daily 
practice.
We estimated the frequency of large normal (class 2) and reduced 
penetrance (class 3) alleles, and the frequency of genotypes carrying 
them, in (1) our diagnostic laboratory (1,214 samples, 350 families), 
(2) our genetic counselling clinic (146 testees), and (3) our general 
population (2,000 control chromosomes).
Large normal alleles were 6% of population control alleles, 7% of con -
sultands for PST, and 7% of all diagnostic samples (they represented 
5% of all normal HD alleles at the laboratory). Reduced-penetrance 
alleles were found in only one control chromosome (0.1% individuals), 
but in 5% of PST, and >2% of all lab samples (they were 4.3% of all 
expansions found, and >9% in PST).
Evidence thus showed that large normal alleles are relatively frequent 
in the general population, while reduced penetrance alleles are also 
not rare at the lab or the clinic. Together, these two classes were pres -
ent in >10% of all consultands for PST.
The four existing classes of alleles must be addressed in pre-test 
counselling. If not aware of all possible test outcomes, consultands 
may become very distressed when learning that their results fall within 
a grey-zone, rather than providing a definite prognosis for themselves 
and/or their children (<90% cases).
P01.35  clinical coding of Rare and Genetic Diseases
M. Milicic Brandt , M. Cornell, A. Devereau;  
National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom.
NGRL is participating in a clinical coding project that includes map -
ping the Orphanet (www.orpha.net) rare disease catalogue to three 
established medical terminologies, including SNOMED CT, in order to 
improve the representation and traceability of rare diseases in health 
records and systems. Orphanet medical terminology contains data on 
approximately 6,000 rare (largely genetic) diseases, relating clinical 
signs and genes to diseases, including epidemiological data, as well 
as classification of rare diseases. The Orphanet group are revising 
both their classification of rare diseases and the ICD-10 classification 
of rare diseases as part of this project and the development of ICD-
11.
In order to enforce the consistency of Orphanet data we developed 
a logical (OWL) model and used automated reasoning to detect er -
rors. For example, we identified instances where epidemiological con -
straints were inconsistent between a disease and its sub-categories, Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy1
implying either errors in classification or in the epidemiological data. 
Ensuring that the classification of diseases is correct is of great impor -
tance for producing valid mappings between different terminologies 
and in ensuring the utility of the terminologies.
The mapping process included several steps. The first, lexical map -
ping, based on syntactic comparison of disease names, provided us 
with a set of exact and partial matches. The second step included the 
quality control of these mappings by clinical experts, and the last step 
used structural data, such as classifications of diseases, to provide 
additional partial mappings. Our final goal is to revise SNOMED CT’s 
data on rare diseases by using mappings from Orphanet to this termi -
nology.
P01.36  From newborn screening to primary prevention of 
hemoglobinopathies
J. O. Kaufmann1, I. Krapels2, B. Van Brussel1, R. C. Zekveld-Vroon3, J. C. 
Oosterwijk4, F. van Erp5, P. J. G. Zwijnenburg6, P. C. Giordano1;  
1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 
3Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5University Medical Center St Radboud, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6VuMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Newborn screening for sickle cell disease (SCD) started in the Neth -
erlands upon approval of the national health council. This was after 
growing numbers of patients were born in the Netherlands, due to in -
creased immigration from endemic regions, their endogamous partner 
choice, and their relative high number of consanguine marriages. The 
first year of screening revealed a hemoglobinopathy in 64 children 
(0.35‰) 41 of which had SCD and 806 (4.2 ‰) was a HbS carrier.
The detection of carriers of sickle cell offers parents the chance to pre -
vent a possibly affected child in the next pregnancy. After indentifying 
a carrier the parents ought to be offered diagnostics and when both 
are carriers the couple at risk should be referred to a genetic center. 
Therefore, we monitored the hemoglobinopathy intakes at the genetic 
centers since the start of the newborn screening.
We asked all 8 clinical genetic centers in the Netherlands for their HbP 
counseling’s and gave them a short questionnaire per case asking: 
reason for referral, ethnic background, diagnosis and plans with re -
gards to family planning. We got cooperation of 7 centers that provided 
us with their anonymized data. Preliminary results show incidental re -
ferrals after newborn screening. Reasons for not seeing these families 
in the genetic centers may vary and remains unknown. One of the 
reasons maybe the pediatricians treating the affected children counsel 
these families themselves, but in a worse case scenario parents get 
no counseling and may be confronted with another ill child, without this 
being an informed choice.
P01.37  clinical geneticists tomorrow: Are quantity & diversity of 
information an opportunity or a trap?
S. Julia1,2, A. Soulier1, A. Cambon-Thomsen1;  
1UMR 558 Inserm, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 2Service de 
Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
Clinical geneticists have to interpret genetic data coming from the lab -
oratory and to position themselves in the “information society”. Their 
interpretative task tightly depends on 1. the nature of data provided 
by genetic testing technologies and 2. the knowledge of the patient. 
Patients can indeed access information and their own understanding 
of genetics is a relevant parameter in the patient/clinician communica -
tion. Through the development of new technologies - both in the labo -
ratory and in the society - clinical geneticists will therefore have to face 
new kinds and new sources of information.
Rapid developments of high throughput technology (HTT) let expect 
that new genetic testing technologies will be implemented soon in 
clinical laboratories. Sequencing genes generates quantitatively abun -
dance of data and qualitatively complex and heterogeneous informa -
tion with different levels of clinical relevance. As data interpretation 
becomes tougher and unexpected health related information are more 
common, emerging technologies will obviously challenge medical 
practices.
At the same time as clinicians deal with growing uncertainty, new 
technologies of communication provide diverse sources of informa -
tion to patients. Networks strengthen patients’ communities, websites 
make genetic testing available directly to consumers and information 
flows literally on line. Diversity of information challenges the clinician’s speech: he is not the unique information provider and his patient has 
his own opinion about genetic information.
We therefore aim to discuss the potential impact of this evolution on 
patient/clinician relation and its incidence about clinical practice.
P01.38  The study of polymorphic variants in the serotonin 
receptor gene HtR2A have professional athletes.
A. Timkova , O. Gumerova, V. Gorbunova;  
Bashcir state pedagogical univercity from name it M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Important indicators of the success of sporting activity is a resistance to 
psychological stress, the ability to receive and processing of informa -
tion, largely determined by the work of the neurotransmitter systems. 
One of the base genes neuromediator serotoninergic system is the 
serotonin receptor gene HTR2A localized on 13.q -14 - q 21 chromo -
some. The analysis of frequency distribution of alleles and genotypes 
of the serotonin receptor in the group of sportsmans. The analysis of 
the frequency distribution of alleles and genotypes of the serotonin 
receptor in the group of sportsmen. The analiz polymorphism A1438 
in the gene HTR2A conducted in 250 unrelated individuals by PCR 
with subsequent processing amplifikons appropriate restriction endo -
nuclease. Of these, 150 people who are not involved in sports, and 
100 human professional athletes. Found a significant increase in the 
frequency of allele G (P = 0.01) and genotype GG (P = 0.005) in the 
group of athletes on the background of reducing the frequency of allele 
A (P = 0.002) and AA genotype (P = 0.005) in the comparison group.Al -
lele G polymorphic locus HTR2A in gene A1438G have may a positive 
potential for sports activities.This work was partially funded grant from 
the Ministry of Education of Russia „Thematic Plan for 2008-2010“.
P01.39  Psychological well being and quality of life in 
presymptomatic Huntington‘s Disease gene carriers.
S. Serpentini1, L. Dal Sasso1, P. Castellan1, E. Pasquin1, M. Balestrieri2, G. 
Damante1, I. R. Lonigro1,3;  
1Istituto di Genetica - A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 2Clinica Psichiatrica - A.O.U., Udine, 
Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche - Università, Udine, 
Italy.
Purpose: The aim of the study is to describe some preliminary data 
about psychological well being and quality of life in presymthomatic 
Huntington’s Disease (HD) gene carriers after 6-12 months from DNA 
testing. The study is part of a larger, long-term research and has only a 
descriptive purpose because of the small number of the sample.
Methods: From May to December 2009, at the Institute of Genetics of 
Hospital/University “S. Maria della Misericordia” of Udine (Italy), we 
evaluated 10 presymthomatic subjects resulted carriers of HD gene. 
The instruments used are: 1) a semi-structured interview; 2) the Psy -
chological General Well-being Index (PWBGI); 3) the Short Form 36 
Health Survey Questionnaire (SF-36).
Results: Until now we assessed 10 patients (M:4, F: 6; mean age: 
50,20, range age:28-75). The means and standard deviations of the 
PWBGI scales are: Anxiety 15,60 (4,90), Depression 10,80 (2,57), 
Well-being 10,40 (3,56), Self control 9,70 (3,53), Global health 9,60 
(4,55), Vitality 10,20 (4,18). The means and standard deviations of the 
SF-36 scales are: Physical functioning 70 (30,83), Role-Physical 47,5 
(50,62), Bodily pain 78,6 (30,13), General health 53,22 (31,66), Vitality 
51,11 (25,34), Social functioning 72,50 (28,75), Role-emotional 60,00 
(51,64), Mental health 62,22 (18,98). Our mean scores found to be 
lower than normative scores.
Conclusions: Our preliminary descriptive results indicate a critical con -
dition in the psychological well being and the quality of life of the pre -
sympotamic HD gene carriers and suggest the importance of a specific 
psychological intervention. Therefore, we consider necessary to con -
tinue this study with a larger sample.
P01.40  An analysis of the impact of illness representation in 
predicting distress in breast cancer patients; implications for 
genetic counselling
R. Moldovan ;  
Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
The role played by psychological, social and cultural factors in health 
and illness related behavioral and emotional responses is no longer 
breaking news. Individual differences such as various cognitions have 
been shown to contribute in variability in distress when confronted with Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy2
stressful events or certain illnesses. Still, there is considerable lack of 
empirical data concerning the impact that illness representation has in 
predicting distress for patients diagnosed with breast cancer. The pur -
pose of this mixed methods study was to investigate the interrelations 
between illness representation and distress levels in breast cancer 
patients. The illness representation of 30 breast cancer patients was 
evaluated with semi-structured interviews; distressed was assessed 
using the Beck Depression Inventory, State Trait Anxiety Inventory 
and the Profile of Mood States. Results revealed no significant differ -
ences between levels of distress for different representations of illness 
(p>0.05). Implications for genetic counselling are discussed.
P01.41  Genetic causes of intellectual disability
G. Cozaru , C. Papari;  
“Andrei Şaguna” University, Constanta, Romania.
This paper reviews several genetic syndromes that are associated with 
intellectual disability (ID). ID is a condition characterized by significant -
ly sub-average intellectual functioning (often expressed as I.Q. < 70 to 
75) combined with limitations of > 2 of the following: communication, 
self-direction, social skills, self-care, use of community resources, and 
maintenance of personal safety. Between 1 % and 3 % of a population 
have an intellectual disability. Management consists of education, fam -
ily counseling, and social support.
We want to present 5 cases: Cri du chat syndrome, Down syndrome, 
Turner syndrome, Coffin-Lowry syndrome and Sotos syndrome. All 
this cases have in common: delayed intellectual development, imma -
ture behavior, limited self-care skills, but genetic causes are different.
All children with an intellectual disability (mental retardation) or global 
developmental delay should have a comprehensive evaluation to es -
tablish the etiology of the disability.
Family support and counseling are crucial. As soon as ID is confirmed 
or strongly suspected, the parents should be informed and given am -
ple time to discuss causes, effects, prognosis, genetic recurrence risk, 
education and training of the child, and the importance of balancing 
known prognostic risks against negative self-fulfilling prophecies in 
which diminished expectations result in poor functional outcomes later 
in life.
A diagnosis also avoids unnecessary testing and can lead to oppor -
tunities for improved health and functional outcomes. Finally, early 
comprehensive prenatal care and preventive measures prior to and 
during pregnancy increase a woman‘s chances of preventing intellec -
tual disability.
P01.42**  Public interest in depression-risk genotyping in a large 
national sample.
A. Wilde1,2, B. Meiser3, P. B. Mitchell1,2,4, D. Hadzi-Pavlovic1,2, P. R. Schofield5,4,6;  
1School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 
2Black Dog Institute, Sydney, Australia, 3Prince of Wales Clinical School, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 4Brain Sciences 
UNSW, Sydney, Australia, 5Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6School of Medical Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, Australia.
Introduction: Despite international concern about unregulated predic -
tive genetic testing, there is surprisingly little data on both the deter -
minants of community interest in such testing and its psychosocial 
impacts.
Methods: A large population-based public survey with community 
dwelling adults (N=1046) ascertained through random digit dialling. At -
titudes were assessed via structured interviews.
Results: The study found strong interest in predictive genetic testing for 
a reported susceptibility to major depression. Once perceived benefits 
and disadvantages of such testing had been considered, there was sig -
nificantly greater interest in seeking such a test through a health care 
provider (62%) compared to direct-to-consumer (40%) (p<0.001). Per -
sonal history of mental illness (OR= 2.53, p<0.001); self-estimation of 
being at higher than average risk for depression (OR = 1.84, p<0.001); 
belief that evidence of genetic component for a mental illness would 
increase rather than decrease stigma (OR=1.51, p<0.001); sexual 
abuse as a casual attribution for depression (OR = 1.24, p <0.001) 
and endorsement of perceived benefits of genetic testing (OR=3.18, 
p<0.001) significantly predicted interest in having such a test.
Conclusions: Despite finding attitudes that genetic links to mental ill -
ness would increase rather than decrease stigma, we found strong community acceptance of depression-risk genotyping, even though 
a predisposition to depression may only manifest upon exposure to 
stressful life events. Our results suggest there will be a strong demand 
for predictive genetic testing for complex multifactorial disorders.
P01.43  Genetic counselling and testing in inherited monogenic 
cardiac disorders : interviews with patients and their families
S. Fokstuen1, D. Kumar2, J. L. Blouin1, A. Clarke2;  
1Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom.
Experience with genetic counselling and testing for monogenic cardiac 
disorders is limited. What has been learned from dealing with other 
conditions like Huntington’s disease or familial cancer disorders may 
be applicable in these families too but the context of inherited cardiac 
conditions present very particular problems, especially sudden cardiac 
death in young adults, restrictions placed on exercise and uncertainty 
regarding the prognosis. In addition to the advantages and disadvan -
tages of diagnostic testing from a clinical perspective, there are issues 
of privacy or disclosure and coping within the family with the risk of 
transmission and the possible psychological consequences. One is -
sue that requires particular attention is how families experience and 
cope with being told that several of them may die at any moment. 
Problems with the transmission of such information take different forms 
depending upon whether the information is to be passed “vertically” to 
a child or “horizontally” to a sibling or other relative and also depending 
upon the availability of preventive and/or therapeutic strategies. These 
issues were discussed in a small number of interviews with patients 
and/or their families, who have experienced cardiac death due to an 
inherited cardiomyopathy in a young adult first degree relative. We 
present their comments about genetic counselling and genetic test -
ing. It clearly emerges that genetic counselling is a key component in 
the overall management of families affected with inherited monogenic 
cardiac disorders and that more research in the personal experience 
of these families is necessary to improve medical management and 
support.
P01.44  Genetic counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies
N. Marziliano , P. Merlini, M. Frigerio, G. Masciocco, S. Veronese, F. Orsini, A. 
Colosimo, C. Lauricella, M. Gambacorta, F. Mauri;  
Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy.
The recent and major breakthrough in the molecular genetics of Car -
diomyopathies has created a new understanding of these diseases, 
and also new expectations regarding the applications in clinical prac -
tice. A new task for Cardiologists and geneticists in the cardiovascu -
lar settings is therefore to integrate this new knowledge in order to 
improve the management of the patients and their families. Beyond 
the traditional goal of genetic counselling, defined as “a communica -
tion process which deals with the human and psychological problems 
associated with the occurrence or the risk of occurrence of a genetic 
disorder in a family”, the main goals are (i) to inform the patients and 
family about the genetic aspects of the disease, including the risk of 
transmitting the disease within the family; (ii) organise appropriate 
cardiac screening and follow-up of the relatives; (iii) discuss genetic 
testing, which may improve the medical management in various situ -
ations.
By showing a clinical and diagnostic work-up of a family with a com -
pound heterozigosity in the MYBPC3 gene, these objectives are 
achieved taken into account the specific issues related to a genetic dis -
ease, such as the psychological, social, professional, ethical and legal 
implications. Genetic counselling and genetic testing should therefore 
be performed by trained health care providers and usually through a 
close collaboration between different and complimentary specialties.
P01.45  the neonatal screening programme in Leningrad 
province: 2009
I. A. Ivanov1, M. O. Mkheidze2,1, E. S. Davidova1, I. F. Mamontova1, I. M. 
Andreeva1, S. E. Khalchitsky1;  
1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical 
Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Genetic neonatal screening is an important public health and clinical 
activity. In Leningrad province the neonatal screening programme was 
expanded from 2 to 5 disorders for which screening met the Wilson 
and Jungner criteria, especially regarding treatability. In 2009 Labora -Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
tory of molecular genetics and cytogenetics (LMGC) as a unit of the 
District Children Hospital realized neonatal screening for phenylketon -
uria (PKU), galactosemia (Gal), congenital hypothyroidism (CH), con -
genital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), cystic fibrosis (CF). Guthrie blanks 
spotted with newborn’s blood (12800 infants) were analyzed with au -
tomatic fluorescent methods and fluoroimmunoassay. The “PKU-neo -
screen” reagents (ZAO “Immunoscreen” Moscow, Russia) were used 
in PKU screening. Screening for Gal was realized with Neonatal Total 
Galactose kit (PerkinElmer.Inc). The Delfia® Neonatal hTSH assay 
was used in CH screening. A risk group for CAH was formed accord -
ing to the data of the Delfia® Neonatal 17-α-OH-progesterone kit. CF 
screening was based on the Delfia® Neonatal IRT assay. Two infants 
had constantly high levels of Phe and were found to be PKU infants. 
30 babies were found to be a risk group of CH. 17 infants formed a 
risk group of CAH. Nobody was shown to be included in risk lists of 
Gal and CF. Clinical geneticists of LMGC confirm hereditary disorders, 
carry out long-term outpatient care, dietary management and genetic 
counselling
P01.46  Newborn hearing screening
E. Severin1, A. Toma2, C. Albu1, D. Albu1, C. Sarafoleanu1, C. Dragomir3, A. 
Stan3, D. T. Stefanescu3, L. Savu3;  
1“Carol Davila“ Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Panait Sirbu“ Hospital, 
Bucharest, Romania, 3Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Romania.
Background: newborn hearing screening has been instituted in many 
countries since the identification of congenital hearing loss in the neo -
nate period, followed by intervention within the first few months, is criti -
cal for limited communication, low school achievements and life-long 
dependency. In the absence of newborn screening, the hearing loss 
might not be noticed by parents until the child begins to have difficul -
ties at speaking and learning at a later age. Approximately 90% of 
children with deafness are born to hearing parents. Most cases with 
non-syndromic deafness inherited the disorder in an autosomal reces -
sive manner. 
Aims of the study: identification of congenital hearing loss in children 
before three months of age; detection of risk factors known to be as -
sociated with congenital hearing loss. 
Methods and Subjects: Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) and auditory 
brainstem response (ABR) were performed for 4303 newborns. Physi -
cal examinations and family history were used to get information about 
hereditary / syndromic hearing loss. 
Results: 23 newborns did not pass the OAEs and ABR. All of them 
were referred to audiologic evaluation to confirm if the hearing loss is 
present. Physical examination revealed no other findings associated 
with a syndrome. Four newborns with hearing parents were found to 
have sensorineural hearing loss. They were referred to genetic coun -
seling and testing for the etiologic diagnosis.
Conclusion: screening newborns for hearing loss is highly accurate 
and leads to earlier identification and treatment of infants with hear -
ing loss. All newborns identified with congenital hearing loss require a 
comprehensive genetic evaluation.
P01.47  Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis in saudi Arabia: 
Parents Experience and Attitudes
A. Al Suliaman ;  
Department of Genetics, Research Centre, King Faisal Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Background preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been pro -
posed as a valuable alternative to prenatal diagnosis (PND) to select 
genetically ‘normal’ human embryos and transfer them to the uterus of 
a woman. This study evaluates a range of social and moral concerns 
of Saudi couples with and without experience of the IVF procedure 
might have about the various procedures available.
Methods A total of 184 subjects attending the King Faisal Special -
ist Hospital and Research Centre in Riyadh were interviewed using 
a semi-structured questionnaire. 87 of the subjects have complete at 
least one cycle of the in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedure.
Results Forty-nine (100%) of the oncology group and forty-three (90%) 
of the ENT group were personally accept PGD technology. All the on -
cology and ENT group who would personally consider PGD were will -
ing for others to be offered the procedure. Specific concerns about 
PGD related to the IVF procedure, waiting for the pregnancy results 
and egg collection were the most commonly mentioned concerns. All the groups of the subjects (100%) agreed that the destruction of an 
embryo prior to implantation less wrong than destruction of the fetus 
inside the uterus in comparison to only 30% of the PGD group. Views 
were more mixed for the other (IVF) procedure.
Conclusion The outcomes of this study demonstrate that PGD might 
be considered as a valid alternative to prenatal diagnosis. However, 
couples referred for PGD must be selected and counselled appropri -
ately, considering the complexity of the treatment and the relatively low 
take-home baby rate.
P01.48  The structure of the public attitude toward the genome 
research by the latent class analysis in Japan
Z. Yamagata1, T. Maeda2, K. Muto3, A. Nagai1, A. Tamakoshi4, I. Ishiyama5;  
1Department of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, 
Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan, 2The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, 
Japan, 3The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, tokyo, 
Japan, 4Aichi Medical University, Aichi, Japan, 5Teikyo-Gakuen Junior College, 
Yamanashi, Japan.
The purpose of this study was to clarify the structure of the public at -
titude toward the genome research by the latent class analysis. The 
nationalwide surveys about the attitude toward the genome research 
were conducted in 2005 and 2009 in Japan. The participants were 
comprised of 4,000 people (age, 20-69) in 2005 and in 2009, selected 
from the Japanese general population by using the two-step stratified 
random sampling method. Five clusters were assumed as an explana -
tion model of six variables related to the knowledge of genome and 
attitudes toward genomic research promotion about three themes; 
basic genome research, genome research related to agriculture and 
medicine at the survey in 2005. They were able to be named “Group 
of aggressive promotion” (40.8%), “Group of passive support” (20.2%), 
“Group not making judgment” (18.5), “Group making prudent judg -
ment” (16.5%), and “Group not interested in genome”. The results in 
2009 were almost the same as that in 2005. It is possible to forecast 
to which cluster to belong according to respondent‘s attribute, and we 
can forecast the reaction to other questions by using a cluster oppo -
sitely. For examples, “Group of aggressive promotion” is the layer of a 
high academic background, and is positive to donate their blood for the 
genome research, “Group making prudent judgment” is high academic 
background persons as same as “Group of aggressive promotion”, 
and is interesting in the science and technology, but is negative to the 
blood donation for the research.
P01.49  cross-disease support group
R. Rupps1,2, C. J. Condin3, I. Jordan2, C. du Souich1,2, C. F. Boerkoel1,2, W. H. 
McKellin3,2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada, 2Rare Disease Foundation, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department 
of Anthropology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Background:  Rare diseases are individually uncommon (affecting few -
er than 1 in 2000) but collectively affect approximately 1 in 10. Parents 
of children with very rare and undiagnosed diseases often feel hope -
less and alone.
Hypothesis:  Support addressing the needs and isolation of individu -
als and families with very rare and undiagnosed diseases is possible 
within a diverse community.
Results:  To test this hypothesis, we profiled a series of individuals and 
families with very rare and undiagnosed diseases. Shared features 
that we identified included sense of isolation, need for story-sharing 
and desire for more information. Distinguishing features that we identi -
fied included parents experiencing greater anxiety with new compared 
to more established diagnoses and having an undiagnosed compared 
to a known condition. The parents identified common themes of ba -
sic medical, educational, social and advocacy needs. Based on these 
commonalities, we formed a trial support group composed of 19 fami -
lies with 18 diagnoses. Over the course of 2 years, our observations 
are that it is possible to provide cross-disease support on issues rel -
evant to a variety of disorders.
Conclusion : Cross-disease support groups are very effective for ad -
dressing the shared medical, educational, social, advocacy, and re -
search needs of the community with very rare and undiagnosed dis -
eases. Our model allows universal establishment of such local support 
groupsGenetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
P01.50  WHO International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 
Revision Process: state of Art for genetic diseases
S. Aymé , B. Bellet, A. Rath;  
Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France.
WHO has established various Topic Advisory Groups to serve as plan -
ning and coordinating advisory bodies in the update and revision pro -
cess for specific areas of the ICD. A TAG for rare diseases (including 
all genetic diseases) was established in April 2007 as rare diseases 
should now be traceable in mortality and morbidity information sys -
tems. The production of the basic information needed to establish an 
Alpha draft of the classification of rare diseases has been assigned to 
Orphanet. The Orphanet database includes over 6,000 distinct phe -
notypes which are classified according to published classifications. 
These classification systems are mainly based on scientific grounds 
(aetiology and mechanism). Orphanet has developed a complemen -
tary, strictly clinical in-house classification to meet clinicians’ needs. 
Available on Orphanet’s website, this classification serves to elaborate 
an ICD revision proposal. The revised chapters currently circulating 
among experts for review are Haematology, Endocrinology, Nutrition, 
Metabolism and Immunology, Neurology and Malformation. Revised 
chapters follow a primarily clinical approach, only secondarily an ae -
tiological one up to the gene level. When several names are possible 
for a disease, descriptive names formed in accordance with a clinical 
approach are preferred. Every entity is assigned a unique identifying 
number. Rare diseases affecting several body systems are included in 
every relevant chapter, as ICD11 will be polyaxial: a main code is also 
selected for linearisation purposes, according to the severest involve -
ment and/or the specialist most likely to manage the disease. In some 
cases, the choice is open for debate. Input from the Rare Disease 
Community is expected.
P01.51  An overview of rare diseases research in Europe based 
on data from the Orphanet database.
N. Martin , N. Doulet, V. Hivert, S. Aymé;  
Orphanet - INSERM SC11, Paris, France.
Orphanet compiles 6500 research projects. This information been 
analysed to identify areas needing collaborative research projects and 
to target future calls for proposals. The analysis of the distribution of 
number of diseases by number of treatments in development shows 
that most RD have no more than 3 products in development, whereas 
53 RD have over three such products. Similar analysis results were 
obtained for clinical trials, marketed drugs, patient registries and pre -
clinical/epidemiological/basic research. Some of the diseases over-
represented upstream in the process of R&D (with a treatment on the 
market or drugs in development) are well represented regarding ongo -
ing research (Cystic fibrosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, some 
rare cancers). Diseases with a higher prevalence are anticipated to 
have more treatments in development: this assumption is not backed 
up by our data analysis. The most developed areas where the ones 
for which large European networks and consortium have been estab -
lished as it is the only way to achieve the critical mass necessary in 
terms of resources and expertise. However the sustainability of the 
structures which have been created during the development of these 
collaborations, such as patient registries, biobanks, and technological 
platforms, is very difficult to ensure to date. The EC could be involved 
in the financing of the coordination and maintenance of these struc -
tures through a specific call for proposals. This work was supported 
by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (HEALTH-
F2-2008-201230).
P01.52  Review of Retinoblastoma families and RB1 mutational analysis in the West of scotland genetics service
S. Gibson , V. Murday;  
Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Rare inherited diseases can cause challenges for genetic services, 
both clinical and molecular. Retinoblastoma is a rare childhood cancer 
of the eye. Bilateral retinoblastoma is caused by de novo or inherited 
germline RB1 mutations. Most unilateral cases are due to somatic mu -
tations. As the germline and somatic forms cannot be distinguished 
clinically, molecular diagnosis is essential for affected families. It is 
important that testing is conducted by an experienced laboratory; that 
results are given to families in a timely manner and at-risk relatives are 
identified in order to target screening. Identification of a genetic muta -tion allows for best management of at-risk individuals and prevents un -
necessary examination under anaesthetic (EUA), which can be trau -
matic for the child and family. This review identified families who had 
attended West of Scotland genetics over the past twenty years with 
unilateral or bilateral retinoblastoma. We identified 12 families who 
had stored DNA samples but not had complete analysis. The samples 
were sent for analysis of RB1 by bi-directional sequencing and MLPA. 
Germline mutations were identified in six bilateral cases, including one 
mosaic, and testing is now available to relatives. One bilateral case 
requires additional analysis by RT-PCR. No mutation was identified in 
the five individuals with unilateral retinoblastoma and no other known 
family history. Unnecessary EUA may now be avoided in their relatives 
and their families reassured. These families highlight the challenges of 
rare conditions, where results may take many years and families may 
need support to adapt to new information many years after diagnosis.
P01.53  conceptual frameworks determine experts’ views on 
clinical use of schizophrenia genetics results
T. Vrijenhoek1, C. van El2, H. G. Brunner1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, M. C. 
Cornel2, J. A. Veltman1, A. Nelis3;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
2Department of Clinical Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care 
Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Centre for 
Society and Genomics (CSG), Institute for Science, Innovation and Society, 
Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Recent developments in microarray technology have enabled large-
scale genetic studies on schizophrenia, and have led to the discov -
ery of many risk alleles. This development has been accompanied by 
promising expectations regarding clinical applications. However, most 
of the known genetic variants meet validity nor utility requirements for 
application in clinical practice. Ongoing discussions are not only about 
when or under what conditions , but also if results from large-scale 
schizophrenia genetics studies are relevant for clinical use. Based on a 
literature review and in-depth interviews with experts, we explored the 
arguments used in these discussions. We have identified four different 
lines of arguing, which state that high-throughput schizophrenia stud -
ies will: (1) eventually reveal clinically relevant data; (2) not reveal clini -
cally relevant data directly; (3) only reveal clinically relevant data when 
combined with non-genetic (environmental) factors; or (4) eventually 
be translated into a clinical setting, irrespective of clinical relevance. 
We show that the experts’ perception of the relevance of large scale 
genetic data predominantly depends on their conceptual framework of 
the relationship between genes and schizophrenia. This is exemplified 
by discussions around the development of direct-to-consumer  (DTC) 
genetic tests. Furthermore, the experts’ conceptual framework deter -
mines their perception of ‘schizophrenia’ itself, which is partly reflected 
in recent discussions on DSM-V. The challenges resulting from large 
scale genetic research and the demand from consumers and patients 
for genetic testing call for a solid infrastructural and translational strat -
egy for schizophrenia genetic research.
P01.54  screening t ests for Genetic counselling in tURKEY
Y. Erdem1, F. Teksen2;  
1Ankara University Faculty of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara 
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Turkey is a country where consanguineous marriages are quite com -
mon. Approximately of one-fourth of marriages in Turkey is consan -
guineous and as a result, the incidence of autosomal recessive dis -
eases are very high.
In order to avoid the recurrence of these diseases, Ministry of Health 
has started screening programmes. For instance, in 1995, a premarital 
screening programme aiming to reduce the incidence of thalassemia 
major at 33 city center; in 2002, “Phenylketonuria (PKU) Screening 
Programme”; in 2003, national newborn hearing screening program 
(NNHSP); in 2006, congenital hypothyroidism screening program; in 
2008, a metabolic disorder, Biotinidase screening programmes were 
established.
Beta-thalassemia prevalence in the country is 2.1%. There are approx -
imately 1.300.000 carriers and 4000 patients in Turkey. The frequency 
of PKU is 1 in 4500 live births and 1 in 10,000 live births in the United 
States comparatively. The newborn hearing, PKU, hypothyroidism, and 
Biotinidase screening programmes were applied nearly to 95.1% of all Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
newborns in last five years according to Ministry of Health report.
In conclusion, it was observed that, premarital screening is a very use -
ful tool for detecting carrier couples and an effective way of controlling 
the recurrence of some of the autosomal recessive genetic diseases. 
Also, there is the necessity to newborn screening programmes.
In addition to screening programmes, the establishment of Genetic 
Counseling Services is also very important and the employment of high 
quality educated genetic counselors in these centers is of great value 
as they have critical roles in the prevention of inherited diseases.
P01.55  Prevalent mutant alleles in connexin 26 ( GJB2 ) to 
romanian children with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic 
deafness
C. Strugaru1, L. Bohaltea1, R. Calarasu2, A. Branzan3;  
1Department of Genetics „Carol Davila“ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Bucharest,, Romania, 2Department of Oto-rhino-laringology - „Prof. Dr. Dorin 
Hociota“ Phonoaudiology and Laringology Hospital, Bucharest,, Romania, 
3Department of Pediatrics „Dr. Victor Babes“ Diagnostic & Treatment Center, 
Bucharest,, Romania.
Inherited hearing impairment affects about 1 in 1000 newborns. Up 
to 50 percent of all patients with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic 
deafness in different populations have mutations in the gene encod -
ing the gap-junction protein connexin 26 ( GJB2 ) at locus DFNB1 on 
chromosome 13q12.
We performed mutation screening of 50 probands for GJB2 in non-
syndromic hearing loss families, including those with cases of sporadic 
deafness, which were compatible with recessive inheritance.
35delG and 167delT are two GJB2 alleles that cause nonsyndromic 
recessive deafness, and carrier rates for these mutant alleles may be 
as high as 4% in some ethnic populations (Estivill et al. 1998; Morell 
et al.1998).
However, a large fraction (20 to 63 percent) of patients with GJB2 mu-
tations have only one mutant allele; the accompanying mutation has 
not been identified.
In our study, these results highlight the usefulness of Cx26 mutation 
screening for genetic counseling and suggest importance of entire se -
quencing of the gene responsible for DNFB1.
P01.56  A practice framework for promoting appropriate 
reporting and use of molecular genetic test results: combining 
education, test result reporting, and information resources
I. M. Lubin1, M. Scheuner2,3, J. V. Henderson4, W. A. Faucett1,5, L. Hilborne2;  
1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States, 
2RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, United States, 3VA Greater Los 
Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 
4Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth, NH, United States, 5Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States.
Clinical molecular genetic testing for heritable conditions is a growing 
segment of laboratory medicine. However, studies suggest that clini -
cians are challenged in staying up to date with knowledge about the 
genetic tests used in their medical practices and this increases the 
risk that patient care will be compromised. To address this concern, 
we propose a practice model to promote appropriate clinical decision 
making that combines education, effective laboratory reporting of test 
results, and access to credible and useful information relevant to the 
test ordered and result reported. This model is based upon several 
studies that are now complete and will be summarized. Some of the 
issues that the model addresses include 1) variations in the use of 
terminology and nomenclature, 2) understanding the relevance of the 
indication(s) for testing, 3) effectively communicating the limitations of 
the test method and result interpretation, 4) integrating knowledge of 
family history, race ethnicity, and other factors that are necessary for 
interpreting the test result, and 5) using the test result report as a tool 
for clinical decision making. An interactive, multimedia education pro -
gram targeting clinicians has been developed to support this practice 
model. We facilitated collaboration between clinicians and laboratory 
professionals who evaluated test result reporting processes and de -
veloped a clinician-friendly laboratory test result report that has been 
adapted to a number of clinical scenarios. Combining these tools with 
access to readily available information resources should prove use -
ful to practicing clinicians by enhancing professional competency and 
promoting good clinical decision making.P01.57  Providing access to genetic variation: The SNP & SEQ 
technology Platform at Uppsala University
T. Axelsson , L. Bäckström, E. Englund, C. Enström, O. Karlberg, K. Larsson, 
U. Liljedahl, M. Lindersson, P. Lundmark, D. Magnusdottir, C. Pöntinen, I. Ö. 
Thorsteinsson, A. Wiman, T. Öst, A. Syvänen;  
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
The SNP & SEQ Technology Platform (www.genotyping.se) performs 
SNP genotyping and next generation DNA sequencing (NGS) as a ser -
vice to academic groups in Sweden and the other Nordic countries and 
as partner in international collaborative projects. The platform offers 
genotyping services to research projects from single SNP-markers to 
genome-wide panels of 1 million SNPs in hundreds or thousands of 
samples, both for association studies and analysis of copy number 
alterations and DNA-methylation. The genotyping services include 
all steps from target selection and assay design, to production scale 
genotyping and quality assessment of the data. Small panels of 1-
12 SNPs are analyzed by fluorescent single base primer extension, 
medium multiplex genotyping is performed by the Golden Gate assay, 
and highly multiplexed and genome-wide genotyping by the Infinium II 
assay (Illumina). Sequencing services are provided for all NGS-appli -
cations using two Genome AnalyzerIIx instruments (Illumina). We have 
developed a lab-data system for handling and storing information on 
samples, markers and genotypes, and for quality control and delivery 
of the genotype data. The genotyping process is accredited according 
to the European ISO/IEC 17025:2005 quality standard. For storing and 
analyzing NGS data using computer cluster hardware we collaborate 
with UPPMAX (Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Compu -
tational Science). Most of the completed genotyping and sequencing 
projects have studied human complex diseases but several projects in 
other species in evolutionary studies and comparative genomics have 
also been conducted. For a complete list of publications to which the 
SNP & SEQ Technology Platform has contributed, see www.genotyp -
ing.se.
P01.58  Ethical Aspects of Prenatal Testing for 
Neurodegenerative and Nervous-muscle Hereditary Diseases in sakha (Yakutia
S. K. Kononova1, O. G. Sidorova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2;  
1Yakut Research Center of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of 
RAMS, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Genetic counseling of total 38 pregnant women at risk for spinocer -
ebellar ataxia type 1 (SCAI, n=26) and muscular dystrophy (MD, 
n=12) have been carried out. All individuals were sakha nationality; 
women at risk for SCAI significantly more often had higher education 
than women at risk for MD (76.9% and 33.3%, p<0.05). Also, pregnant 
women at risk for SCAI were more likely than individuals with MD to 
perceive that prenatal diagnostics would influence their life. In SCAI 
group 14(53.8%) women requested prenatal testing then in MD group 
-10 (83,3%). Pregnant women at risk for SCAI more often didn’t want 
prenatal testing than in MD group (46.2% and 16.2% respectively, 
p<0.05). The relation of women at risk to prenatal diagnostics can be 
caused a number of the reasons. The first reason is poor information 
about prenatal diagnostics, confirmed by questionnaire‘s data of the 
sakha rural population. The second one is financial reason, so as not 
every rural family has a possibility to get to Yakutsk for a genetic coun -
seling and DNA testing. Another possible reason is the ethnical fea -
tures of sakha character: in interpretation of such a philosophical cat -
egory as a destiny, that is patience in confronting of destiny‘s strokes 
such as hereditary disease transmitting in the generation.
P01.59  Teaching genetic counseling to first year medical 
students
R. Dragotoiu ;  
Medical and Pharmacy University „Carol Davila“, Bucuresti, Romania.
Should genetic counseling be taught or is it encompassed in the over -
all ethical concepts first year medical students bear among their knowl -
edge? Philosophers have assumed that morality is an inborn human 
trait and science has nowadays established the cortical regions which 
are activated while making explicit right or wrong judgments as well 
as while facing situations containing implicit moral issues. Whether a 
result of specific inborn brain development or interneuronal connec -
tions, a question raises: „Can genetic counseling issues prove that Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy
their ethical aspects show a tendency of being either inherited or al -
ready gained through learning until becoming a student?“
After having read an article about the discovery of the CF gene, stu -
dents had to answer 3 questions motivating their opinion. They were 
asked if considering right or not, that persons with genetic disorders 
took part in the researches concerning their disease, acknowledg -
ing that genetic disorders are rare and often severe; then, if in case 
of monogenic diseases with known gene anomalies they believed 
(thought) a screening in the teaching units to detect carriers of auto -
somal or X-linked genes could now cause in Romania unhappiness, 
discomfort, panic, because those persons would feel ‘labeled’ as ‚ill‘ in 
front of friends and society, in general; lastly, if they considered useful 
or not the premarital carrier state detection. No discussions had taken 
place about genetic counseling during the workshops (and lectures), 
the results reflecting only the students’ personal views.
The pitfalls of the study and the students’ answers are discussed for 
asserting the conclusion.
P01.60  co-presence of deletional mutations on alpha globin 
genes in the beta thalassemia carriers in t ehran
B. Zarbakhsh , E. Farshadi, F. Eghbalpour, m. Mohammadi, A. Amirian, M. 
Jafari, S. Jamali, S. Zeinali;  
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The exact determination of gene defect for thalassemia carriers is es -
sential for premarital screening. It will also help the genetic counselor 
to advise the family accordingly. Among 142 blood samples from PND 
(prenatal diagnosis) center of Pasteur Institute of Iran which had ex -
act mutation on beta globin gene, we performed simultaneously some 
molecular experiences such as Multiplex gap-PCR, ARMS-PCR and 
sequencing for detecting probable mutation on their alpha globin gene 
cluster.
All samples (142) had 25 different mutations on their beta globin gene, 
but just one mutation on alpha globin gene in 16 samples successively 
identified. 15 samples were heterozygote and one sample was homo -
zygote for deletional alpha mutation named-α3.7. All these 16 samples 
had 8 different mutations on their beta globin gene, on which 7 sam -
ples were IVSII-I and 3 samples were IVSI-5 and simultaneously all 16 
samples had -α3.7mutation on their alpha globin gene cluster.
Through these 16 samples, the descriptive statistics of the mean 
value of HbA2, were 4.2± 1.0, and for MCV: 67.3±5.8, and for MCH: 
20.9±2.7.
Type and frequency of mutations in population with high prevalence of 
hemoglobin disorder is very variable. In the several publications from 
our geographical region, it is obvious that IVSII-I is the most prevalent 
mutation in the beta thalassemia patients and the most prevalent mu -
tation among alpha thalassemia carriers is -α3.7. Co-presence of both 
mutation in globin genes in chromosome 16 and chromosome11, is 
distinctly -α3.7 with IVSII-I.
P01.61  Feasibility of Preconception screening for thalassaemia in indonesia: Exploring the Opinion of Javanese mothers
C. G. Widayanti1, A. Ediati1,2, M. Tamam3, S. M. H. Faradz1,2, E. A. Sistermans4, 
M. C. Cornel4,5, A. C. Plass4,5;  
1Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia, 2Center for Biomedical Research 
(CEBIOR), Semarang, Indonesia, 3Dr Kariadi Hospital Diponegoro University, 
Semarang, Indonesia, 4VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
5The EMGO-institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background: Thalassaemia has become a major health problem in 
Indonesia. It has been estimated that about 10% of the population car -
ries the mutated gene. However, there are no formal recommendations 
for thalassaemia screening. This study aimed to explore awareness of 
thalassemia, and attitude regarding carrier testing among Javanese 
mothers.
Methods: A Quantitative questionnaire was applied cross sectional, us -
ing constructs of the Theory of Planned Behavior. 
Results: 180 mothers were invited: 74 had a child affected with thalas -
semia ( RR=100%). Both, attitude towards receiving information about 
thalassemia ( M=4.08 ), and attitude towards carrier testing ( M=4.09 ) 
were high. Awareness was low: mothers whose children were not af -
fected hardly ever heard of thalassemia ( N=106; M=1.58 ), whereas 
mothers with an affected child showed high interest in carrier testing 
(N=74; M=4.02 ). Respondents did not perceived control over carrier 
testing ( M=3.02), and feared being discriminated against or stigma -tized ( M=2.39 ) if carrier status would be identified. Awareness and 
attitude towards carrier testing explained future reproductive choice 
(R2=.21; p < .001 ). 
Conclusion: All responding mothers showed high interest in receiving 
information on both thalassemia and carrier testing. The less educated 
and/ or the more deprived they were, the keener they were on receiv -
ing this information. Awareness of thalassemia was low. Even mothers 
with affected children seemed unaware of the inheritance pattern of 
the disease, showing the need for genetic counseling in Indonesia. It 
is therefore advised not only to raise awareness on thalassemia, but to 
better educate healthcare professionals as well.
P01.62**  Usefulness of Factor V Leiden mutation testing in 
clinical practice
E. Ø. Blinkenberg1, A. Kristoffersen2, S. Sandberg2, V. M. Steen1,3, G. Houge1,3;  
1Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Norway, NO-5021 Bergen, Norway, 2Laboratory of Clinical 
Biochemistry, Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, NO-5021 Bergen, 
Norway, 3Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway.
We have investigated the clinical usefulness of the Activated protein 
C resistance (APCR)/factor V Leiden mutation (FVL) test by send -
ing out questionnaires to all Norwegian physicians who ordered 
these tests from our publicly funded service laboratory during a three 
months period, and 70% (267/383) responded. Indications for testing, 
patient follow-up, the use of APCR versus FVL tests, and differences 
in practice between hospital doctors and GP‘s were examined. We 
found that 46% of the APCR/FVL tests were predictive tests, ordered 
for risk assessment in healthy individuals with no previous history of 
VTE. Among these, 42% of the tests were taken on the initiative of 
the patient, and 24% were screening tests before prescription of oral 
contraceptives. Fifty-four per cent of the tests were classified as diag -
nostic, among which 42% were ordered due to a previous history of 
VTE, and 22% due to a history of brain stroke or myocardial infarction. 
The prevalence of FVL heterozygotes was not significantly different 
between the predictive and diagnostic test groups, 26% and 20%, re -
spectively. Only the predictive tests influenced patient follow-up. Here, 
physician‘s advice to patients depended on the test result. In general, 
the clinical usefulness of APCR/FVL testing was low. Many tests were 
performed on unsubstantiated or vague indications. Furthermore, nor -
mal test results led to unwarranted refrain from giving advice about 
antithrombotic measures, to the potential harm of the patient.
P01.63  How do clinical geneticists-in-training spend their 
working hours?
B. R. Diness ;  
Department of Clinical Genetics, Juliane Marie Centret, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen OE, Denmark.
Aim: To determine how clinical geneticists in training spend their time 
and to compare this to doctors in other specialties.
Method: Time-motion study. A clinical geneticist-in-training recorded 
her activities prompted by an alarm clock at ten minutes intervals dur -
ing five consecutive workdays. Activities were categorised as direct 
patient care, indirect patient care, administrative tasks, conference 
participation, external professional communication of laboratory re -
sults and test options, research, break, and other. 
Results: 235 observations were recorded. The proportion of time spent 
on different categories of work is shown in table 1. Approximately half 
of the time was used on patient care, but less than a third of this time 
was spent directly interacting with patients.
Discussion: Studies of doctors-in-training are sparse, but one large 
study from Australia documenting the activities of doctors-in-training 
in internal medicine reported similar time fractions spent on direct and 
indirect patient. Other studies of how doctors in various specialties 
spend their time report with few exceptions that less than half of the 
time is spent on patient care and that most patient care takes place 
without the presence of the patient (charting, reviewing test results, 
etc.).
Conclusion: The workday of doctors-in-training in clinical genetics may 
not differ as much from other medical specialties as commonly per -
ceived.Genetic counseling Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy7
Table 1
category of activity Proportion of time spent
Direct patient care 14 %
Indirect patient care 32 %
Administrative tasks 11 %
Conference participation 8 %
External communication 17 %
Research/project 4 %
Break 6 %
Other 8 %
P01.64  Professional training for the new era of genetic medicine
A. C. Davies1,2, K. Dack1,2, M. Leech1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2;  
1Nowgen A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
2Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
Genetics and genomics are making a dynamic and expanding con -
tribution to mainstream healthcare, for example: the increasing use 
of pharmacogenetics and companion diagnostic testing to personalise 
medicine. In addition, genetic knowledge is increasing at such a pace 
that the rate of data generation is at risk of overtaking the capacity for 
its interpretation.
Nowgen, a Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, is at the forefront of 
training provision in the arena of genetic medicine. In collaboration 
with our colleagues in the Central Manchester University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, The University of Manchester and the National 
Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, we have developed a 
portfolio of training courses for health professionals, industry profes -
sionals and research academics in response to expressed needs for 
training in these diverse areas.
Here we demonstrate Nowgen’s role in training provision, including the 
following areas: Bioinformatics for clinicians and scientists working in 
genetic medicine, to help develop skills interpreting genetic data; Ge -
netics for research ethics committees, to provide a tool-kit to support 
committee members in their ethical review of genetic research studies; 
Oncology-based pharmacogenetics, which aims to provide an intro -
duction to this area, including the regulatory issues, effect on clinical 
trial design, diagnostic testing and data interpretation; and Molecular 
genetics for cytogeneticists and genetic counsellors, which aims to 
provide attendees with an understanding of molecular techniques and 
analytical methods used in molecular genetics laboratories. All courses 
have been developed in close consultation with senior representatives 
from the relevant professional groups.
P01.65  clinical characterization and analysis of temperamental 
traits and impact on their parents in 42 italian young girl with 
triple X syndrome.
E. Folliero1, D. Quagliarini2, U. Cavallari3, B. Gentilin1, P. Castorina1, F. 
Forzano4, S. Forzano5, E. Grosso6, S. Gattone7, F. Faravelli8, L. Gargantini9, F. 
Lalatta1;  
1UOS Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 2UO Ostetricia e 
Ginecologia, Milano, Italy, 3Centro Malattie rare cardiologiche, UO cardiologia 
AO Sacco, Milano, Italy, 4SSD Genetica medica E.O. Ospedali Galliera 
Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Genetica Medica AOU S. Giovanni Battista and 
Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 6Genetica Medica, 
AOU S. Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 7Genetica Medica, Genova, Italy, 8SSD 
di Genetica Medica, EO Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 9UO Pediatria A.O 
Treviglio, Treviglio, Italy.
We report clinical and temperament evaluation data in a large Italian 
cohort of young girls with triple X syndrome whose diagnosis was made 
prenatally between 1998 and 2006 in three Italian Centres. At initial 
evaluation reproductive and medical histories were collected. Clinical 
assessment of the child was performed by a clinical geneticist and in -
cluded a detailed personal history, physical evaluation and auxological 
measurements. To analyze how parents coped with specific events in 
the prenatal and postnatal periods, we conducted an interview which 
included 35 specific questions designed to elicit retrospective judge -
ments on prenatal communication, present and future worries, needs 
and expectations. In a subset of probands we also administered the 
formal Italian Temperament Questionnaire assessment test which 
investigates adaptation, general environment and socialization. This 
test also assesses the emotional component of temperament. Clinical results in the affected children are similar to those previously reported 
with evidence of increased growth in the pre-puberal age and an av -
erage incidence of congenital malformation and health needs. Mean 
age at first word was 15 months, showing a slight delay in language 
skills which tended to improve by the time they reached school age. 
Parental responses to the interview demonstrated residual anxiety but 
with a satisfactory adaptation to and a positive recall of the prenatal 
counselling session.
We believe that an integrated approach to prenatal counselling is the 
best way to manage the anxiety and falsely imagined consequences 
which parents feel after being told that their fetus bears such a genetic 
abnormality.
P01.66  Influence of associations of patients in rare diseases (Williams syndrome and smith magenis syndrome) in clinical 
Research. Research centers of reference
M. Fernández-Prieto1, E. Garayzábal2, M. Lens1, A. Sampaio3, M. Buceta4, Á. 
Carracedo5;  
1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain, 2Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Universidade do 
Minho, Department of Psychology, Braga, Portugal, 4Universidade de Santiago 
de Compostela, Department of Evolutive Psychology, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain, 5Group for Genomic Medicine of University of Santiago de Compostela, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
In rare genetic diseases research it is a critical issue to build national 
and international networks of study. Platforms providing the necessary 
logistics to carry out the proposed work of researchers and clinicians 
are also needed, due to geographic dispersion. This usually occurs 
because of the low incidence of rare diseases. Logistic platforms inte -
grating information and centralized federations of rare diseases allow 
associations concerned to coordinate their activities, ranging from re -
search to therapeutic activities, including leisure and family entertain -
ment. Also, they allow to overcome the barrier of geographical disper -
sion.
In this context, the Association of Williams Syndrome of Spain has 
a long tradition in the collaboration with researchers. By other hand, 
the Spanish Association of Smith Magenis has been recently created. 
Both associations have joined together to promote research, integrat -
ing professionals who study these diseases, in order to develop differ -
ent projects and clinical programs. They found strategic support in the 
Regional Center for Rare Diseases (CREER) that allows cooperation 
among associationism and research. The Spanish Federation for Rare 
Diseases also supported them, and also another specific centers of 
genetics as the Galician Public Foundation of Genomic Medicine did 
so.
This allows to establish a real national internal network of detection 
and early diagnosis of these diseases, facilitating research. It also 
helps to develop a better understanding of the neurocognitive, clini -
cian and educational profiles affected and to publish specific materials 
for different diseases.
The main objective of this paper is to present the existing networks in 
Spain studying rare diseases.
P01.67  Role of genetic family testing in Wilson disease.
N. Mocanu , S. Groppa;  
National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, 
Moldova, Republic of.
Wilson‘s disease (WD) represents a severe hereditary disorder that 
predominantly affects liver and brain which in case of late revealing 
and inefficient treatment or its absence leads to severe disabilities, 
demands considerable financial expenses and even might be fatal. 
Affected individuals may require health, financial and personal care for 
10-15 years. This care is frequently undertaken by family members.
We investigated Moldavian families with WD for identification of muta -
tions at members of families for the purpose of carrying out of prelimi -
nary presymptomatic therapy.
We analyzed 34 Moldavian WD patients and family members who were 
genetically confirmed. In 8 (23,5 %) cases we revealed diseases in 
siblings of probands on presymptomatic stage, that given us a chance 
to carry out required therapy and to avoid appearance of clinical WD 
symptoms and physical disability in these patients.
Disease identification in 23, 5 % presymptomatic patients has a ma -
jor importance for diagnosis of WD in Moldova. These cases highlight Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
the importance of accessible and accurate information about rare dis -
eases. Genetic counseling in WD family and molecular testing has a 
major practical importance for diagnosis what due to early revealing of 
patients without clinical symptoms of disease gives a chance to begin 
appropriate therapy in time, to avoid physical disability and to keep a 
life in such patients.
P01.68  Written information to patients in clinical genetics: 
what‘s the impact?
C. Cassini1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, F. Coron1, S. Vinault2, C. Binquet2, S. 
Mercier3, N. Laguette3, L. Faivre1;  
1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre d’Investigations Clinique 
– Épidémiologie Clinique, CHU Bocage, Dijon, France, 3Direction des Droits 
des Patients, de la Qualité et de la Gestion des Risques, CHU Bocage, Dijon, 
France.
In all countries of the European Union, oral information must be given 
to the patient. Written information is generally optional, but physicians 
are tending more and more to send a copy of the clinical report to the 
patient. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the impact on patients of 
sending them written information after a clinical consultation in the ge -
netics department. During a three months period, two geneticists and 
one genetic counselor offered to send each patient a copy of the letter 
sent to their general practitioners. A questionnaire was sent with this 
copy. 375 patients were seen, 60% of the questionnaires were sent 
back. Of these, 99% showed that this practice was considered a good 
idea, and 82% reported that the letter reflected the clinical aspects 
well. 72% thought that receiving this letter improved their understand -
ing, and only 9% found the letter confusing. In general, patients found 
the words understandable (83%) and only 2% were shocked. 58% 
would have preferred a letter sent specifically to them, and 63% said 
that they would have asked their general practitioner to show them 
the letter. Their main motivation for wanting a copy of this letter was 
to have the information to pass on to other physicians involved in their 
health in the future, or to have information concerning the family. There 
were no significant differences depending on the physician, the indica -
tion for the clinical consultation, the age or gender of the patients, or 
their level of general understanding.
J01.1  Early Diagnosis and screening of congenital Heart 
Anomalies
M. Taghizadeh , S. Dastgiri, M. Heidarzadeh;  
Department of Community and Family Medicine, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
There are many cases of congenital heart anomalies missed at the 
time of birth. Literature demonstrates that CH anomalies are the sec -
ond most common birth defect in many countries. Despite this fact, 
our previous study showed that the prevalence of CH anomalies is the 
fifth most common one indicating that many of these defects are not 
diagnosed at the time of birth. The aim of this study was to estimate the 
missing frequency of CH anomalies at the time of birth. The popula -
tion of the study was 185650 births (183579 live births and 2071 still 
births) in the northwest of Iran covered by Tabriz Registry of Congeni -
tal Anomalies (TRoCA). A total of 451 children with CH anomalies were 
studied in this region from 2000 to 2009. The expected prevalence 
of CH anomalies at birth was estimated to be 24.2 per 10000 births 
(CI 95%: 22.1-26.5) while a prevalence of 9.2 per 10000 births (CI 
95%: 7.8-10.6) was observed at the same time/place. This indicated 
that 59.1 percent of children with CH anomalies were not identified at 
birth (P<0.05). the same proportion increased by 13 percent over the 
study from 2000 to 2009 (P>0.1). The result indicated that a remark -
able frequency of CH anomalies was not diagnosed at birth because 
there was no pediatric cardiologist available at birth in the gynecology 
and obstetrics wards. This may necessitate the presence of pediatric 
cardiologist at the time of delivery or soon after birth for early diagnosis 
and screening of CH anomalies.
J01.2  marfan syndrome in children
R. Pakai1, D. Iacob2, R. E. Iacob3, P. Stancu4, M. Puiu2, M. Manescu5;  
1Louis Ţurcanu Children‘s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 
2University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Victor Babeş, Timisoara, Romania, 
3Pediatric Surgery, SCJU, Arad, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 5University Hospital ‚San Carlos‘, Madrid, Spain.
A mutation of the fibrillin-1 gene gives an inherited multisystemic con -
nective-tissue disease, called Marfan syndrome. It is characterized by 
a wide range of clinical manifestations. The major mortality generators 
are the cardiovascular manifestations: annuloaortic ectasia, aortic dis -
section, aortic aneurysm, pulmonary artery dilatation and mitral valve 
prolapse. Common musculoskeletal manifestations include: scoliosis, 
pectus excavatum and carinatum, arachnodactyly and acetabular pro -
trusion. Dural ectasia is a characteristic nervous system affection. In 
some patients there is also pulmonary and ocular involvement. To im -
prove the life expectancy and quality, an early identification and treat -
ment of these clinical aspects is a must. Geneticists play a key role 
in Marfan syndrome diagnosis. For a better patient care, a compre -
hensive diagnostic is driven by a prenatal genetic counseling and the 
knowledge about the various manifestations of Marfan syndrome.
J01.3  Genetic screening in Europe
P. Javaher1, E. Nyoungui1, H. Kääriäinen2, U. Kristoffersson3, I. Nippert4, J. 
Sequeiros5, J. Schmidtke1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany, 2Department of Medical genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland 
and National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of 
Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 4Department of Human 
Genetics, Universitaetsklinikum Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 5UnIGENe and 
CGPP, IBMC – Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology and ICBAS, University 
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background: Genetic screening has been defined as any kind of test 
performed systematically for the early detection or exclusion of a ge -
netic disease, genetic predisposition or resistance to a disease, or to 
determine whether a person carries a gene variant, that may produce 
disease in his or her offspring.
Methods: The data were collected from answers of experts via a self-
designed questionnaire, which addressed the conditions screened, 
screening methods, organisational aspects of screening programmes, 
and conditions screened in prenatal, population-based carrier, and 
cascade screening programmes, as well as data from websites of na -
tional screening authorities and societies and several organisations 
dealing with neonatal screening issues.
Results and conclusion: The current (2006-2008) status of genetic 
screening and the organisation of genetic screening programmes in 
selected European countries is presented in this survey as a back -
ground for future attempts of harmonizing standards and procedures 
of genetic screening, an explicit aim of the European Network of Excel -
lence, EuroGentest (www.eurogentest.org).
P02 clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
P02.001  interstitial deletion of 10p12-p11: A novel micro-deletion 
syndrome associated with mental retardation and a distinct 
phenotype
C. Wentzel ;  
Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
The ability to detect cryptic unbalanced rearrangements in patients 
with syndromic mental retardation has improved considerably with the 
clinical implementation of genomic microarrays. Here we report on the 
molecular karyotyping of three unrelated patients with partially over -
lapping microdeletions at chromosome 10p11.23-p12.1 ranging from 
0.99 Mb to 4.03 Mb in size. The smallest region of overlap (SMO) be -
tween the deletions is 400 kb. Yet another patient has previously been 
described with a 10 Mb deletion, partially overlapping with our three 
patients {Shahdadpuri, 2008 #1}. All four patients have a developmen -
tal delay and growth retardation.
Apart from the SMO, the genomic region could be divided into three 
separate intervals when related to phenotypic expression and symp -
toms. Together with the previously reported patient our study suggests 
that the deletions may represent a novel micro-deletion syndrome with 
a distinct clinical expression associated with haploinsufficiency for 
genes in this region.
Reference
Shahdadpuri R, de Vries B, Pfundt R, de Leeuw N and Reardon W. 
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 146A: 233-237 (2008)Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
P02.002  Deletion of 13q32.3-34: A genotype-phenotype 
correlation of three cases
J. Davidsson1, H. Ågerstam1, M. Öreberg2, M. Soller1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne 
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Department of Pediatrics, Kalmar Hospital, 
Kalmar, Sweden.
Background: Partial deletions of chromosome 13 are rare. Based on 
their clinical and cytogenetic features patients have been categorized 
into three groups: 1) deletions proximal to 13q32, 2) deletions involv -
ing 13q32; and 3) deletions of 13q33-34. Of these, group 2 has the 
most severe phenotype, including, among others, dysmorphology of 
the brain, eyes, gastrointestinal tract and distal limbs.
Methods: We have collected clinical data and performed molecular 
cytogenetic mapping of three cases with de novo deletions of 13q32.3-
34, using metaphase FISH and genome-wide array CGH.
Results: In case 1, FISH analysis mapped the deletion to range from 
99.53 Mb to pter on chromosome 13. The clinical symptoms included, 
among others, developmental delay, an intracranial dural arteriove -
nous fistula and low levels of clotting factors 7 and 10. In case 2, FISH 
analysis mapped the deletion to span from 107.74 Mb to pter. The 
clinical symptoms included, among others, developmental delay, mi -
crocephaly, hypertelorism and low levels of clotting factors 7 and 10. 
In case 3, array CGH mapped the deletion to range from 101.07 Mb 
to pter. The clinical symptoms included, among others, developmental 
delay, microcephaly and hypotonia.
Conclusions: We present three cases with 13q32.3-34 deletions, char -
acterized at the molecular cytogenetic level. In the deleted regions, 
several candidate genes responsible for the diverse phenotypes of the 
patients could be identified. Characterization of additional patients har -
boring similar distal deletions might lead to better, and clinically more 
useful, description of the 13q deletion syndrome.
P02.003  Narrowing down the minimal critical deletion region of 
recurrent 16p11.2-p12.2 microdeletion syndrome
K. M. Roetzer1, A. C. Obenauf1, B. Plecko-Startinig2, M. Brunner-Krainz2, M. R. 
Speicher1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Graz, 
Austria.
Microdeletions in16p11.2-p12.2 were recently described in a number 
of patients exhibiting mental retardation, speech delay, developmental 
delay, hypotonia, dysmorphic features, and recurrent infections. Yet, 
due to the size of the deletions (~ 8Mb) and the number of genes con -
tained it was difficult to link the deleted genes to the phenotype.
Here we report the case of an 11-year-old girl with muscular hypo -
tonia, speech delay, ptosis, recurrent infections and dysmorphic 
features similar to those reported in patients with microdeletions in 
16p11.2-p12.2. A muscle biopsy at the age of 1 year showed unspe -
cific changes, whereas the altered structure of the mitochondria was 
most striking. However, biochemical investigations for mitochondriopa -
thies were inconclusive. Array-CGH analysis revealed a 205kb micro -
deletion in 16p11.2, overlapping the deleted regions in the 6 patients 
recently reported. The microdeletion in our patient was inherited from 
the mother, who following anamnesis and physical examination, also 
exhibited mild muscular hypotonia, ptosis, and recurrent ear infections. 
The microdeletion contains only three disease causing genes: TUFM, 
ATP2A1 and CD19. We hypothesize that the muscular hypotonia could 
be due to a deletion of ATP2A1 and the recurrent infections might be 
associated with CD19 deficiency. This theory is further supported by 
the observation that only one patient reported so far did not exhibit 
muscular hypotonia, and this was also the only patient with a microde -
letion not including ATP2A1. However, further investigations to confirm 
the central role of ATP2A1 and CD19 in the phenotypic presentation of 
patients with 16p11.2-p12.2 microdeletions are necessary.
P02.004  16p13.3 microduplication syndrome : report of 4 cases 
and futher phenotype delineation
B. Demeer1, G. Morin1, S. Julia2, D. Martin-Coignard3, G. Plessis4, F. Amram1, 
A. Receveur5, H. copin5, G. Bourrouillou2, C. Le Caignec6, J. Andrieux7, M. 
Mathieu1;  
1department of genetics, Amiens University hospital, amiens, France, 
2department of genetics, Toulouse University hospital, Toulouse, France, 
3department of genetics, Le Mans hospital, Le Mans, France, 4department of 
genetics, Caen University hospital, Caen, France, 5department of cytogenetics, Amiens University hospital, amiens, France, 6department of genetics, Nantes 
University hospital, Nantes, France, 7department of genetics, Lille University 
hospital, Lille, France.
Duplication of the critical Rubinstein Taybi deletion region on the chro -
mosome 16p13.3 have recently been proposed to be a cause of a rec -
ognizable syndrome, characterized by normal to moderately retarded 
mental development, normal growth, mild arthrogryposis, mild abnor -
malities of the hands, characteristic facial features, and occasional 
anomalies of the heart. Up to date, only 13 patients with an interstitial 
duplication of the 16p13.3 region encompassing the CREBBP gene 
have been reported.
We report 4 new cases with such 16p13.3 microduplication. They pres -
ent mental retardation (4/4), normal growth (4/4), mild arthrogryposis 
anomalies (2/4), and no anomalies of the heart. Remarkable facial fea -
tures such as microretrognathia (4/4), broad nose (4/4), dolicocephaly 
(2/4) were noted, and also frequent eye involvement (4/4) with upslant -
ing eyes with narrow palpebral fissures (4/4), ptosis (3/4), bilateral epi -
canthi (3/4). Minor anomalies of the extremities- hands and feet- were 
always found (4/4), with frequent involvement of the thumb: proximally 
adducted thumbs (3/4), adducted thumbs (2/4). Several other occa -
sional findings reported before were also noted : cleft palate (2/4)/ bifid 
uvula (1/4), inguinal hernia (2/4), hyperconvex nails (2/4) and hammer 
halluces (1/4)/short halluces (1/4). One patient also presents retinal 
hypogmentation. A detailed clinical description of the 4 patients with 
review of the literature will be made, confirming the recognizable mi -
croduplication syndrome, and helping to delineate the associated phe -
notype.
P02.005  microduplication of 17p13.3 including YWHAE in a 
patient with strongly increased nuchal translucency as a fetus, 
and postnatal abnormal phenotype.
D. Svaneby1, J. Graakjaer1, G. Dybmose2, C. Fagerberg1;  
1Department of clinical Genetics, 7100 Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of 
pediatrics, Esbjerg, Denmark.
Background:  Deletion of 17p13.3 causes Miller-Dieker syndrome. Du -
plications in this region have been described with a variable pheno -
type depending on which genes are included. The genes PAFAH1B1, 
encoding LIS1, and YWHAE seem to be important for the genotype-
phenotype correlation. Duplications including the YWHAE gene but 
not PAFAH1B1 have been described in a few patients, with common 
features being facial dysmorphism, macrosomia, and mild develop -
mental delay. Individuals with duplications including PAFAH1B1 have 
no particularly dysmorphic features, but more severe developmental 
delay, and brain defects.
Case:  Our patient is a boy, 2 years old. The prenatal ultrasound scan 
showed an increased nuchal translucency of 7,5 mm, no malformations 
were seen. A normal male karyotype was found. At the age of 2 years 
the patient showed increased growth and psychomotor retardation. He 
was hypotonic, had a bad temper, and expressive and impressive lan -
guage delay. Facial dysmorphism included epicanthus, low set ears, 
smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, and short nose. Array-CGH showed a 
de novo 1.02 MB duplication on chromosome 17p13.3. The duplication 
included the YWHAE gene, but not the PAFAH1B1 gene.
Conclusion : A few cases of duplication 17p13.3 have been described 
with variable phenotype depending on whether YWHAE or PAFAH1B1 
is involved. We here describe a patient with duplication including 
YWHAE with very similar features to previous cases, but also with an 
increased nuchal translucency, thus extending the phenotypic spec -
trum. It can be considered in pregnancies with very high nuchal trans -
lucency combined with normal karyotype to investigate for duplications 
in 17p13.3.
P02.006**  the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome
D. A. Koolen , B. B. A. de Vries;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome is a novel genomic disorder 
with a prevalence of around 1/16,000. We present an update of the 
delineation of the phenotype based on the clinical description of 47 
individuals with the recurrent 17q21.31 deletion and call for an interna -
tional collaboration to collect information on this emerging syndrome 
(www.17q21.com). In our cohort of patients the most consistent fea -
tures are hypotonia and mild to severe global psychomotor develop -
mental delay. The facial dysmorphisms include a high/broad forehead, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology0
long face, upward slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, an ab -
normally shaped nose, large prominent ears and an everted lower lip. 
Abnormal hair pigmentation and texture is also frequently present. The 
facial phenotype may evolve with age, leading to coarsening and elon -
gation of the face. Short stature, pectus excavatum, spine anomalies, 
dislocation of the hip(s), long slender fingers and slender lower limbs, 
and positional deformities of the hand/feet  are also reported. A history 
of epilepsy is noted in ~50% of all cases. Other serious abnormalities 
include atrial  and ventricular  septal defects, kidney/ urologic anoma -
lies, and cryptorchidism . Our data show that the 17q21.31 microdele -
tion syndrome is a clinically well recognizable genomic disorder. Long-
term studies, however, are required to further define the syndrome and 
to determine the prognosis in adult patients.
Acknowledgements: Many thanks to our collaborators, for providing 
DNA samples and clinical and/or molecular data.
P02.007  Loss of cytochrome P450 17A1 Protein Expression in a 
17α-Hydroxylase/17,20-Lyase-Deficient 46,XY Female Caused by 
two Novel mutations in the CYP17A1  Gene
S. Kofman-Alfaro1, N. Nájera1, I. Palma1, R. Peña2, G. Queipo1;  
1Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, Mexico City, 
Mexico, 2Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico.
17α-hydroxylase deficiency (17OHD) is a rare form of congenital ad -
renal hyperplasia (CAH) caused by mutations in the  CYP17A1  gene. 
This condition shows considerable clinical and biochemical variation. 
Molecular characterization of novel mutations in the CYP17A1  gene 
and detailed study of their structural, enzymatic, and clinical conse -
quences are required to fully understand enzyme behavior. Here, we 
present the first molecular characterization of two novel mutations in  
CYP17A1  in a 15-year-old female Mexican mestizo 46,XY female with 
primary amenorrhea and lack of pubertal development, and severe 
hypertension that manifested only after surgery. A complete clinical 
and biochemical evaluation was compatible with 17OHD. Structural 
anomalies in the CYP17A1  gene were discovered by direct auto -
mated sequencing, which revealed a novel compound heterozygous 
K110X/R362H mutation that leads to a complete lack of enzyme ac -
tivity. Immunohistochemical analyses performed to determine protein 
expression and localization showed that cytochrome P450 17A1 was 
completely absent in the patient’s testicular tissue. Studies of novel 
mutations, such as those described here, provide important informa -
tion that allows us to better understand the effect of a given mutation 
on enzyme function and to observe the impact of the mutation on clini -
cal phenotype.
P02.008  Three Interrupted Deletions at 1p36 in a Patient with Lateral Ventricular Enlargement, Epilepsy and corpus callosum 
Abnormality
S. Cingöz1, A. Ünalp2, S. Betinoğlu1, S. Kurul3, Z. Tümer4;  
1Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül 
University, İzmir, Turkey, 22Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric 
Neurology, Behcet Uz Child Disease and Pediatric Surgery Training and 
Research Hospital, İzmir, Turkey, 33Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child 
Neurology, Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, İzmir, Turkey, 4Kennedy 
Center, Glostrup, Denmark.
Monosomy 1p36 is a frequent terminal microdeletion syndrome char -
acterized by distinct craniofacial features, developmental delay, mental 
retardation, hypotonia, seizures, visual, auditory, structural brain and 
cardiovascular malformations.
The 1p36 deletion syndrome is likely to be associated with haploinsuf -
ficiency of contiguous genes. In previous studies  KCNAB29 (voltage-
gated potassium channel β-subunit gene) and GABRD  (the human 
γ-aminobutyricacid A receptor delta-subunit gene) were suggested as 
candidate genes for epilepsy. Genes within the 2.2 Mb smallest region 
of overlap have also been suggested as potential candidate genes for 
periventricular nodular heterotopias (PH).
Here we report a case with three consecutive interstitial deletions at 
1p36.22-p36.23, 1p36.31 and 1p36.32array CGH. All the three dele -
tions were within the common deletion region (1pter-p36.23) of classi -
cal monosomy 1p36 patiens.The present case has mental retardation, 
developmental delay, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, epilepsy, lat -
eral ventricular enlargement and facial dysmorphism. In this study we 
comparedthe phenotypes and the deletion sizes of the present case 
with previously published cases. Our study suggests a new critical re -gion at 1p36.31 for ,dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and epilepsy.
P02.009  severe Lysosomal Lipid storage Disease of the Liver in monosomy1p36: New Presentation Extending the Phenotype
M. Haimi1, T. Iancu2, L. Shaffer3, A. Lerner4;  
1Children‘s Health Center, Clalit Health Services, Haifa, Israel, 2Pediatric 
Research and Electron Microscopy Unit, Technion-Rappaport Faculty of 
Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 3Health Research and Education Center, Washington 
State University & Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United 
States, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Carmel Medical Center, 
Haifa, Israel.
Background /Aim : Monosomy 1p36 has been increasingly recognized 
as a distinct chromosome deletion syndrome in the past few years. 
Monosomy 1p36 is mostly associated with severe mental retardation, 
developmental delay, behavioral difficulties and self-injury. There are 
several distinct dysmorphic features, including large anterior fontanels, 
microcephaly, brachycephaly, deep-set eyes, flat nose, nasal bridge 
and pointed chin. In contrast to the “classical” phenotype, several chil -
dren with a 1p deletion have had overgrowth and hyperphagia with a 
clinical presentation similar to Prader -Willi syndrome (PWS).
Methods: Here we describe an 11-year-old girl with 1p36 deletion 
demonstrating the classical dysmorphological features, having devel -
oped an uncontrolled voracious appetite and severe truncal obesity. 
Gastroenterological evaluation revealed elevated liver enzymes. Liver 
biopsy disclosed severe fatty liver: in addition to medium-size triglycer -
ide droplets, hepatocytes showed excessive lipofuscin accumulation. 
A most unusual feature was the presence of frequent, extremely large 
lipolysosomes, never previously reported in this condition.
Results: Oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis was performed 
using a 105K-feature whole-genome microarray. It showed copy-num -
ber loss of 177 oligonucleotide probes from the short arm of chromo -
some 1 at 1p36.33p36.32, approximately 2.2 Mb in size.
Conclusions: We suggest that the chromosome segment 1p36.33- 
36.32 harbour a critical region for the manifestation of obesity and hy -
perphagia. We also suggest that monosomy 1p36 syndrome should be 
considered in patients with hypotonia, developmental delay, obesity, 
hyperphagia, behavioral disorders, learning difficulties and a negative 
genetic test for PWS, even in the absence of the striking facial features 
of the syndrome.
P02.010  BAc array analysis detects microdeletions on 
chromosome region 20p12.1 in two unrelated individuals with mR/ mcA syndrome
L. Grozdanova1, R. Stoeva2,3, J. Vermeesch3, J. P. Fryns3, B. Dimitrov3, R. 
Thoelen3, M. Stefanova4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 
2Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, 
Bulgaria, 3Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
One patient with a de novo  deletion spanning a 250kb region of 
20p12.1 and clinical features of Kabuki syndrome was described pre -
viously (J Med Genet 2007 44:562-569).
Here we report a detailed clinical and molecular investigation of two 
unrelated individuals, a 15-years-old and a 7½-years-old boys with 
respectively paternally and maternally inherited overlapping deletions 
of 20p12.1, detected by BAC array CGH at 1 Mb resolution. Clinically 
they both presented with characteristic dysmorphic features, dental ab -
normalities, gum hypertrophy, brain malformations and severe mental 
retardation. Common dysmorphism include sloping forehead, arched 
eyebrows, long palpebral fissures, long eyelashes with unusual growth 
pattern at the lower eyelid, short philtrum, open-mouth appearance, 
high palate, posterior rotated ears with massive earlobes. Failure to 
thrive during infancy, periorbital and generalized oedema, hallux val -
gus were noted. Additionally, the 15-years-old patient presented with 
nasolacrimal duct stenosis, single palmar crease, thenar hypoplasia, 
cubitus valgus, pes planus, stereotypic movements. The 7½-years-old 
boy developed a short stature (SD-4.7) and microcephaly (SD-2.5). He 
showed epilepsy, retinal pigment changes, cataract, myopia, bilateral 
congenital hip luxation and cryptorchid testes. A deletion of the BAC 
clone RP5-855L24 (14609853-14755918 bp, HG18) was detected in 
all cells with the 15-years-old patient and his father and as well as with 
the other and his mother.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology1
The similar clinical presentation in both individuals suggests the caus -
ative effect of the aberration. Epigenetic factors could be potential 
reasons for the healthy parents carrier. To our knowledge these are 
the first two cases reported with microdeletions 20p12.1 and inherited 
from the healthy parent.
P02.011**  Drosophila  as a model organism to establish a 
genotype-phenotype correlation in 2q23.1 deletion syndrome
B. W. M. van Bon , J. Kramer, A. Schenck, B. B. A. de Vries;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
In general, patients with a 2q23.1 microdeletion are mentally retarded 
and present with speech delay, short stature, microcephaly, seizures, 
coarse facies, sleep disturbances and behavioral problems. These 
features may lead to the initial clinical impression of Angelman, Rett 
and/or Smith-Magenis syndromes.
The overlapping 2q23.1 deletion region in all reported patients com -
prises one gene, MBD5 , which is a member of the methyl CpG-bind -
ing domain protein family. Another gene in this region, EPC2 , is also 
deleted in the majority of patients, who appear to have a more severe 
phenotype than those with a deletion of MBD5  only. EPC2  is a member 
of the polycomb protein family, involved in heterochromatin formation. 
Several genes with a role in modulation of chromatin structures are 
associated with mental retardation. Therefore, EPC2  might be consid -
ered as a mental retardation gene.
In the absence of patients with mutations or deletions of EPC2  only, 
we used Drosophila melanogaster  as model organism to elucidate 
possible pathogenicity of this gene. Ubiquitous knockdown of the fly 
ortholog epc induces lethality, mainly during pupal stages. Drosophila 
also offers the possibility of tissue and cell-specific gene ablation. Epc 
knockdown in wings and eyes, severely disturbes morphogenesis of 
these organs. These results point to an important function of epc dur -
ing development and suggest a significant contribution to the pathol -
ogy of the 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. We will now focus on the 
role of epc in neuronal function and behaviour.
This study aims to establish the relevance of fly models in understand -
ing gene-phenotype correlations in microdeletion syndromes.
P02.012  situs inversus totalis with 47,XXX; A case report
H. Kocak Eker1, M. Ikbal2, A. H. Cebi2, M. Y. ALP2, T. Tos3;  
1Dıskapı Children Hospital, Dept of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 
2Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics, Trabzon, 
Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, SB Sami Ulus Women’s and 
Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
We report a case of a 1,5 year old female situs inversus totalis with 
47,XXX. We think that this is the first case in the literature situs inver -
sus totalis with 47,XXX. She is the first child of the family and has no 
sister or brother. She was taken to our genetic polyclinic because of 
her puffy face. She had situs inversus totalis and large VSD on her 
history. We want to see the karyotype of the patient because she had 
some abnormalities with her phenotype and we know some cases si -
tus inversus with chromosomal abnormalities. Chromosomal analysis 
performed on a peripheral blood lymphocyte culture showed a 47,XXX 
female karyotype. Further studies are needed to explain situs inversus 
totalis connexion with X chromosome abnormalities.
P02.013  Expanding the clinical and neuroradiological 
phenotype of 6q terminal deletion syndrome: olfactory bulb 
aplasia and aqueductal stenosis.
K. Becker1, T. Neuhann1, N. Tyshchenko1, D. Podlesek2, M. Smitka3, S. 
Tinschert1, G. Hahn4, T. Hummel5, E. Schrock1, J. Gerber6, K. Hackmann1;  
1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, 
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik 
für Neurochirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische 
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Abteilung für Neuropädiatrie an der 
Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Carl 
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Abteilung 
Kinderradiologie am Institut und Poliklinik für Radiologische Diagnostik, 
Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany, 5Klinik und Poliklinik für Hals-Nasen-Ohren-Heilkunde, 
Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany, 6Abteilung Neuroradiologie am Institut und Poliklinik für 
Radiologische Diagnostik, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
Subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 6q have emerged as a charac -
teristic microdeletion syndrome, characterized by mental retardation, 
seizures, mild dysmorphic features, and brain anomalies. The latter 
most commonly include enlarged ventricles or hydrocephalus and 
aplasia/hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Thus far, aplasia of the ol -
factory bulbs and tracts has only been reported as autopsy findings 
in two patients with a ring chromosome 6 and in one patient with a 
6q23-deletion.
We report on two patients with a de novo  subtelomeric rearrangement 
involving the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q27) detected by molecular 
karyotyping using Array-CGH analysis. Both patients had aplasia of 
the olfactory bulbs and hydrocephalus due to aqueduct stenosis as 
well as additional brain malformations. The first patient presented with 
global developmental impairment, facial dysmorphism, and had an un -
balanced reciprocal translocation of chromosome 3 and 6, resulting in 
a 6q27 deletion and an additional 3q29 duplication. The second patient 
presented with complete anosmia as the only clinical symptom and 
showed no signs of delayed physical or mental development.
Thus we conclude that there is considerable variability in the pheno -
typic spectrum of the disorder and that the degree of developmental 
impairment does not correlate with the extent of brain findings. There -
fore the “6q Terminal Deletion Syndrome” might actually be underdi -
agnosed as it can manifest by anosmia only. Moreover, since olfactory 
bulb aplasia seems to belong to the phenotypic spectrum of the 6q 
terminal deletion syndrome we suggest screening these patients for 
this malformation by high resolution brain imaging.
P02.014  A case report of Achondroplasia (AD inheritance) in 
a family with consanguineous marriage( both parents are not 
affected).
S. Akbaroghli1,2, M. T. Akbari3;  
1Dr. Akbaroghli Genetic Counselling Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Deputy for Cultural Affairs and Prevention of Iran Welfare Organization, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
An eight years old boy with clinical manifestations including: 
megalocephaly,short stature ( height = 108 cm , weight =24) ,low na -
sal bridge, prominent forehead,lumbar lordosis, short tubular bones 
and radiologic manifestations including: rhizomelic dwarfism, V shape 
deformity, narrow sacrosciatic notches, small iliac wings,short trident 
hand. He is the result of a consanguineous marriage ( second cous -
ins).In the molecular study, he has G1138A mutation in FGFR3 gene 
in heterozygote form.
His unaffected parents ( 33 years old woman and 39 years old man) 
came for preconceptional genetic counseling because of their affected 
child and consanguineous marriage and they are candidates for pre -
natal diagnosis because of the probability of gonadal mosaicism.
P02.015  Unbalanced translocation t(1;5)(p31.3;q23.2) in a child 
with congenital malformations and a disorder of glycosylation 
(cDG) affecting ALG6 gene, and characterized by sNP and cGH 
arrays
M. D. Sanchez-Izquierdo1, E. Bermejo1,2, A. I. Vega3, B. Pérez3,4, M. L. 
Martínez-Fernández1,4, C. Pérez-Cerdá3, G. Arriola5, A. García5, M. Ugarte3,4, M. 
L. Martínez-Frías1,6;  
1CIAC, ECEMC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 
2Research Institute for Rare Diseases (IIER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3CEDEM, 
CBMSO-UAM, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 4CIBER 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Spain, 5Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital 
Universitario de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain, 6Departamento de 
Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
The genetic study of a 3 year old child with mild psychomotor delay, 
joint hyperlaxity, talipes valgus, flat frontal hemangioma, total agen -
esis of the corpus callosum and some dysmorphic features, revealed 
a ‘de novo’  translocation detected by a high resolution karyotype and 
involving chromosome bands 1p31.3 and 5q23.2. For a better charac -
terization of the breakpoint regions, CGH array (244K) and SNP array 
(500K) analyses were performed, both showing a hemizygous deletion 
next to ALG6, a gene containing 15 exons and involved in defective 
glycosylation. The CGH array deletion was 3.5 Mb in size and started 
at exon 10 of ALG6, while the SNP array deletion was centromeric, 
and ALG6 was not included in the deleted region. Other genes such Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology2
PGM1 and LEPR where also lost in both arrays analyses. For a better 
delimitation of the deletion boundaries, PCR amplification of all ALG6 
exons was applied to genomic DNA. No product was obtained for ex -
ons 11 to 14 when compared to controls, but the amplification of the 
terminal 3’ exon 15 showed a positive result, suggesting an intragenic 
homozygotic deletion, undetectable by both arrays. An aberrant tran -
script was obtained using RT-PCR for the detection of ALG6 mRNA. 
These results suggest a deletion of ALG6 in this patient, affecting both 
alleles, in a different and non-previously described mode of protein 
inactivation. Products obtained from the detected rearrangement must 
be further characterized.
Funding for this study provided by: CIBERER (Intra 07/746.1) and 
ISCIII. Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Madrid, Spain.
P02.016  isolated autosomal recessive hypotrichosis in Pakistan 
caused by P2RY  and LIPH  gene mutations
M. Tariq1,2, A. Azhar2, J. Klar1, I. Ahmad2, S. M. Bakhtiar2, S. M. Baig2, N. Dahl1;  
1Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan.
Autosomal recessive hypotrichosis (LAH) is characterised by diffuse 
hair loss without associated abnormalities. Typically, hair thinning 
starts in early childhood and progresses through adolescence. The 
expression is variable with differences in age of onset and severity of 
baldness, as well as in hair density and texture. The clinical variation 
is observed between, as well as within, families segregating hypotri -
chosis. Recently, the genetic basis of LAH was shown to involve muta -
tions in the P2RY5  gene on chromosome 13q14.3 (OMIM 609239) or 
the LIPH  gene on chromosome 3q27.3 (OMIM 607365). In the pres -
ent study, we identified eight unrelated consanguineous families from 
different areas of Pakistan segregating autosomal recessive hypotri -
chosis. The families were investigated by homozygosity mapping for 
linkage to P2RY5  and LIPH . Six families showed linkage to the P2RY5  
gene and sequencing revealed a single known missense mutation in 
five families and a novel insertion mutation in one family. The previ -
ously known missense mutation was accompanied by a shared hap -
lotype amongst all affected. The remaining two families showed link -
age to the LIPH  gene and segregated known mutations. The P2RY5  
gene encodes a 344 amino acids long G protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR). LIPH  produces the ligand for P2RY5 , acyl-lysophosphatidic 
acid (LPA). Both genes are highly expressed in the inner root sheaths 
of the hair follicle and play an essential role in the maintenance of hair 
growth and texture. From our results, we suggest that a few ances -
tral mutations cause isolated autosomal recessive hypotrichosis in the 
Pakistani population.
P02.017  carrier frequency for alpha triplication in individuals 
with normal hematologic indices
F. Moosavi1,2, A. Amirian1, H. Mirzahoseini1, S. Zeinali1, M. Karimipoor1;  
1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science & Research 
Branch, Azad Islamic University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The α3.7 deletion is the most frequent α-globin mutation in Iran, one 
would then expect that the anti 3.7 triplication is common in Iran as 
well. the frequency of β-thalassemia gene is close to %10 in highly 
prevalent regions of Iran, so we expect to see frequent co-inheri -
tance of alpha triplication with β-thalassemia.Blood samples were se -
lected from individuals with normal hematological indices (MCV>80, 
MCH>27) (n=153) in Iran population.DNA extraction from peripheral 
blood leukocytes was performed by salting out method and multiplex 
PCR was used to detect alpha triplication.Carrier frequency in individu -
als with normal hematological indices (n=153) was %3.26. This carrier 
frequency of α-triplication is relatively high (3-26) in this study. the co-
inheritance of this determinant could interfere with genotype-pheno -
type correlation in minor β-thalassemia carriers, and could cause thal -
assemia intermedia. further characterization by southern blot or MLPA 
is needed to determine the allele frequency in our population.
P02.018  Alström syndrome in two sisters.
S. Jougheh Doust1, M. Nagel2, G. Yoon1,3;  
1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto,, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Center for Nephrology and 
Metabolic Disorders, Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Weisswasser, 
Germany, Weiswasser, Germany, 3Department of Paediatrics, Division of Neurology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
Alström syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive multisystemic disor -
der caused by mutations in the ALMS1 gene. The gene is located on 
2p13, contains 23 exons and encodes a protein of 4169 amino acids 
(Collins et al and Hearn et al 2002). Alström syndrome is characterized 
by cone-rod retinal dystrophy causing blindness, sensorineural hear -
ing loss and major organ involvement such as dilated cardiomyopathy, 
hepatic and renal failure. Childhood obesity, type 2 diabetes, hypertri -
glyceridemia and hypothyroidism are other common features. Clinical 
manifestations are highly variable even within family members. We 
report two siblings with a clinical diagnosis of Alström syndrome who 
presented with early onset rod monochromatism, cardiomyopathy, 
congenital nystagmus, truncal obesity and mild developmental delay. 
These 2 sisters are both heterozygotes for a novel pathologic mutation 
(c.5098A>T) in exon 8 of ALMS1 gene , which causes truncation of the 
ALMS1 protein. Previous studies suggest that the classical syndrome 
occurs only in patients with homozygous or compound heterozygous 
mutations of the ALMS1 gene thus the heterozygosity for this novel 
mutation does not explain the severity of this disease in our patients. 
Array-CGH studies for both siblings were normal and MLPA studies of 
the ALMS1 region are currently pending.
Little is known about phenotype-genotype correlation in Alström syn -
drome, although patients with clinical symptoms of Alström syndrome 
were found to have disease-causing mutations in exon 16 (Marshall et 
al 2007). We hypothesize that rearrangement of the ALMS1 gene in 
addition to this pathologic mutation is the basis for the severe pheno -
type of our patients.
P02.019  Ambiguous external genitalia in newborns
E. Kiss1, C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, I. Pascanu3, H. Gozar4;  
1Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg Mures, 
Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg 
Mures, Romania, 3Endocrinology Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Tg Mures, Romania, 4Pediatric Surgey Clinic, Emergency County Hospital Tg. 
Mures, Tg Mures, Romania.
A newborn infant with ambiguous genitalia is a medical emergency, 
and the choice of gender must take into account the chromosomal 
and the gonadal sex, the hormonal influence during fetal life, surgi -
cal aspects, and the anatomy of the internal genitalia. A newborn with 
ambiguous genitalia needs prompt evaluation that will permit gender 
assignment and detection of life-threatening conditions (salt-losing cri -
sis due to congenital adrenal hyperplasia -CAH). The classification of 
this disorder in newborns is difficult because similar phenotypes could 
have several different etiologies. In most cases it is impossible to cor -
relate the etiology of the disorder and the appearance of the external 
genitalia. Diagnostic criteria applied are similar for all (physical exam, 
karyotype, investigation of hormones and their derivates, genital ultra -
sound, radiological examination), but medical and surgical treatment is 
applied to each patient individually.
We present 2 cases of ambiguous genitalia admitted in our depart -
ment in the last year. RESULTS: In one patients (normal karyotype: 
46, XX) the underlying cause of ambiguous genitalia was CAH, while 
the aethiology of sexual ambiguity in the other case was the chromo -
somal structural anomalies 46,XY,t(X;21)(p11;q21). CONCLUSION: 
The etiology of ambiguous genitalia is variable. The physician man -
aging these families could minimize the trauma of having a child with 
unidentified sex by providing appropriate genetic counseling so that 
the parents can make an early decision. A proper diagnosis requires 
a team working: pediatrician, endocrinologist, genetician and pediatric 
urologist/surgeon. Prenatal diagnosis in at-risk families should be con -
sidered and appropriate therapy offered to minimize or prevent genital 
ambiguity.
P02.020  Recurrence of complete arhinia in two siblings with 
clinical picture of t reacher-collins syndrome negative for 
tcOF1 mutations
F. Lalatta1, C. Cesaretti1, B. Gentilin1, E. Folliero1, V. Bianchi1, G. Melloni1, C. 
Rossi2, C. Meazzini3, M. Bedeschi1, F. Natacci1, R. Brusati4;  
1UOS Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical 
Genetics, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Maxillo-
Facial Surgery San Paolo Universitry Hospital, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
Maxillo-Facial Surgery San Paolo University Hospital, Milano, Italy.
Congenital arhinia is an extremely rare malformation derived from an 
anomalous embryological development of the nose which normally de -
velops between the third and the tenth week of intra-uterine life. The 
pathogenesis of this anomaly is not clearly understood. Congenital ab -
sence of the nose is often associated with other defects, including ear, 
palatal and ocular malformations, central nervous system and skeletal 
anomalies. We report the case of two siblings, a 9-year-old girl and a 
2-year-old boy, with congenital total arhinia. Both had a complete ab -
sence of external nose and nasal cavities associated with dysmorphic 
facial features including downslanting of palpebral fissures, maxillary 
hypoplasia and external ear anomalies. Since congenital absence of 
the nose has been described in a few patients affected by Treacher-
Collins Syndrome, we conducted a molecular study of TCOF1 gene 
on the mother and first child DNA, which were negative for both point 
mutations and large deletions (PCR and DNA analysis through se -
quencing of the exons 1-26 and the contiguous intronic sequences). 
As congenital absence of the nose is an extraordinary occurrence in 
a family and most cases are sporadic, the recurrence of arhinia in the 
same family, as described here, suggests a common genetic and he -
reditary origin. The consanguinity of parents supports the hypothesis 
of an autosomal recessive disorder; nevertheless, we can not exclude 
a gonadic mosaicism or an autosomal dominant inheritance, as we are 
not able to verify if the father had pathological features.
P02.021  complex genotypes in arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy patients from North West spain
M. Hermida-Prieto , L. Núñez, M. I. Rodríguez-García, M. Ortiz, R. Barriales-
Villa, E. Maneiro, X. Fernández, L. Cazón, D. García, E. Veira, A. Castro-
Beiras, L. Monserrat;  
Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud-CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain.
Purpose: Desmosomal genes mutations are detected in nearly 50% of 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) patients from 
different series. Our objective was to analyze the prevalence of muta -
tions in these genes in an ARVC cohort from North West Spain.
Methods: Twenty no related index cases with ARVC diagnosis were 
clinical evaluated in a dedicated cardiomyopathies clinic. Sequence 
analysis of main desmosomal genes (PKP2, DSP, DSG2 and DSC2) 
was performed from fresh blood samples, taken after written consent.
Results: We found 10 different mutations in 13 index patients (65%). 
Four patients (20%) had complex genotypes: 1 was homozygous for a 
DSC2 gene mutation, 1 was compound heterozygous (two mutations in 
PKP2 gene) and 2 were double heterozygous (two mutations in differ -
ent genes). All mutations were novel and two (R375X, S329RfsX351) 
were present in more than one patient. Both mutations are predicted 
to produce a truncated peptide. R375X in DSC2 gene was detected in 
two patients: one was homozygous and developed early and severe 
phenotype and the other patient had a second mutation in PKP2 gene 
(S329RfsX351). Moreover, this PKP2 mutation was found in 6 differ -
ent cases.
Conclusions: Nearly, 20% of patients could have complex genotypes in 
the main desmosomal genes. The complex genotypes could develop 
early and severe phenotype. North West Spain have a highly preva -
lence (65%) of ARVC patients with desmosomal gene mutations.
P02.022  Further delineation of the cerebral morphology in AsPm-related primitive microcephaly : microcephalia ver ais not 
a small, normally organized cortex !
S. Passemard1, M. Schaer2, M. El Maleh3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy4, T. Billette de 
Villemeur5, B. Isidor6, B. Gérard1, S. Eliez7, P. Gressens8, A. Verloes1;  
1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, PARIS, France, 2Service 
Médico-Pédagogique, Département de psychiatrie, Université de Genève, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 3Dept of Medical Imaging, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, 
PARIS, France, 4Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Robert DEBRE Univ. Hospital, 
PARIS, France, 5Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Armand TROUSSEAU Univ. 
Hospital, PARIS, France, 6Dept of Genetics,Nantes Univ. Hospital, Nantes, 
France, 7Service Médico-Pédagogique, Département de psychiatrie, Université 
de Genève, Genève, Switzerland, 8INSERM U676, Robert DEBRE Univ. 
Hospital, PARIS, France.
Primary microcephalies (MicroCephaly Primary Hereditary, MCPH) 
have often been presented as a developmental disorders resulting in 
homogeneous reduction of grey matter in the cortex, without obvious 
developmental defect except neuronal apauverishment, occurring in patients with mild MR, hyperactivity and, occasionally, late onset sei -
zures. ASPM is the most commonly involved gene, explaining roughly 
25 to 50% of all cases (MCPH5). Careful clinical, neurological and 
neuroradiological investigation of 12 patients with homozygous or 
compound heterozygous mutations in ASPM revealed that 1) pheno -
type may encompass pyramidal signs and short stature (< -2 SD) ; 2) 
intelligence may be within normal values (IQ > 70) ; 3) more important -
ly, simplified gyration pattern with anteroposterior gradient is present in 
most cases,. Migration defects (heterotopias), and infratentorial anom -
alies are present in some patients. We investigated regional cerebral 
organization through 3D morphometric analysis of MRI scans in 7/12 
patients and showed that 1) reduction of brain volume affects equally 
white and grey matter. 2) Reduction of cortical volume (and surface) 
affects more the caudal part of frontal lobes and the rostral part of 
parietal areas, whereas 3) mediotemporal areas and basal structures 
are preserved, which is in accordance with preserved mnseic perfor -
mances. These data allow us to allow us to broaden the phenotype of 
MCPH and to redefine its diagnostic criteria.
P02.023  Mutations of codon 2085 in the helicase domain 
of ATRX  are recurrent and cause a moderate form of A tRX 
syndrome
C. Lacoste1, B. Leheup2, I. Agouti1, D. Mowat3, N. Levy1, C. Badens1;  
1Department of Genetics, Hôpital d‘enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 
2Department of genetics, Hôpital Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 
3Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randswick, 
Sydney, Australia.
ATRX syndrome is characterised by the association of profound men -
tal retardation, facial dysmorphism, urogenital abnormalities and al -
pha-thalassemia. A large number of ATRX  mutations have been de -
scribed as causative in ATRX syndrome, the majority being missense 
mutations. Most of the 80 missense mutations reported so far, have 
been described in one or two families with exception of the R246C 
which was found in 20% of the ATRX syndromes. Here, we described 
mutations localised on codon 2085, in one of the 2 major functional 
domains, the helicase domain, and associated with a mild form of the 
disease.
Among the patients addressed to our lab for ATRX  analysis, we 
found 5 patients from 3 families carrying a mutation on codon 2085, 
a highly conserved residue of the helicase domain. The substitution 
was R2085H in 2 families and R2085C in the last one. Clinical data 
were as follow: the 5 patients have discrete but characteristic facial 
dysmorphism and present with mental retardation: all of them acquired 
autonomous walking between 18 and 24 months, three has no speech 
skill, one can say words, the last one sentences. None of them have 
genital abnormalities nor seizure. The 3 mothers are carriers and have 
highly skewed chromosome X inactivation. No mutation of the codon 
2085 was found after testing 250 control chromosomes.
In conclusion, missense mutations localised on residue 2085 should 
clearly be considered as causative mutations even though they lead to 
moderate and incomplete forms of ATRX syndrome.
P02.024  Detection of genomic imbalances by arraycGH in two 
children with syndromic autism.
D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, S. Hadjidekova2, B. Rukova2, D. Nesheva2, E. 
Simeonov3, R. Tincheva1, D. Toncheva2;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical 
University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Pediatrics, 
University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Autism is a complex behaviorally-defined disorder of the immature 
brain. It is not a disease but a syndrome with multiple non genetic 
and/or genetic causes. Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are condi -
tions which can be either isolated or syndromic, that is associated 
with other clinical features such as facial dysmorphism, limb or vis -
ceral malformations, and growth abnormalities. Currently, diagnosable 
medical conditions, cytogenetic abnormalities, environmental factors, 
and single-gene defects associated with autism, together account for 
10-20% of cases.
We report two children with autistic behavior, mental retardation and 
dysmorphic features. We have used genomic array CytoChip (BlueG -
nome, Cambridge, UK), covering the entire genome at a median 565 
kb, a resolution optimised to detect pathogenic imbalances while mini -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
mizing polymorphisms. Array CGH- analysis revealed cryptic ampli -
fication of 16p11.2 region spanning 1,362 Mb in first patient and an 
amplification spanning 1,274Mb of 7p12.3 region in second patient. 
The microdeletion and a reciprocal microduplication of 16p11.2 region 
carry substantial susceptibility to autism and appear to account for ap -
proximately 1% of cases. 7p12.3 is a region of shared genetic associa -
tion between ASD and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
These data strongly support the idea that only a whole-genome high-
resolution analysis such as array-CGH is able to provide an accurate 
diagnosis for chromosomal imbalance in patients with ASD. Confirma -
tory FISH studies with BAC clones are planned for accurate confirma -
tion of CytoChip result.
P02.025**  Autism spectrum Disorders: emerging data from 
copy Number Variations analysis
M. Mucciolo1, R. Canitano2, M. Mencarelli1, F. Papa1, E. Katzaki1, A. Marozza1, 
L. Radice2, C. Castagnini1, L. Dosa1, M. Pollazzon1, G. Hayek2, A. Renieri1, F. 
Mari1;  
1Medical Genetics-Molecular Biology Department-University of Siena, 53100 
Siena, Italy, 2Child Neuropsichiatry, University Hospital of Siena, 53100 Siena, 
Italy.
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) have a complex and heteroge -
neous aetiology with a strong evidence of a genetic involvement. To 
assess the frequency and type of copy number variations (CNVs) in 
ASD, a cohort of 95 patients has been selected and analyzed by oligo 
array -CGH with a functional resolution of nearly 100 kb. Array-CGH 
resulted negative in 57 patients while in 38 at least one rearrangement 
was identified. A total of 51 rearrangements was identified: 23 dele -
tions and 28 duplications. Among the 38 patients with CNVs the M:
F ratio is higher than expected resulting in 6.6:1. Seven CNVs turned 
to be pathogenic: one de novo  (del Xq12) and 6 located in known 
autism susceptibility regions (dup15q13.3, dup16p13.1, delXp22.31, 
del15q11.2, del11p12, dup17q12). The 7 patients with pathogenic 
CNVs were all males with intellectual disability (ID). The majority pre -
sented with congenital anomalies (MCA) and dysmorphisms (57.1%); 
none suffered from epilepsy. Among the cohort of 57 patients without 
CNVs the M:F ratio resulted in 4.7:1, as currently reported in ASDs. ID 
was present in 96.5%; MCA and dysmorphisms were present respec -
tively in 21% and 63.2%. Epilepsy rate was 19.3%. The detection rate 
of CNVs in our series of patients is 7.4%. Patients with pathogenic 
CNVs differed from the cohort without any CNVs for the presence of 
congenital anomalies, more frequent in the first group. Furthermore, 
the rate of epilepsy found in the all group was 19.3%, while in the 
subgroup of patients with pathogenic CNVs (n=7) epilepsy was not 
detected.
P02.026  Evaluation of clinical findings in 20 patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome
O. Altiok Clark1, E. Mihci1,2, S. Akman3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, 
Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, 
Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of 
Pediatric Nephrology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by one or more of the following six major features: retinal 
degeneration, early-onset obesity, cognitive impairment, genitourinary 
tract malformations, renal dysfunction and polydactyly. According to 
recent studies, defects in the basal bodies of ciliated cells appear to 
be the underlying cause of the syndrome. Although BBS was originally 
thought to be a recessive disorder, it has since been shown that some 
forms of BBS are passed on via triallelic inheritance.
We retrospectively evaluated 20 patients with BBS because of asso -
ciated abnormalities. between January 2001 and January 2009. We 
found both classical and rare findings of BBS in our patients. We iden -
tifed a patient with persistent urogenital sinus, urethrovaginal fistule 
together with BBS as rare findings. Our special attention was given to 
monitoring those patients with renal abnormalities, because renal dis -
ease is a major cause of premature mortality in patients with BBS. We 
found renal abnormalities in 10 of the patients. The renal abnormalities 
observed ranged from minimal pelvicalyceal dilatation (PKD) to end-
stage renal failure. Among of these, four had a polycystic kidney and 
six had PKD. Due to end-stage renal failure, three of these patients 
received a renal transplant from a relative. Four of the patients were still undergoing periton dialysis at the end of the evaluation period. Be -
cause of the morbidity and mortality associated with renal abnormali -
ties in BBS, this study demonstrates the importance of long-term follow 
up so that proper care and treatment can be provided.
P02.027  A micro-duplication of the centromeric domain of the 
11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster is associated with loss of DNA methylation and familial BWs
N. Chiesa1, A. De Crescenzo2, A. Mussa1, G. Baldassarre1, L. Perone3, M. 
Carella4, M. Cirillo Silengo1, A. Riccio2, G. B. Ferrero1;  
1Department of Paediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department 
of Environmental Science, University of Naples, Caserta, Italy, 3Telethon 
Institute of Genetics and Medicine,, Naples, Italy, 4IRCCS, Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, Genetica Medica, San Giovanni Rotondo - Foggia, Italy.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder 
caused by a variety of molecular lesions affecting a two-domain clus -
ter of imprinted genes at chromosome 11p15.5. Most cases are spo -
radic and result from DNA methylation defects at either one of the two 
imprinting centres (IC1 and IC2). Here, we describe a familial case 
with a 166 kb duplication of the centromeric domain and loss of IC2 
methylation. The proband is an infant with macroglossia, macroso -
mia, onfalocele and hexadactylism, her mother and uncle presented 
with abdominal wall defects. The duplication that comprises IC2 and 
the 5’ part of the anti-sense KCNQ1OT1 gene was identified by MS-
MLPA (methylation-sensitive multiple-ligation-probe-amplification), 
confirmed by SNPa analysis and demonstrated to be in-cis by FISH. 
This genomic lesion cosegregates with BWS phenotype and IC2 hy -
pomethylation, but does not affect IC1 methylation. cDNA sequencing 
of KCNQ1OT1 demonstrated that both the maternal and paternal al -
leles were expressed in the proband and her mother, indicating loss 
of KCNQ1OT1 imprinting. The results obtained are consistent with 
the presence of a maternal IC2 duplication that results in partial hy -
pomethylation at IC2 and activation of the maternal KCNQ1OT1, likely 
silencing the imprinted genes of the IC2 domain (e.g. CDKN1C). This 
is the first familial case of BWS with IC2 hypomethylation in which 
the molecular defect is identified. Maternal 11p15.5 duplications are 
generally associated with the Silver-Russell syndrome phenotype and 
include the CDKN1C gene. On the contrary, in the reported case, the 
duplication does not include any full-length genes, affects IC2 methyla -
tion and causes BWS.
P02.028  Microdeletions within the “Imprinting region 2” on 
11p15 identify a distinct category of Beckwith-Wiedemann 
syndrome phenotype at risk for cardiac arrythmia.
M. Zollino1, F. Gurrieri1, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, R. Pietrobono1, F. Bellocci2, 
G. Neri1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 
2Istituto di Cardiologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth condition 
characterized by clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. Psycho -
motor retardation is uncommon and familiar recurrence rare.
BWS is caused by disregulation of two imprinting domains (ICR1 and 
ICR2) on 11p15, ICR2 being involved in most cases. Abnormalities of 
ICR2 include loss of methylation on the maternal allele, or point muta -
tions of CDKN1C .
We observed a 11p15 microdeletion involving ICR2 in two unrelated 
females , aged 16 and 19 years, respectively. The deletion spanned 
about 900 kb in the first case, including CDKN1C , KCNQ1  and addi -
tional 15 flanking genes. The size of the deletion in the second patient 
was 200 kb, encompassing the entire KCNQ1OT1  antisense tran -
script, ICR2 and part of KCNQ1 . Loss-of-function mutations of KCNQ1  
can be responsible for long QT syndrome type 1.
Both patients presented with an atypical BWS phenotype, including 
mental retardation in the first patient, a long QT syndrome in the sec -
ond and overgrowth and facial dysmorphisms in both. The long QT 
syndrome was responsible for a cluster of life-threatening ventricular 
fibrillation episodes, needing an urgent implant of intra-cardiac defibril -
lator.
Literature deals with only one additional BWS patient with microdele -
tion of ICR2. However this event might be under-estimated. A search 
for a ICR2 microdeletion should be performed in each BWS patient with 
impaired methylation of ICR2, and patients hemizygous for KCNQ1 
should be monitored for long QT syndrome. If a ICR2 microdeletion Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
is diagnosed in female patients, a 50% recurrence risk of BWS is ex -
pected in the offspring.
P02.029  Orofaciodigital syndromes: a case series.
I. Panigrahi, R. R. Das , R. K. Marwaha;  
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Rducation and Research, Chandigarh, India.
Introduction: Orofaciodigital syndrome (OFD), an inherited syndrome, 
with varying combinations of defects of the oral cavity, face, and hands, 
including lobulated or bifid tongue, cleft or pseudocleft palate, tongue 
tumours, missing or malpositioned teeth, hypoplastic nasal alar carti -
lage, depressed nasal bridge, bifid nasal tip, brachydactyly, clinodac -
tyly, incomplete syndactyly, and, frequently, mental retardation. They 
have variable presentations as well as inheritance patterns.
Objectives: To study clinical variability of orofaciodigital syndrome in 
subjects who were seen in genetic clinic in last 3 years.
Methods: Subjects with OFDs seen in Genetic unit in APC were sub -
jects of this retro-spective analysis.
Results: There were 4 cases with OFD with M:F ratio = 1:3 and the 
consultations were from age of 4 years to 21 years. On database 
search, the clinical diagnoses made were: OFD I, OFD II and OFD IX 
in 3 cases each with 4th subject having overlapping features of both 
OFD II & VI. The last case had lingual nodules, central polydactyly, 
bifid thumb, cardiac defect and bilateral renal parenchymal disease. 
Predominant clinical presentations were developmental delay, abnor -
mal facies, digital anomaly and short stature.
Conclusions: Subjects with OFDs can have varying clinical presen -
tation and should be differentiated from craniosynostosis syndromes 
and oral-cardio-digital syndromes. Digital anomalies may not be pres -
ent in all. A high clinical suspicion, examination of parents and ap -
propriate investigations are required to arrive at early diagnosis and 
provide proper genetic counseling. OFD II and OFD VI may represent 
a clinical continuum of same underlying gene defect.
P02.030  t wo siblings with blepharophimosis, psychomotor 
delay and severe growth failure: a new autosomal recessive 
blepharophimosis-mental retardation syndrome?
M. Dentici1, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola2;  
1IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-
Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
Blepharophimosis is characterized by a fixed reduction in the vertical 
distance between the upper and lower eyelids with short palpebral fis -
sures. It is commonly associated to other periocular anomalies that 
may occur either as isolated features or as part of multiple congenital 
anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Many syndromic blepharophimosis pa -
tients show variable degree of mental retardation and are referred to 
as BMR (blepharophimosis mental retardation), a term which includes 
a clinical and etiological heterogeneous group of disorders. We report 
on two siblings, a 6 year old girl and a 18 month old male, present -
ing overlapping clinical findings. Striking facial dysmorphisms included 
upward slanted palpebral fissures, blepharophimosis, telecanthus, 
hypertelorism, posteriorly rotated ears with over-folded helices and 
micrognathia. Ectodermal abnormalities included fine hair, sparse 
eyebrows and thin skin. Both patients had feeding difficulties with gas -
troesophageal reflux and growth retardation. Psychomotor skills were 
severely delayed and with no verbal capacity. The male sib displayed 
low GH levels, while the older sister had low cholesterol and mildly 
raised TSH levels. Numerous metabolic/genetic investigations, includ -
ing cholesterol precursors dosage and high resolution array-CGH, 
were negative. The clinical history of the siblings was uploaded to the 
Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) developed by DYSCERNE. 
Differential diagnosis with BMR syndromes, including Dubowitz syn -
drome, Marden-Walker syndrome, Ohdo/Ohdo-like syndromes and 
cholesterol storage disorders was discussed with the DDS experts 
which concluded that these two siblings likely represent a previously 
unreported autosomal recessive-BMR syndrome.
This study was supported by DYSCERNE, A European Network of Cen -
tres of Expertise for Dysmorphology (DG Sanco), Project 2006122.P02.031**  Larger cohort of Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome 
(BOFs) patients: phenotype description and TFAP2A  genotype 
findings
Y. J. Sznajer1,2, L. Burglen3, S. Blesson4, E. Bieth5, S. Lyonnet6, C. Baumann7, 
D. Lacombe8, A. David9, E. Galliani10, W. Just11;  
1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for 
Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 3Service de génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, 
Paris, France, 4Service de génétique, Pôle Biologie, CHRU de Tours - Hôpital 
Bretonneau, Tours, France, 5Service de Génétique médicale; Hôpital Purpan, 
Toulouse, France, 6Dept of Genetics, University Paris Descartes and Hôpital 
Necker Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Dept of Clinical Genetics, 
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Service de Gééntique Médicale, CHU 
Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 9Service de Génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, 
Nantes, France, 10Maxillo-Facial/Plastic Surgery Dept, Centre de Référence 
Malformations de la Face, Hôpital d’enfants Armand-Trousseau (AP-HP), Paris, 
France, 11Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
BOFS patients develop distinctive features: abnormal external ear; 
retro-auricular overlying skin; clefts or pseudocleft; eye involvement 
(microphthalmia or coloboma) and premature grey hair. Patients may 
have mental retardation and all type of deafness. TFAP2A  gene dele -
tion or missense mutations were identified in one familial and 5 spo -
radic patients (1). Stoetzel et al. confirmed these findings in one family 
and 3 sporadic patients (2). No precise phenotype criteria was validat -
ed to diagnose BOFS. A checklist was elaborated based on the pub -
lished reports available in BOFS patients. Four familial and 9 sporadic 
patients with BOFS were included in this study. All patients developed 
any type of clefts (lip, palate and/or pseudo-). Pre auricular pits/fistula 
and abnormal external ears were noted in familial presentations as 
for 6 sporadic patients. Nasolacrymal duct stenosis and malformed 
nose was diagnosed for two sporadic and one familial presentations. 
Overlying skin was found in one familial and one sporadic patients. 
Premature grey hair was noted in three familial and in one sporadic 
patients. Ophthalmic anomalies were diagnosed in the two familial as 
in 7 sporadic patients. One family had neurosensorial deafness as 4 
sporadic patients. Three sporadic patients developed mental retarda -
tion. In all affected patients but one,  TFAP2A  gene sequencing was 
diagnostic for missense/nonsense mutations or gene deletion. Hotspot 
mutations in exons 4 and 5 in the gene encoding the transcription fac -
tor AP2A were found.
References
(1) Milunsky et al. Am J Hum Genet 2008;82:1171-1177
(2) Stoetzel C. et al. Am J Med Genet 2009;149A:2141-2146
P02.032  A new case of blepharophimosis syndrome (BPEs) 
associated with translocation between chromosomes 3q and 8q
E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, V. Gorduza1, C. Bujoran2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Pediatric Hospital Iasi, 
Iasi, Romania.
We report a case of 2 month old girl with hort stature, dolichocephaly, 
blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus. The proband was 
the first child of a healthy, nonconsanguineous couple. Family anam -
nesis was negative. Evolution of pregnancy was with hydramnios; 
preterm delivery at 35 months of age. Chromosomal analisys showed 
an apparently balanced karyotype with translocation between chromo -
somes 8q and 3q. Genetic testing for parents should be performed 
in the context of genetic counseling (the karyotype of the parents - in 
work).
Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is a complex eyelid malforma -
tion characterized by four major features: blepharophimosis, ptosis, 
epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus. The diagnosis of BPES is es -
sentially based on clinical findings.
It is possible that our patient has a contiguous gene defect including at 
least one locus from chromosome 3q for a type of blepharophimosis, 
further suggesting that multiple loci exist on chromosome 3q for eyelid 
development. Cytogenetic rearrangements are rare, estimated to oc -
cur in 2% of individuals with BPES. [Beysen et al 2009]
P02.033  interstitial deletion of chromosome 3q24 to 3q25.33 
associated with an unusual brachydactly, facial telangectasia 
and brisk reflexes
C. M. Brewer1, C. John2, F. Katka3, R. Evans3;  
1Clinical Genetics Department, Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, 
United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
Kingdom, 3Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom.
We report a girl with developmental delay, neurological, dermatological 
and immune features, facial dysmorphism and unusual brachydactyly 
with a 10.7Mb interstitial deletion within 3q24 to 3q25.33.
The 4th and 5th metacarpals, and 3rd and 4th metatarsals are short, con -
sistent with the overlapping conditions of brachydactylys type D and E. 
She has marked joint laxity and brisk reflexes, facial telangectasia and 
recurrent infections. Growth is normal.
The deleted interval contains 55 annotated genes, but none is an obvi -
ous candidate for any of the features observed here.
Deletions of this region of chromosome 3 are rare, with only one fur -
ther case reported in the literature. No photos of the other case were 
published, but the description is of 1st and 2nd toes that were unusually 
long compared with the other toes. This sounds remarkably similar to 
the findings in our case.
This case is noteworthy because this case represents a new microde -
letion syndrome, and we suggest that an key feature of this may be an 
unusual form of brachydactyly.
P02.034  Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/
hypoplasia syndrome (Omim 609945) in a girl born to 
consanguineous parents
Y. Shafeghati1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1, A. W. Kuss2, H. Ropers2, A. 
Tzschach2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome 
(OMIM 609945) is a rare syndrome characterized by severe limb mal -
formations, facial dysmorphic features and additional clinical prob -
lems. Only seven patients have been reported to date, and the etiol -
ogy of this disorder is unknown. Autosomal dominant inheritance with 
variable expression has been suggested based on the presence of 
minor features in some parents and the fact that neither parental con -
sanguinity nor pairs of affected siblings were reported.
We report on the first patient with this syndrome who was born to con -
sanguineous parents. Neither the mother nor the father, who were first 
cousins, had clinical features suggestive of a manifestation of brachy -
phalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome. The pa -
tient had no siblings, and the family history was unremarkable. Clinical 
problems included brachydactyly of hands and feet, splaying of fingers 
and toes, preaxial polydactyly of feet, bilateral tibial aplasia, shortened 
radius and ulna and characteristic facial dysmorphic signs.
Consanguinity in this patient indicates an autosomal recessive etiol -
ogy, a mode of inheritance that should not be dismissed in genetic 
counseling as long as the causative gene defect of this disorder re -
mains elusive.
P02.035  A 1.6 mb deletion of the 19p13.13p13.12 region detected by array-cGH and encompassing the cAcNA1A gene 
is responsible of a non evolutive epileptic encephalopathy with 
macrocephaly, connective tissue dysplasia and urinary reflux.
F. Amram1, G. Morin1, J. Barois-Guilliot1, R. Gouron1, A. Leke1, B. Demeer1, A. 
Receveur1, S. Kanafani1, J. Andrieux2, H. Copin1, M. Mathieu1;  
1University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Lille, 
France.
This female patient is the third daughter of unrelated parents. After a 
pregnancy characterized by a polyhydramnios during the second tri -
mester and an oligoamnios at the end of the third trimester, the deliv -
ery occurred spontaneously at 41 WA. At birth, the patient presented 
a severe hypotonia, marfanoïd habitus, hyperelastic skin and severe 
gastro-oesophageal reflux requiring Nissen surgical treatment. In the 
first months she presented numerous urinary infections secondary to 
urinary tract reflux. Dysmorphic features were noticed: high and large 
forehead, frontal bossing, down slanting palpebral fissures, external 
strabismus, and arachnodactyly of fingers and toes. The outcome was 
severe: non evolutive epileptic encephalopathy, absence of speech, 
absence of walking. She also presented an advance of the stature 
(+2.5 SD) and the bone age, and a macrocephaly (+2.5 SD). At age 
11, a dorsal-lumbar scoliosis was surgically repaired.
All etiological investigations were normal: karyotype with FISH 
15q11q13, ophtalmological examination, EEG and EMG, cerebral 
MRI, muscucular and cutaneous biopsy. Array-CGH showed a de novo 19p13.13p13.12 deletion encompassing the CACNA1A gene.
This microdeletion overlapped the deletion recently reported by Auvin 
(Epilepsia, 50(11):2501-2505, 2009) concerning a patient presenting 
infantile spasms, neonatal hypotonia, macrocephaly, advance stature 
and bone age. In the overlapping region of the 2 deletions is located 
the CACNA1A gene (calcium channel alpha 1A subunit) encoding a 
sub-unit of voltage-dependant calcium channel. Mutations of this gene 
are responsible of familial hemiplegic migraine and episodic ataxia 
type 2. The haploinsufficiency of CACNA1A probably plays an impor -
tant role in the phenotype of these 2 patients.
P02.036**  sHOc2 mutations in patients with cardio-facio-
cutaneous syndrome
E. M. M. Burkitt Wright1,2, J. Shorto3, B. Kerr1,2;  
1Genetic and Developmental Medicine, Manchester Biomedical Research 
Centre, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics 
Research Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
3Manchester Regional Genetics Laboratory, Central Manchester Hospitals 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), Noonan syndrome (NS) and 
Costello syndrome (CS) show both considerable phenotypic heteroge -
neity and overlap, and arise due to mutations in several genes whose 
products interact within the RAS-MAPK pathway. Whilst HRAS  muta -
tions cause CS, many different genes ( PTPN11 , SOS1, KRAS , NRAS,  
BRAF , MEK1  and MEK2 ) cause NS and CFC, and a significant propor -
tion of NS/CFC patients have no mutation identified currently. Patients 
in whom CS is clinically suspected but no HRAS  mutation is found are 
generally considered to have CFC. De novo S2G mutations in SHOC2  
were recently reported in patients with a variant NS phenotype, ‘Noon -
an-like syndrome with loose anagen hair’. This mutation generates a 
myristoylation site, the myristoylated protein then being targeted to the 
cell membrane, where it interacts with RAS and RAF proteins.
Samples from 84 patients referred for molecular diagnostic testing of 
BRAF , KRAS , MEK1 , MEK2  and HRAS  because of a clinical suspicion 
of CFC or CS, in whom no mutation was found in these genes, were 
screened for the S2G mutation in SHOC2 . 11 such mutations were 
identified, confirming that this mutation is a common and important 
cause of a CFC/CS/Noonan-like phenotype. Further work to character -
ise this patient group is underway. These results emphasise the signifi -
cance of SHOC2 in germline disorders of the RAS-MAPK pathway and 
indicate that molecular diagnostic testing for the S2G mutation is likely 
to yield positive results in groups of patients in whom the diagnoses of 
CFC, CS or severe Noonan syndrome are being considered.
P02.037  Desmin mutations as a cause of right ventricular 
cardiac failure affect the intercalated disk.
E. Otten1, A. Asimaki2, A. Maass1, I. M. van Langen3, A. van der Wal3, N. 
de Jonge4, M. P. van den Berg1, J. E. Saffitz2, A. A. M. Wilde3,5, J. D. H. 
Jongbloed1, J. P. van Tintelen1;  
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 3Academic Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 5Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
Background: Desmin is the main intermediate filament in skeletal 
and cardiac muscle cells. Abnormal desmin causes skeletal mus -
cle weakness and/or cardiomyopathy. Desmin related myopathy 
(DRM)(MIM#601419) is associated with dilated (DCM), restrictive or 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Recently, we observed both DCM and 
(probable) Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) 
in three Dutch families carrying an identical desmin ( DES) mutation. 
This suggests DES mutations to cause cardiomyopathy affecting both 
the left and right ventricle. Because of this overlap with ARVC, we 
studied the prevalence of DES mutations in (probable) ARVC patients 
and we studied the cardiac desmosomal composition in DES mutation 
carriers.
Methods: DES was screened for mutations in 50 ARVC(-like) pa -
tients.
Besides, immunohistochemistry of desmosomal proteins was per -
formed in myocardial tissue from 3 patients carrying two different DES 
mutations, causing an ARVC(-like) phenotype in one and a severe bi -
ventricular cardiomyopathy in two other patients.
Results: No additional DES mutations were found in our patient group. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated accumulation of desmin aggre -
gates with abnormally shaped intercalated disks and normal amounts 
of desmosomal proteins in p.S13F mutation carriers but a decreased 
amount of connexin 43, desmoplakin and plakophilin 2 in two patients 
carrying the p.R454W mutation.
Conclusions: (Probable) ARVC or severe cardiomyopathy with right 
ventricular involvement are possible phenotypes in DRM. Moreover, 
we demonstrated that DES mutations may affect the architecture and/
or the localisation of multiple proteins at the intercalated disk, suggest -
ing a common pathophysiological pathway between arrhythmogenic 
cardiomyopathies caused by desmosomal gene mutations (mainly af -
fecting the right ventricle) and cardiomyopathies caused by DES muta -
tions.
P02.038  The importance of genetic examination in sex 
assessment in the new born 
O. D. Marginean , I. I. Simedrea, A. D. Anghel, E. P. Pavel;  
1 Ist Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania.
Case report: RR, a male infant, 7 months years old, referred in our 
department, from chirurgery department, for micropenia and facial di -
morphism. The child was born at 32 week of gestation, with 1800 g. 
There was no significant personal or family history for birth defects and 
genetic disorders. Examinations reveled: weigh 4500gms (< 3th per -
centile), height of 61 cms (< 3th percentile);dysmorphic facial features 
(macrocephaly- head circumference of 40 cms, frontal bossing, hypo -
telorism, prominent eyes, proeminent philtrum), anterior ears, micrope -
nis ( 0.8 cms), small scrotum and no palbably testis, without associated 
external genitalia ambiguity. According to the clinical appearance small 
phallus and scrotum the child get a male sex at birth. After inadequate 
growth of genitalia the parents decided to have a chirurgery procedure 
for solve the problem. Laboratory and exams reveals : TSH, Ft3, LH, 
FSH, Testosterone normal, 17OHP (16.9ng/ml), DHEA (1.57ng/ml). 
Bone age concordant with chronological age. Ultrashall of the pelvis- a 
uterus may be present; The hyperplasia of the adrenal glands:1/0.9/08 
mms. MRI - no evidence of the uterus. Cariotipe 46XX. The DNA testis 
for Y chromosome - negative for Y chromosome. In this moment refuse 
to change the social sex of child.
Conclusions: 
1. The clinical appearance of external genitalia may be not sufficient to 
give the social sex of children.
2. The micropenis in the infant is a real challenge to diagnose and 
treat. 
3. The congenital adrenal hyperplasia with psudohermafroditism is a 
rare disease with severe psychological implications for the child and 
his family.
P02.039  cerebrofaciothoracic syndrome: t win presentation
C. Ruggiero , M. Reyes, A. I. Corominas;  
Centro de Estudios Genéticos, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Objective: To describe two female dizygotic twins, born to non con -
sanguineous parents by means of assisted fertilization, who had facial 
dysmorphism, complex anomalies of vertebrae and ribs (such as bifid 
ribs, hemivertebrae and costal synostosis), and global developmental 
delay.
Methodology: Presentation of two girls who were studied because of 
facial and thoracic dysmorphism and mental retardation.
Conclusion and Discussion: The features are similar to those initially 
described by Pascual-Castroviejo et al in 1975 and thus represent new 
cases of cerebrofaciothoracic dysplasia (OMIM 213980). Only 13 cases 
have been previously described. The information obtained through the 
few cases described so far suggests that most likely this is a hereditary 
condition transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. There is a broad 
spectrum of differences in the phenotypic presentation between the sis -
ters and also compared with the 13 cases previously described ), which 
suggest an autosomal recessive form with wide clinical variability. This 
may reflect an interaction with other loci, or epigenetic modifications. 
The interaction with a particular intrauterin factor should be discarded 
in this case, owing to the twinning state of the sibs. We also describe 
some anomalies unreported to date in this syndrome such as cardiac 
malformations, affectation of the auditory conduits, umbilical hernia, 
fifth finger clinodactyly and Arnold Chiari type I.As more patients with 
this condition are described, the main features of this syndrome are 
becoming clearer, and also the inheritance pattern.P02.040  A novel splice mutation in CYP27A1  associated with 
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (and pulverulent cataract)
S. J. Joyce1, R. Bourkiza2, E. Meyer1, A. Reddy1, H. Patel2, M. Chan2, E. R. 
Maher1;  
1The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Barts and the 
London NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a lipid storage metabolism 
disorder, inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. CTX is charac -
terized by neurological findings (such as cerebellar ataxia and demen -
tia), premature atherosclerosis, tendon xanthomas and cataracts. It is 
caused by mutations in CYP27A1 , leading to sterol 27-hydroxylase 
deficiency and abnormal cholestanol tissue deposition.
A consanguineous Bangladeshi family with three children with pulveru -
lent cataract and global developmental delay were ascertained. Since 
learning difficulties could also be observed in two of the other siblings 
who showed no evidence of cataract, the underlying diagnosis and 
inheritance pattern was unclear.
Genetic linkage studies, employing an autozygosity mapping approach, 
were undertaken to ascertain the underlying genetic cause. The results 
showed linkage to the chromosomal region 2q35-q36 which contained 
the CYP27A1 gene. Direct sequencing of CYP27A1 revealed a homo -
zygous splice mutation in all family members with cataracts.
This finding confirms the validity of this approach when identifying 
genes responsible for disorders, even when the aetiology of the condi -
tion and diagnosis are uncertain. It highlights the importance of evalu -
ating if CTX is an appropriate diagnosis when the proband has cata -
racts, especially since the condition can be treated if identified before 
irreversible brain damage.
P02.041  clinical and genetic analysis of the CHD7  gene in 
Korean patients with cHARGE syndrome
Y. Lee1, S. Kim1, Y. Shin1, J. Kim2, H. Hong1, Y. Lee1, C. Ki2;  
1Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon, Korea, Republic of, 
2Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea, Republic 
of.
Background: CHARGE syndrome (CS; OMIM 214800) is a rare au -
tosomal dominant disease associated with coloboma, heart defects, 
choanal atresia, retarded growth and development, genital abnormali -
ties, and ear anomalies. Mutations in the CHD7  gene have been sug -
gested to be a genetic background of CS.
Methods: In this study, sequence analysis of the CHD7  gene was per -
formed in four Korean sporadic CS patients who showed clinical mani -
festations of typical or atypical CS.
Results: Four novel mutations, three nonsense mutations (Ser705X, 
Arg1069X, and Trp1534X) and one frameshift mutation (Asn -
603ThrfsX4), were identified in the CHD7  gene in the patients. Con -
genital heart disease, aplasia of the semicircular canal, sensoryneural 
hearing loss, and developmental delay were observed in all patients; 
however, choanal atresia was not seen in any of them.
Conclusions: The phenotypic expressions of these Korean patients 
with CS were different from those of other ethnicities, and allelic het -
erogeneity was found in the CHD7  gene in Korean patients with CS. 
Mutation analysis of the  CHD7  gene should be performed in Korean 
subjects to rule out the possibility of CS, even when clinical manifesta -
tions are not typical of CS.
P02.042**  congenital heart defects in patients with a CHD7 -
mutation
N. Janssen1, M. Baardman2, G. J. du Marchie Servaas3, L. Kapusta4, L. H. 
Hoefsloot5, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1;  
1Dept. Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, Netherlands, 2Dept. Genetics & EUROCAT, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Dept. 
Paediatric Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Children‘s Heart Centre, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Dept. 
Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
Loss of function mutations in the CHD7  gene cause CHARGE-syn -
drome, an autosomal dominantly inherited combination of multiple 
congenital malformations, including congenital heart defects (CHDs) 
in 66-92% of the patients. The pathogenesis and type of CHDs in 
CHARGE syndrome are still largely unknown. Most malformations in Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
CHARGE syndrome are related to the neural crest (NC), which is in 
line with our observation of a high CHD7 expression in isolated mouse 
progenitor NC cells. Cardiac NC cells are involved in pharyngeal arch 
and conotruncal defects. We hypothesise that CHDs in CHARGE syn -
drome are NC-related.
We are collecting detailed clinical information on almost 350 patients 
with a CHD7 -mutation detected by our group, and compared their 
CHDs with 381 non-syndromic CHD-patients collected between 2004 
and 2008 by EUROCAT.
The first results show a heart defect in 189 out of 231 CHARGE-pa -
tients (82%). Detailed cardiac information is available for 163 of these 
189 patients. Of all CHDs 31% were NC-related (e.g. tetralogy of Fal -
lot, right descending aorta), 56% possibly NC-related (e.g. non-speci -
fied VSDs) and only 13% were non-NC-related (e.g. muscular and 
membranous VSDs, hypoplastic left heart). In the control group these 
figures were 15%, 40% and 45% respectively (p<0.000).
These data confirm an important role for the cardiac neural crest in the 
pathogenesis of CHDs in CHARGE syndrome.
P02.043  Dental abnormalities associated with cherubism
L. Preda1, O. Dinca1, A. Bucur1, C. Dragomir2, E. Severin1;  
1“Carol Davila“ Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetic Lab, 
Bucharest, Romania.
Cherubism is an abnormal hereditary condition characterized by pro -
gressive bilateral swelling of the mandible, especially in children. In 
some cases of cherubism, the entire jaw swells and the eyes turn up, 
enhancing the cherubic facial appearance. Frequently, dental abnor -
malities are associated with cherubism: congenitally missing second 
and third molars; premature exfoliation of the deciduous teeth and dis -
placement of permanent teeth secondary to the jaw lesions. Mutations 
in SH3BP2 gene cause cherubism. 
Case report: A 9-year-old girl, youngest of three siblings, was diag -
nosed with cherubism based on clinical findings, radiological manifes -
tations and molecular genetic testing. There was no family history of 
similar findings. 
Results and conclusions: Clinical examination revealed swellings at 
angles of mandible, an asymmetrical enlargement of the mandible and 
chubbiness of the face. Mixed dentition and poor occlusion were no -
ticed. No ocular, respiratory or cardiovascular problems were found. 
Except her facial appearance, bad alignment of the teeth and maloclu -
sion, the patient did not exhibit any physical abnormality and showed 
no signs of mental retardation. Panoramic radiograph showed clearly 
that the facial enlargement is the result of bone changes. Orthopanto -
mogram revealed bilateral multilocular areas of diminished density in 
the mandible and congenitally missing second and third lower molars. 
The maxillary dentition was not affected. A mutation was identified in 
the SH3BP2 gene in proband and her asymptomatic mother. Lack of 
signs in mother and the difference in clinical presentation between pa -
tient and her carrier mother are consistent with incomplete penetrance 
in females and variable expression of mutation in SH3BP2 gene.
P02.044  Familial supernumerary teeth due to cleidocranial 
dysplasia
D. Belengeanu , D. Stoicanescu, S. Farcas, N. Meszaros;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Cleidocranial dysplasia is a rare generalized dysplasia of osseous and 
dental tissues with an autosomal dominant inheritance. The disorder 
is characterized by typical facial and dental appearance, skeletal dys -
plasia and short stature, the two most striking features being hypo or 
aplastic clavicles and a surprisingly increased number of supernumer -
ary teeth. Intrafamilial variations of the skeletal abnormalities have 
been described , but those of dental abnormalities are obscure yet. The 
majority of cases occur due to loss of function mutations in the RUNX2 
gene, which encodes for a transcription factor that is essential for os -
teoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. It is estimated that 
the proportion of cases caused by a de novo mutation is high. We 
present the case of a newborn female with skeletal findings consistent 
with cleidocranial dysplasia, facial dysmorphism with bossing of the 
forehead, hypertelorism and a depressed nasal bridge, widely open 
anterior fontanelle, high-arched palate. On lateral and postero-anterior 
cephalometric radiographs, we could find unclosed coronal suture. Her 
mother, 31 years old, has short stature, the same dysmorphic features 
of the face, patent anterior fontanelle, short, broad thumbs, retained primary teeth. On panoramic radiographic examination unerupted su -
pernumerary teeth in both maxilla and mandible were seen (total of 
19). The probands granmother was also said to have abnormalities in 
the numbers and eruption of the permanent teeth. In the management 
of the disease dental procedures, speech therapy, head protection, 
preventive treatment for osteoporosis are considered.
P02.045  Array-cGH detects mosaic tetrasomy 12p (Pallister-
Killian syndrome) in peripheral blood without invasive skin 
biopsy
U. Koehler1, M. Locher1, S. Balg1, K. Reiter2, E. Holinski-Feder1;  
1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum München, München, Germany, 2von 
Haunersches Kinderspital, München, Germany.
We report on a 3 month old girl presenting with multiple dysmorphic 
features including hypotonia, irregular respiration, hypertelorism, long 
philtrum, prominent forehead, retrognathy, low set, dysplastic ears, 
and impaired hearing. She is the second child of a non consanguine -
ous couple. Karyotyping of peripheral blood revealed an inconspicu -
ous karyotype. Because of the profound psychomotor retardation at 
the age of six months, Array-CGH-analysis was requested.
Array-CGH with genomic DNA from peripheral blood using 105K oligo 
arrays, revealed an amplification of the complete short arm of chromo -
some 12, which led to the assumption of an additional marker chromo -
some 12 and most probably of a mosaic isochromosome 12p which is 
common in patients presenting with Pallister-Killian syndrome. Karyo -
typing of 100 metaphases and interphase FISH analysis on nuclei from 
cultured T-lymphocytes using a chromosome 12 centromeric probe 
failed, simply because detection of an isochromosome 12p in stimu -
lated T-lymphocytes is hard to achieve as only 1-2% of lymphocyte 
metaphases contain the additional isochromosome 12p.
The subsequent karyotyping on fibroblasts of a cultured skin biopsy 
confirmed the presence of an isochromosome 12p (tetrasomy 12p) in 
56% of cells. These results refer to Pallister-Killian syndrome and the 
girl reported shows several correlating features.
Up to now, analysis of fibroblasts from invasive skin biopsies was the 
only opportunity to detect the additional isochromosome 12p in Pal -
lister-Killian syndrome patients. Array-CGH with genomic DNA from 
peripheral blood, however, is an adequate and powerful tool to investi -
gate children suspected of having Pallister-Killian syndrome. An inva -
sive skin biopsy is no longer required.  
P02.046  High-Level expression of functional recombinant 
human coagulation factor Vii in insect cells
N. Masroori1,2, M. Habibi Roudkenar2, R. Halabian2, M. Mohammadipour2, M. 
Amani2, P. Bahmani2;  
1Islamic Azad University, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Recombinant coagulation factor VII (FVII) has been introduced as a 
potential therapeutic intervention in hemophilia patients who produce 
antibodies against the coagulation factors. Mammalian cell lines pro -
vide only low levels of expression, however the Spodoptera frugiperda  
cell line Sf9 and baculovirus have proved to be a powerful system for 
high-level expression of recombinant proteins. Due to the lack of en -
dogenous vitamin K-dependent carboxylase, expression of functional 
FVII through this system is impossible. In the present study, we report 
a simple but versatile method to overcome the defect for high-level 
expression of the functional recombinant coagulation FVII in Sf9 cells. 
This method involves expression of both the human gamma-carboxyl -
ase (hGC) and human FVII genes in the host. The cDNAs of hGC and 
FVII were isolated and cloned into appropriate vectors. Recombinant 
baculoviruses carrying the human FVII and hGC genes were gener -
ated and insect cells were directly coinfected with the recombinant 
baculoviruses. Expression of the recombinant FVII (rFVII) was veri -
fied, purified, and the biological activity was determined. The expres -
sion of FVII and hGC mRNAs in coinfected Sf9 cells were detected 
by RT-PCR and further confirmed by Western blot analysis. A fourfold 
decrease in clotting time was observed. Whereas no decrease in pro -
thrombin time was noted when the rFVII expressed in the absence of 
hGC, the results indicate that the expression of hGC confers functional 
activity of rFVII. Therefore it may possible to express other vitamin K-
dependent coagulation factors using this method in the future.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
P02.047  Ophthalmic findings in the Greek isolate of Cohen 
syndrome.
S. Douzgou1, J. R. Samples2,3, N. Georgoudi4, M. B. Petersen1;  
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s 
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Rocky Vista University, Parker, CO, United States, 
3Department of Opthalmology, Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, 
OR, United States, 4Department of Mental Health and Social Welfare, Institute 
of Child Health, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Cohen syndrome is a rare condition of mild to moderate developmen -
tal delay, characteristic craniofacial features, childhood hypotonia, joint 
hyperextensibility, neutropenia, and a variety of ophthalmic abnormali -
ties. A high frequency of the syndrome has been observed in a Greek 
island with 2,000 inhabitants and a high degree of inbreeding. All pa -
tients were homozygous for a COH1 deletion of exons 6 to 16, sug -
gesting a founder effect. We present the results of their first systematic 
ophthalmologic assessment.  
Myopia and chorioretinal atrophy were present in all patients of this 
cohort. Yet, in contrast to all groups previously reported, the major -
ity presented corneal changes, independently from age, gender and 
family history. A pair of sisters, aged 11 and 15 years old, presented 
bilateral keratoconus. More frequently (86%) than in any other ethnic 
group, Greek patients presented cataracts that were bilateral and often 
graded as high as 3, even at a young age. As a whole, the ophthalmic 
phenotype of the Greek isolate of Cohen syndrome was characterized 
by the involvement of both the posterior and the anterior eye segment, 
bilaterally, in the majority of cases (93%).
Greek Cohen subjects that share a founder mutation are at a higher 
risk of developing blindness in respect to those of other ethnicities and 
genotypes. This study added to the range of visual problems seen in 
children and adults with Cohen syndrome the finding of thin corneas 
and highlighted the need for pachymetry measurement as a means 
of surveillance and prediction of the visual impairment frequently ob -
served.
P02.048  Two years experience of VPS1B  gene sequencing: 
confirmation of diagnostic criteria, value of array-CGH in 
identifying large rearrangements and identification of a new 
phenotype
L. Faivre1, P. Sarda2, A. Moncla3, S. El Chedadeh1, P. Callier1, N. Gigot1, D. 
Lacombe4, L. Burglen5, M. Rio6, P. Edery7, C. Missirian3, C. Popovici3, B. Aral1, 
C. Thauvin-Robinet1;  
1Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Génétique, Montpellier, France, 3Cytogénétique, 
Marseille, France, 4Génétique, Bordeaux, France, 5Génétique, Trouseau, Paris, 
France, 6Génétique, Necker, Paris, France, 7Génétique, Lyon, France.
Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive inherited disorder that 
results from mutations in the VPS13B  gene. Clinical features consist 
of a combination of mental retardation, facial dysmorphism, post-natal 
microcephaly, truncal obesity, slender extremities, joint hyperexten -
sibility, myopia, progressive chorioretinal dystrophy and intermittent 
neutropenia. From the experience of 42 patients (36 families) referred 
for molecular analysis of VPS13B  for suspicion of Cohen syndrome, 
two mutations were found in 7 families, one mutation was found in 2 
families, and none in 27 families. 244K array-CGH revealed two intra -
genic rearrangements in the two families with only one mutation (one 
deletion and one duplication). We found that the presence of chorioret -
inal dystrophy (92% versus 32%, p=0.0023), intermittent neutropenia 
(92% versus 5%, p<0.001) and postnatal microcephaly (100% versus 
48%, p=0.0045) was significantly higher in the group of patients with 
VPS13B  gene mutations compared to the group of patients without 
mutations. All patients with VPS13B  mutations had chorioretinal dys -
trophy and/or intermittent neutropenia. The Kolehmainen diagnostic 
criteria provided 100% sensitivity and 77% specificity. Interestingly, we 
found an adult aged 34 years compound heterozygous for two splicing 
variants (IVS34+2T_+3AinsT and IVS57+2T>C) with dysmorphic fea -
tures, normal incisors, microcephaly, severe neutropenia responible 
of recurrent infections at age 2 years and chorioretinal dystrophy at 
age 22 years but absence of obesity and mental retardation (total IQ = 
100). This observation enlarges the phenotype of the VPS13B  gene, 
but further underscores the importance of the two key features in the 
indication for a VPS13B gene study.P02.049  P628L  and G624D  COLA  mutations do not cause 
classic X-linked Alport syndrome but a milder nephropathy 
resembling thin Basement membrane Nephropathy
P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, M. Hadjigavriel2, M. Arsali3, C. Patsias3, P. 
Zirogiannis4, C. Stavrou5, E. Alexopoulos6, A. Pierides7, C. Deltas1;  
1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Nephrology, Larnaca 
General Hospital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 3Department of Nephrology, Nicosia 
General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Lamia Hospital, Lamia, Greece, 
5Evangelismos Hospital, Paphos, Cyprus, 6Department of Nephrology, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 7Department of Nephrology, 
Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Classical X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS), caused by mutations in 
COL4A5 , is associated with childhood hematuria progressing to pro -
teinuria, chronic renal failure (CRF) and end-stage kidney disease 
(ESKD), often accompanied by deafness. Renal biopsies present 
splitting, lamellation and thickening of the glomerular basement mem -
brane.
We studied clinically and genetically two Greek and two Cypriot fami -
lies with a clinical and pedigree based suspicion of XLAS despite pre -
senting mild characteristics of the syndrome. DNA linkage analysis 
and direct sequencing resulted in the identification of mutation CO-
L4A5 -G624D in the Greek families and COL4A5 -P628L mutation in 
the Cypriot families. The clinical characteristics of most male patients 
in these four families are surprisingly mild. Four males currying G624D 
reached ESKD after the age of 39 and one showed Thin Basement 
Membrane Nephropathy (TBMN, a mild nephropathy caused in many 
cases by heterozygous  COL4A3  or COL4A4 mutations) on Electron 
Microscope. Another five of nine males with mild mutation P628L de -
veloped ESKD between 30 and 57 years while three show mild CRF at 
similar ages. Biopsy in one of them showed TBMN. Mutations G624D 
and P628L are very near the 12th natural interruption of the COL4A5  
triple helical domain and this may explain the much milder phenotype.
Concluding, some COL4A5  mutations may not lead to ESKD until the 
40’s and 50’s. The phenotypic spectrum may extend to milder forms 
such as TBMN and late-onset ESKD. This wider or milder spectrum of 
symptoms may be attributed to the position of the mutation relative to 
the collagenic interruptions.
P02.050  Familial congenital diaphragmatic hernia, cystic 
kidneys and cardiac anomalies: A new X-linked syndrome?
A. T. Yeung1, S. Keating2, R. Silver3, D. Chitayat1,3;  
1Division of Metabolic and Clinical Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, 
The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 
2Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and 
Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) occurs in approximately 1 in 
3000 live births and is associated with significant morbidity and mor -
tality. Etiologically, CDH is a heterogeneous with most isolated cases 
being multifactorial. About 50% of the cases are ‘non-isolated’, with as -
sociated extra-pulmonary anomalies. Some of these cases are single 
gene disorders and 5-10% have a chromosomal aetiology.
We describe two male siblings of non-consanguineous Caucasian 
parents with CDH, distinctive facial dysmorphism, cardiac anomalies 
and renal cysts - a constellation of features not consistent with other 
previously described CDH syndromes. Both siblings exhibited coarse 
facial features, hypertelorism, brachydactyly, dilatation of the ascend -
ing aorta, valvular dysplasia and enlarged cystic kidneys. In addition, 
sibling two had hepatomegaly, splenomegaly and enlarged thymus as 
well some intracranial white matter calcification. Karyotype in both sib -
lings was 46, XY and microarray analysis in the second sib was nor -
mal. A maternal uncle had died in infancy as the result of CDH. Thus, 
the pedigree is strongly suggestive of X-linked inheritance.
We review the features of other known X-linked CDH syndromes 
which include Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome, Craniofrontonasal 
syndrome, Thoracolumbar syndrome and X-linked Cornelia De Lange 
syndrome. None of these are reconciled by the phenotype in our two 
cases and indeed, genetic testing for GPC3  to rule out Simpson-Gola -
bi-Behmel syndrome was negative. We believe that this family exhibits 
a new X-linked genetic syndrome of which congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia is a principal feature.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology70
P02.051  molecular karyotyping provides etiological diagnosis 
in two malformative patients with blurred chromosomal 
aberrations
S. P. Hadjidekova1, D. M. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, I. I. Dimova1, B. B. Rukova1, D. V. 
Nesheva1, R. S. Tincheva2, D. I. Toncheva1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
2State University Pediatrics Hospital “Queen Evdokia”, Medical Faculty, Medical 
University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Array CGH has proved useful as a diagnostic tool for patients with 
developmental delay and congenital malformations. We screened 2 
patients with ambiguous cytogenetic results in order to disclosure the 
molecular basis of the mutations.  We have used genomic array Cyto -
Chip (BlueGnome, Cambridge, UK), covering the entire genome at a 
median 565Kb. It investigate sub-telomeres at a median 250Kb resolu -
tion, reliably detect mosaicism and examine 90 known genetic condi -
tions at a median 100Kb resolution.
Case 1. 10 years old girl with Kabuki make-up syndrome characterized 
by craniofacial dysmorphism: hypertelorism,  up slanting palpebral fis -
sures, ptosis, short philtrum, depressed nasal bridge, microretrogna -
thia, preauricular tag; generalized hypotonia, bilateral simian creases, 
wide spaced nipples, four toes clinodactyly of the toes. The karyo -
type was 46,XX,add(4)(q35) and array CGH revealed a duplication of 
(6)(q25.1;q25.3) spanning 6.377Mb as well as a 4q35.1 duplication of 
3.815Mb.
Case 2. In the second case with karyotype 46,XX,add(17)(q25) array 
CGH detected duplication of (17)(q24.2;q25.1) region encompassing 
9.58Mb in a 1 year old girl with polydactily of toes and fingers and 
craniofacial dysmorphism: microcephaly, hypertelorism, low-set ears, 
high palate.
Confirmatory FISH studies with BAC clones are planned for accurate 
confirmation of CytoChip result. The influence of the known genes in 
the imbalanced regions and their correlation to the phenotype will be 
discussed.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that molecular karyotyping enables a 
diagnosis in patients with unclear cytogenetic results. Furthermore, we 
demonstrate the effect of causal CNVs on the development of dys -
morphism.
P02.052  Associated malformations in patients with limb 
reduction deficiencies
C. Stoll , Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth;  
genetique medicale, strasbourg, France.
Infants with limb reduction deficiencies (LRD) often have other as -
sociated congenital malformations. The purpose of this investigation 
was to assess the prevalence and the types of associated malforma -
tions in a defined population. This study included special strengths: 
each affected child was examined by a geneticist, all elective termina -
tions were ascertained, and the surveillance for malformations was 
continued until 1 year of age. The associated malformations in infants 
with LRD were collected in all livebirths, stillbirths and terminations of 
pregnancy during 26 years in 347,810 consecutive births in the area 
covered by our population based registry of congenital malformations. 
Of the 271 LRD infants born during this period, representing a preva -
lence of 7.8 per 10,000, 57.9% had associated malformations. There 
were 17(6.3%) patients with chromosomal abnormalities including 10 
trisomies 18, and 62 (22.9%) nonchromosomal recognized dysmor -
phic conditions. There were no predominant recognised dysmorphic 
conditions, but VA(C)TER(L) association. However numerous recog -
nised dysmorphic conditions were registered. Seventy eight (28.8 %) 
of the patients were multiply, non syndromic, non chromosomal mal -
formed infants (MCA). Malformations in the urogenital system (n=50, 
14.2%), the cardiovascular system (n=40, 11.4%), the central nervous 
system (n=27, 7.7%), and the digestive system (n=16, 4.6%) were 
the most common other malformations. The prevalence of associated 
malformations, which was more than one in two infants, emphasizes 
the need for a thorough investigation of infants with LRD. A routine 
screening for other malformations especially cardiovascular system, 
urogenital system, central nervous system, and digestive system may 
be considered in infants and in fetuses with LRD.P02.053  Further case of 12q duplication: Wolf- Hirschhorn 
syndrome phenocopy or distinct syndrome?
M. Bertoli1,2, V. Alesi2, M. Abate3, C. Palmieri3, G. Barrano2, S. Zampatti1,3, M. 
Frontali3, A. M. Nardone3;  
1Dipartmento di Biopatologia e Diagnostica per Immagine, Universita’ di Tor 
Vergata, Roma, Italia, Rome, Italy, 2Ospedale San Pietro Fatebenefratelli, 
Roma. Centro Ricerche, Unita’ di Genetica Medica., Rome, Italy, 3Fondazione 
Policlinico Tor Vergata Roma, U.O.C. Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Rome, 
Italy.
Interstitial duplication of short arm of chromosome 12 is a very rare 
cytogenetic syndrome previously reported as a phenocopy of Wolf- 
Hirschhorn Syndrome (DallaPiccola et al.,2008).
We present a new case of 12q13 duplication in a 6 years old girl with 
similar dysmorphic features in early infancy, but with a facial pheno -
type evolving with age and suggesting a possible different gestalt in 
older patients.
She was born at 31weeks of gestation after uneventful pregnancy. Ex -
amination in neonatal period showed measurements under 3rd cen -
tile, palatoschisis, lacrimal duct obstruction, malar hypoplasia, shallow 
orbit with exophtalmo,hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, 
high arched eyebrows,cleft palate, corneal opacity.
Early motor development was slightly delayed.At the age of 2 some 
similarities with Wolf- Hirschhorn Syndrome dysmorphic features were 
noted.
At 6 years she presents with an ataxic but autonomous walk and a bor -
der line - mild mental retardation. In addition to previous dysmorphic 
features, she has a longer face, prominent nasal bridge, and promi -
nent superior-orbit ridge. Hands are small and show a thick, slightly 
redundant and hypercheratinized skin.
CGH Array analysis (CytoChipOligo ISCA 4X44K) with a resolution 
of 75Kb, revealed a duplication of the long arm of chromosome 12 
(dup12q13.13).
Compared to the previous case, our patient carries a smaller duplica -
tion. Although some features of the present patient at birth and at the 
age of 2 are reminiscent of the Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome, the actual 
clinical picture appears different.
Differences with the previously reported case will be discussed in 
terms of age and of size of duplication region.
P02.054  Prenatal diagnosis of Apert syndrome-case report
V. Varlas , L. Turculet, F. Nedelea, G. Peltecu;  
Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania.
Apert syndrome is one of the craniosynostosis syndromes. It has an 
autosomal dominant inheritance and is characterized by the associa -
tion of craniostenosys and osseous and membranous syndactyly of 
the four extremities. The incidence has been estimated at 1/50000 
births. The craniosynostosis is bicoronal and is present at birth. Most 
of the cases are “de novo” mutations, and could be associated with 
advanced paternal age.
We present a case of pregnant woman who came for second opinion 
of ultrasound investigation for severe anomalies of extremities, detect -
ed at 21 weeks of pregnancy. Those was characterized by complete 
syndactyly of all extremities,with absence of movements and also as -
sociated anamaly of cranian shape, bilateral cleft lip and palat. Those 
dates rised the suspicion of Apert syndrome. It is worth mentioning ad -
vance paternal age of 55 years old. Because of the severity of anoma -
lies detected the family decided to interrupt the pregnancy and clinical 
examination of the fetus confirm the diagnosis of Apert syndrome.
P02.055  First cases of craniosynostosis diagnosed by custom molecular microarray (Array cGc)
P. Tavares1, L. Lameiras1, L. Dias1, L. Nunes2, J. Saraiva3, A. Fortuna4, M. 
Cunha5, M. H. Carreiro6, M. Rosa7, J. Sá1,3, S. Almeida1,2, A. Palmeiro1, P. 
Rendeiro1;  
1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., 
Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 
4Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, IP, Porto, Portugal, 5Centro 
Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes Alto Douro EPE, Vila Real, Portugal, 6Hospital 
Professor Doutor Fernando Fonseca EPE, Amadora, Portugal, 7Hospital Garcia 
de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal.
Introduction: Craniosynostosis is a condition of variable aetiology char -
acterized by premature closure of calvarial skull bones. With many 
sutures closing prematurely, the skull cannot expand to accommodate Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology71
the growing brain, which leads to several consequences, including de -
velopmental delay, mental retardation and vision and hearing problems 
can also appear. Most cases are diagnosed during the neonatal period 
but many cases are detected sooner by the ultrasound during the pre -
natal period. Because this disorder is clinically heterogeneous, some 
carriers are not detected until late in infancy or only detected after the 
birth of an affected child. The major conditions, Muenke, Pfeiffer, Apert, 
Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Seathre-Chotzen-like Syndromes, are 
related with mutations located in the different genes of the Fibroblast 
Growth Factor Receptors (FGFR) 1, 2 and 3.
Method: Using new custom microarray panel (Arrays CGC - Patent 
Pending) that contains a panel of 10 point mutations, identified in 4 
main genes involved on syndromic craniosynostosis it is possible to 
identify the molecular basis of the most frequent and severe forms. We 
report here our experience using this new methodology.
Results: We analyzed 9 cases (8 peripheral blood and 1 amniotic fluid) 
and in two we detected the c.866A>C (p.Gln289Pro) mutation in het -
erozygozity in the FGFR2 gene and the c.755C>G (p.Ser252Trp) in 
the FGFR2 gene. Turnaround time was 2 weeks.
Conclusion: This approach drastically reduces turnaround time, main -
taining accuracy and liability. Faster diagnostic is achieved, allowing 
early decision-making process in patient management.
P02.056  craniosynostosis, pigmentary disorder and 
hemimegalencephaly in a patient with fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 ( FGFR ) mutation.
G. M. H. Abdel-Salam1, L. Flores-Sarnat2, M. O. El-Ruby3, J. Parboosingh4, T. 
El-Badry5, L. Effat6, P. Curatolo7, S. A. Temtamy1;  
1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, 
2Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Neurology, Alberta Children’s 
Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Clinical Genetics 
Departmnt, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, 4Molecular Diagnostic 
Lab, Alberta Children’s Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 
5Orodental Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, 
6Human Molecular Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Giza, 
Egypt, 7Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Neuroscience ,Tor Vergata 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
We describe a 2-year-old Egyptian boy, born with abnormal skull shape 
to healthy consanguineous young parents. At 2 months he showed: 
midface hypoplasia, proptosis, and low-set ears, not associated with 
acanthosis nigricans. He had several oval hypomelanotic patches on 
the skin. Mutation analysis of exons IIIa and IIIc in FGFR2 and FGFR3 
and screening of the two genes of TSC mutations were performed. 
A 3D CT scan of the cranium showed synostosis of the uni-coronal, 
sagittal and lambdoid sutures, whereas brain MRI showed left hemi -
megalencephaly, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and abnormal 
hippocampus. The patient was found to have a de novo point muta -
tion of the FGFR3 gene.  A major screening of the two genes of TSC 
mutations was negative. At 18 months of age he developed obstruc -
tive hydrocephalus. His development is normal and his neurological 
examination showed no asymmetry of movements, tone and reflexes. 
Apart from febrile seizures, there is no history of epilepsy until now. We 
think this is a previously unreported association which could be a new 
syndrome allelic to Crouzon dermoskeletal syndrome. There is pheno -
typical overlap with Muenke syndrome and craniofacial dyssynostosis. 
Hydrocephalus should be detected early for opportune treatment.
P02.057  Longer term survival of a child with autosomal 
recessive cutis laxa due to a novel FiBULiN 4 mutation.
S. L. Sawyer1, J. Parboosingh1, F. Dicke2, B. McInnes1, F. P. Bernier1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 
2Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
Autosomal recessive cutis laxa (ARCL) is a heterogeneous connective 
tissue disorder which continues to be further sub classified by molecu -
lar etiology. We describe a six year old boy who presented with severe 
aortic root dilatation at one year of age requiring semi urgent surgical 
repair. He also has arterial tortuosity, generalized hypermobility, mild 
cutis laxa and a history of bilateral inguinal hernias. His parents are 
consanguineous and related to the parents of three distant cousins 
who all died in the first few years of life. These children were originally 
published by Welsh et al in 1971 as a novel connective tissue disor -
der. We identified candidate regions using homozygosity mapping and 
a high density SNP array; genotyping the obligate carrier parents of the deceased children and our patient. An inspection of the genes in 
these regions identified Fibulin 4 (EFEMP2) as a likely candidate, and 
a homozygous nonsynonymous mutation at c.376 G>A (p.E126K) in 
exon 4 was identified in the patient. The obligate carriers were hetero -
zygous at this position, and the mutation was not present in healthy 
controls. All amino acid changes at this highly conserved region in the 
EGF binding domain are predicted to be damaging. This is only the 
fourth family, to our knowledge, with ARCL due to Fibulin 4 deficiency 
and the emerging phenotype of this subgroup of patients will be re -
viewed. Although postulated in the literature to be universally lethal, 
our experience suggests that early and aggressive treatment of aortic 
aneurysms can result in longer term survival.
P02.058  Trisomy 21 and false positive sweat test
L. Pop1, Z. Popa2, C. Nicolicea3, I. Ciuca3, A. Lacatusu3, C. Gug4, L. Tamas5, I. 
Popa3;  
1Pediatric II Department UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic 
Fibrosis Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 3Pediatric II Department, UMF V Babes, 
Timisoara, Romania, 4Department of Genetics, UMF V Babes, Timisoara, 
Romania, 5Biochemistry Department, UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Romania.
The paper evaluates the possible relation of 21 trisomy and sweat 
test result in cystic fibrosis. Material and method: 5 month old girl in -
fant was admitted to hospital for evaluation of a particular phenotype. 
The clinical examination at admission revealed hypotrophyc child with 
particular phenotype (epicanthic skin folds, eyelid slit, low-seat ears, 
hypertelorism, epicanthus, a slightly open mouth with tongue protru -
sion, simian crease, a groove between the great toe and the second 
toe = the sandal sign), pallor, globally reduced tissue, a hypotonia, no 
pathological change in lungs at auscultation, systolic murmur of III /VI 
degrees well-beating peripheral pulse, abdominal hypotonia with right 
abdominal diastasis, liver and spleen within normal limits. The particu -
lar phenotype was assimilated to a Langdon-Down syndrome Results: 
The kariotype has confirmed a structural chromosomal abnormality of 
robertsonian translocation type between acrocentric chromosomes 21 
and 22, and a numerical chromosomal abnormality consistent with a 
total trisomy 21 type, the cytopenic formula being: 46, XX, -22, +21, 
trob (21;22). The sweat test was positive; NaCl 86 mmol/l and 98 mmol/
l the second test. The genetic analysis for cystic fibrosis was negative 
for the 29 most common mutations for central-eastern european area. 
Echocardiography revealed a common atrioventricular canal complete 
form. An abdominal ultrasonography showed several images interpret -
ed as cholelithiasis. Conclusion: The question is if there is an associa -
tion between trisomy 21 and cystic fibrosis or another condition is the 
leading cause of false positive sweat test still has to be answered.
P02.059  t rends in median Age at Death from cystic Fibrosis in 
Brazil from 1979 to 2005
C. L. A. Paiva , V. G. de Carvalho, J. S. Corrêa, S. R. Middleton;  
Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
The aim of this work is to display the temporal trends in median age at 
death (MAD) from cystic fibrosis (CF) in Brazil, and to compare these 
findings with other international trends in CF MAD. Fogarty et al (2000) 
investigating the same parameter for developed countries from 1974 
to 1994, came to the conclusion that MAD from CF was increasing, but 
their data implied that clinically significant differences in survival with 
CF persist between countries. Therefore, we investigated all persons 
registered in Brazil as having died of CF in specified years. Mortality 
data for CF (International Classification Disease CID- 9 code 277.0 
between 1979 and 1995; and CID-10 codes E84.0; E84.1; E84.8 
and E84.9 between 1996 and 2005) were obtained from the Brazilian 
System for Mortality Information - SIM Data SUS. In Brazil, the total 
number of notified deaths from CF was 1455 from 1979 to 2005. We 
found that, in 1979, the MAD was 3,57 years, and, in 2005, it was 
23,45 years. The Brazilian means are much lower than those found by 
Forgaty and collaborators for developed countries. In 1994, they found 
a MAD of 21 y. and in Brazil it was 12, 5 y. In 1979, the MAD for our 
country was 3,39 y, while five years earlier, in 1974, they found a MAD 
of 8 y for developed countries. Furthermore, our results have shown 
that no increase of MAD occurred in Brazil from 1979 to 1984, however 
from 1984 to 2005 it had a sixfold increase.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology72
P02.060  De novo interstitial 8p23.1 deletions identified by array-
CGH in two patients: definition of the critical region for cardiac 
malformation.
C. Rigon , M. Cassina, K. Ludwig, M. Forzan, A. Bruson, R. Tenconi, M. 
Clementi;  
Department of pediatrics, Padova, Italy.
8p23.1 deletions have recently been described as cause of complex 
congenital heart defects and diaphragmatic hernias. Moreover haplo -
insufficiency of GATA4, located at 8p23.1, is thought to play a critical 
role in the cardiac development.
An interstitial deletion of 8p23.1 has been reported only in 9 children; 
in 4 of them it has been characterized using array-CGH analysis, while 
in the remaining 5 cases it was detected by FISH analysis. All cases 
reported to date are de novo .
We describe two unrelated patients with complex congenital heart 
malformation, microcephaly, plagiocephaly and similar face dysmor -
phisms. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent platform, 44K) revealed a micro -
deletion of 8p23.1 in both patients (3.5 Mb and 4.9 Mb in size, respec -
tively).
In the 6 children investigated by array-CGH (our 2 patients and the 4 
cases in literature) we could identify a common region spanning from 
8,850,913 bp to 11,770,357 bp. GATA4 is the only gene in this deleted 
region with a suggested role in heart development and more studies 
are needed to clarify its involvement in determining the cardiac phe -
notype.
Our observation further stresses the importance of performing array-
CGH in children with complex heart malformations and minor dysmor -
phisms, as it is possible that other genes mapping within the deleted 
region might contribute to the described characteristic phenotype of 
del8p23.1 syndrome.
Investigating the precise size of the deleted region is mandatory to 
delineate the critical region of the del8p23.1 syndrome.
P02.061  Deletion 3p syndrome and phenotypic change with age: 
an adult case report
I. J. Garcia-Gonzalez1, V. M. Anguiano-Alvarez1, J. L. Villarreal-Salgado2, G. H. 
Galicia-Hernandez1, I. González-Godinez3, C. A. Galvan-Diaz4, A. M. Franco-
Martinez1, N. O. Davalos1,5;  
1Instituto de Genética Humana “Dr. Enrique Corona”, CUCS, UdeG;, 
Guadalajara, Mexico, 2Hospital Regional de Zona “Valentín Gómez Farías”, 
ISSSTE, Cirugia reconstructiva, Zapopan, Mexico, 3Universidad Autonoma de 
Ciudad Juarez, Cd. Juarez, Mexico, 4Centro De Investigación Biomédica De 
Occidente IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico, 5Hospital Regional de Zona “Valentín 
Gómez Farías”, ISSSTE Servicio de Genética, Zapopan, Mexico.
Introduction: The deletion of the short arm of the chromosome 3 is a 
rare disorder characterized by growth failure, psychomotor and mental 
retardation and craniofacial anomalies and less commonly others car -
diac, renal and gastrointestinal malformations. 
Case report: The propositus is male reported at the age of 20 months 
for the presence of congenital malformation and hypotonia. The karyo -
type was 46,XY,del(3p26). Currently he is 18 years old and exhibits 
evidence of phenotype changes no characteristics of the syndrome 
at pediatric ages. Physical examination revealed a height of 167 cm, 
weight of 47 kg. He is normocephalic with triangular face, malformed 
ears, low frontal hairline; low nasal base and bridge, absent and long 
philtrum, full inferior lip, narrow and high arched palate; hypotrophyc 
limbs, hands with cutaneous syndactyly and bilateral clinodactyly in 
the fifth finger. Neurological examination is normal. 
Discusion: The deletion 3p syndrome it has a characteristic pheno -
type, nevertheless a few adult cases were reported. The patient shows 
some physical findings not compatible with the syndrome and could 
be age-related. Other are more associated with the extension of the 
deletion. 
Conclusion: This syndrome presents a strong connection between the 
severity of the disease and the portion of the deletion. The previous 
statement justifies the importance of delimit the affected chromosomic 
area with molecular characterization and the phenotype-genotype cor -
relation. We also consider the existence of a phenotypic variability that 
is related with the age in this syndrome.P02.062  15.9 mb terminal deletion in 9p24.3-p22.3: clinical 
description of an adult patient with deletion 9p syndrome
S. Azzarello-Burri , A. Schinzel, M. Riegel, A. Rauch;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland.
Descriptions of adult patients are rare in the literature. As a conse -
quence, the natural history of many chromosomal disorders is largely 
unknown, which hampers adequate genetic counselling and keeps 
parents in the dark about the problems their children may be faced with 
in the future. Therefore it is important to describe older patients when -
ever possible, so that informations about the prognosis and course can 
be provided for the families.
Here we report a 23 year-old women with deletion 9p syndrome. She 
was of short stature with microcephaly and showed narrow fingers and 
feet. The major problems in this patient were a marked scoliosis which 
was operated at the age of 9 years, chewing problems because of 
micrognathia which was operated at the age of 22 years, pain after 
walking because of pressures sores on her narrow feet and aggressive 
behaviour in unfamiliar crowded places. There was precocious puberty 
with menses occurring at the age of 10 years. Because of regular men -
struation she underwent tubal ligation. After the age of about 10 years 
there were no more incontinence problems. The young lady was able 
to communicate and to speak in simple words, but not to read or write. 
She liked very much drawing and listening to music and was described 
as a very social and usually friendly person.
P02.063  Dento-maxillary abnormalies in Prader Willi syndrome
C. Bortun , L. Ardelean, M. Puiu;  
University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Prader Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disease, characterized 
by multi-systemic damage, predominantly neuro-hormonal. The main 
clinical features are hypotonia in the newborn, and feeding difficul -
ties later in childhood, hyperphagia and obesity, small stature, small 
hands and feet, hypogonadism, variable mental retardation, behav -
ioral problems. Clinical characteristics (viscous saliva in small quantity, 
dry mouth, small jaw, dental anomalies various) make in the current 
measures of care, to require and dental.
In a multicentric project started in Romania universities, hospital and 
Prader Willi Association of Romania, the study of oro-dento-maxillary 
issues revealed some interesting aspects. In all 8 cases during 2009 
followed PWS were identified serious dental problems. 5 of the pa -
tients were children (5-12 years) and 3 were adults (22-28 years). In 7 
cases (87.5%) were identified caries and bacteriological investigations 
has highlighted the presence of germs over limit. One of the patients 
had a Class III Angle malocclusion, maxilar hipoplasie and severe de -
ficiency of enamel. Dental examination and discussions with parents 
revealed deficiencies in preventative measures: first oral examination 
when teeth eruption is temporary, carefully supervised oral hygiene 
parents or guardians, the use of topical fluoride, regular checks and 
dental treatment, if necessary. These flaws are due to be capacity lim -
ited collaboration of patients or lack indications for periodicals dental 
examination.
Because of the complexity of medical issues present in these patients, 
the study reveals the importance of the participation of multidisciplinary 
teams that can provide an integrate treatment. Issues brought before 
opening new areas for further study.
P02.064  Functional impact of transitional developmental defects 
of the lumbar spine
D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, V. Belengeanu1, C. Popa1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 
2University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania.
The restructuring process of the spine for adaptation to the new me -
chanical conditions imposed by biped position required complex struc -
tural changes. There are individual predisposing factors with important 
contributions to the changes of the spine: phylogenetic variations of 
cranial or caudal spine development, spina bifida occulta, spondyloly -
sis and spondylolisthesis. Variations in the number, position, shape 
of the vertebrae are common developmental anomalies. A genetic 
predisposition is believed to be involved, as for some of these, family 
members have incidences of 28-69%. The aim of the current study 
was to reveal the presence of the lumbar vertebral anomalies and their 
functional impact in patients with low back pain treated in the Rehabili -
tation Clinical Hospital Baile Felix. Out of 262 examined cases, 32.82 Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
% had vertebral anomalies, 42 women and 44 men, with an average 
age of 29.82 ± 3.42 years. To highlight the impact of low back pain due 
to vertebral anomalies on functionality and daily activities we used Os -
westry questionnaire. Average score was 33.79 ± 13.21%, revealing 
a moderate disability. Oswestry score revealed loss of 40% for good 
physical condition, lifting weights, and walking. A deficit of 44.28% was 
noticed for standing, 30% for social life and 27.14% for professional 
life. The majority of congenital transitional vertebral anomalies pose no 
problems for the patient during childhood and thus go undetected, but 
they may be the cause of low back pain. Physical therapy, therapeutic 
tool of choice, is able to solve several issues related to the functional 
impact of these defects.
P02.065  survey of DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 
association with deafness children in Kohkeloiye va BoerAhmad
s. Ghasemi , m. taherzadeh, E. Farokhi, M. Hashemzade;  
Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord Univ of Med. Sci. Iran, 
shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Hearing loss is a heterogeneous disorder and may be 
due to genetic or environmental cause. PEJVAKIN (DFNB59) a newly 
identified gene on chromosome 2q31.1-q31.3 encodes a 325-residue 
protein. This gene mutated in some deaf people with autosomal reces -
sive heredity. This study aims to determine the frequency of the PEJ -
VAKIN gene mutations in 88 deaf children in Kohkeloiye va BoerAhmad 
province. This gene was surveyed with PCR-SSCP method. SSCP is 
defined as conformational difference of single stranded nucleotide.
Methods and materials: In this descriptive-lab based study, the blood 
sampling for these children was done. Then, DNA was extracted from 
all patients following the standard phenol-chloroform produce. Then, 
the fragment was amplified by Touch-down PCR. So, denaturing buf -
fer was added to PCR products, and then was taken in boiling water. 
Finality, the single stranded was surveyed by 6% polyacrilamid gel.
Results: Based on data from the present study, was concluded that 
DFNB59 gene mutations in exon 2 have not contribution in deaf chil -
dren in Kohkeloiye va boerAhmad province.
P02.066  DK phocomelia syndrome with thrombocytopenia, 
encephalocele and choanal atresia in an adult male with 
moderate learning difficulties
K. Becker1,2, K. Howard1, H. Hughes1,2;  
1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Rhyl, United 
Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom.
We report a 29 year old male, second child of unrelated parents, who 
was born at term by normal delivery with bilateral choanal atresia, a 
posterior encephalocele, and bilateral upper limb defects involving 
both radial and ulnar rays. He was treated for a left convergent squint 
as a baby by patching, and he was found to have moderate global 
learning difficulties. His height is on the 0.4th centile and his head cir -
cumference on the 97th centile. His platelet count was below the nor -
mal range on two occasions. He had surgery for undescended testes 
aged 12 years, and he was commenced on androgen replacement 
therapy for hypogonadism aged 27 years. He has a severe thoraco -
lumbar scoliosis with dorsal kyphosis. We propose a diagnosis of DK 
phocomelia syndrome.
P02.067  Prognostic insights in subjects with subclinical 
hypothyroidism and Down syndrome
I. Scala , E. Scarpato, G. Cappuccio, G. Andria, R. Della Casa;  
Department of Pediatrics, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is associated with thyroid disorders 
including hyperthyroidism, overt hypothyroidim (OH) and subclinical 
hypothyroidism (SH;5<TSH<10 mU/L, normal free thyroxine). In DS 
with SH, there is a controversy regarding the frequency of thyroid test -
ing, recommended every 3-12 months, and the identification of autoim -
munity as a prognostic factor.
Methods: 240 DS subjects (130M,110F; 1 month-21 years) were eval -
uated at the Federico II University, Department of Pediatrics, Naples. 
Thyroid function was tested yearly; in case of 5<TSH<10 mU/L, TSH, 
FT3, FT4, anti-TG and anti-TPO were screened quarterly. In case of 
TSH>10, the test was repeted prior to thyroxine therapy.
Results: The prevalence of thyroid disorders was 65.4%: 73.8% of pa -
tients had SH, 24.2% OH and 1.9% hyperthyroidism. Anti-TPO and anti-TG were present in 16.6% of cases. The rate of thyroid antibod -
ies was 7.5% in SH and 7.1% in OH. The time-course between the 
first finding of hyperthyrotropinemia and TSH>10 ranged from 1 to 
13.8 years: 33.3% of patients reached TSH>10 after 11.6-24 months, 
14.9% after 24-36 months and 51.7% over 36 months.
Autoantibodies were present in 13.3%, 23% and 17.7% of cases of the 
first, the second and the third group, respectively. In 4.4% of cases, 
TSH>10 spontaneously normalized without therapy. The prevalence 
of SH was independent from age.
Conclusion: The prevalence of SH in DS is high. The occurrence of SH 
is age-independent. Autoimmunity is not a prognostic factor for SH or 
OH. Because of the different time-course of TSH levels, blood screen -
ing can be carried-out every 12 months.
P02.068  Clinical diagnosis problems - Cockayne or Dubowitz 
syndrome?
M. Volosciuc1, E. Braha2, C. Rusu2, L. Caba2, M. Covic2;  
1Pediatric Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, 
Romania.
We present a 12 years 5 months old girl with postnatal growth retar -
dation, microcephaly, peculiar facial dysmorphism, mental retardation 
and recidivant eczema on legs and hands (first time appeared at 8 
years age). She was born un term after an uncomplicated pregnancy 
as the first child of a healthy, nonconsanguineous couple. Initially she 
was diagnosis with observation. Cockayne syndrome and fellow up 
attentively (but neurologic dysfunction are not progressive). Based an 
phenotypic features she was diagnosis with Dubowitz syndrome.
The Dubowitz syndrome is a rare, autosomal, recessively inherited 
disorder of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation leading to mi -
crocephaly, moderate mental retardation and such characteristic facial 
anomalies as telecanthus, epicanthic folds, blepharophimosis, ptosis, 
broadening of the bridge and tip of the nose, abnormal ears and ret -
rogenia. Further findings include hyperactivity, eczema and brachy-
clinodactyly of the fifth fingers.
Proband‘ karyotype was normal.As a particularity the proband present -
ed hypercholesterolemia.
The diagnostic symptoms and the differential diagnosis are dis -
cussed.
P02.069  Prenatally diagnosed siblings with dysgnathia complex
A. Yesilyurt1, Z. Candemir2, O. R. Rosti3;  
1Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health and Research Hospital, Department of 
Medical Genetic, Ankara, Turkey, 2Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health and 
Research Hospital Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Gulhane 
Military Medical Academy, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey.
Dysgnathia complex is an extremely rare multiple congenital anoma -
ly syndrome. It is characterized by severe mandibular hypoplasia or 
agenesis, ear anomalies, microstomia, and microglossia. It is thought 
to have an autosomal recessive etiology.
We describe a newborn with dysgnathia complex born to a second 
degree cousin marriage. He was found to have hypoplastic mandibule 
and ear migration anomalies at prenatal ultrasonography. He died an 
hour after birth.
The first pregnancy of the family had resulted in an unembryonic 
pregnancy. Second pregnancy had ended in a missed abortion. The 
third pregnancy was diagnosed as having otocephaly in the second 
trimester. During the follow up of the fourth pregnancy, antenatal ultra -
sonography showed similar clinical findings. The infant was born and 
deceased during the first hour of life.
We will discuss the ultrasonograpic and postnatal features of the sib -
lings in comparison with previous patients in the literature. This fam -
ily is a further evidence for the autosomal recessive etiology of dys -
gnathia complex.
P02.070  A de novo partial trisomy of distal 6p in patient with 
severe dysmorphic features
A. Matulevičienė1,2, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, V. Dirsė1, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre of Medical Genetics, Vilnius University 
Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
We report on an eight-year-old boy with chromosome 6 unbalanced 
abberration and severe dysmorphic features. Our patient is the first Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
child of the first complicated pregnancy from non-consanguineous par -
ents. The boy‘s phenotype is characterised by brachycephaly, round 
face, unilateral ptosis of upper eyelid, short, broad nose with flat nasal 
tip, long flat philtrum, thin vermilion of upper lip, high arched palate, 
microstomia, large and prominent pinnae, short neck, several café 
au lait  spots on the abdomen, waist and right thigh, hypertrichosis on 
the back, pilonidal sinus, psychomotor retardation and growth delay. 
Clinical follow-up showed these clinical findings: Xray showed thymus 
hyperplasia, heart ultrasound - atrial septal defect and recurrent respi -
ratory infections.
Conventional G-banded karyotype analysis from GTG banded meta -
phases revealed the primary karyotype of 46, XY, der(6)add(6)(q24) 
in all cells. Chromosomal analyses of the proband’s parents showed 
normal karyotypes, indicating that the above abnormality was de novo. 
In order to identify the origin of additional material, FISH analysis using 
subtelomeric specific probes for all the long and short arm of chromo -
some was performed. FISH analysis revealed duplication of the 6p 
subtelomeric region to the 6q subtelomere region and deletion of 6q 
subtelomeric region.
We make a suggestion that the derivative 6 chromosome comprised 
due to pericentric inversion which occurred from aberrant homologous 
recombination in the germline of a parent (germline mosaicism) or 
shortly after fertilization in the proband cells.
P02.071  DYscERNE: Developing clinical management 
Guidelines for selected Dysmorphic syndromes
P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, S. Gardner1, R. Day1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. 
Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska-
Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1;  
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch 
Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance 
Publique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France.
The DYSCERNE Network of Centres of Expertise for dysmorphology 
(www.dyscerne.org ), is developing clinical management guidelines for 
Williams (WS), Angelman (AS), Noonan (NS) and Kabuki (KS) syn -
dromes. An initial scoping exercise identified these conditions as rare, 
complex, multi-system disorders, for which it was felt that affected pa -
tients, families and health/social care professionals would benefit from 
access to up-to-date evidence based management guidelines.
Published evidence from which to develop management recommenda -
tions for these conditions is very limited, and devising a systematic and 
robust methodology has been challenging. Our approach is based on 
the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) method, which 
we modified placing more emphasis on expert opinion and consensus, 
whilst maintaining systematic rigour and transparency of processes.
The development process includes:
- Identification of key management issues by guideline group leaders.
- Targeted, systematic literature searches using PubMed.
- Review, identification and grading of results by panel of invited ex -
perts.
- Consensus meetings at which experts present, discuss and agree 
recommendations.
- Initial drafting of guideline document which is circulated amongst ex -
perts and stakeholders for comments.
- Amendments incorporated and guideline finalised.
- Guidelines piloted and evaluated.
- International dissemination.
The process has involved 49 experts from 8 countries reviewing be -
tween them, over 1000 papers. The WS guidelines are currently being 
piloted in 20 centres, by paediatricians and geneticists. The first draft 
of AS guidelines has been circulated for feedback. Consensus meet -
ings for NS and KS will be held very shortly. The finished guidelines will 
be available from the DYSCERNE website.
P02.072  DYscERNE: Results from the full European launch of the Electronic Dysmorphology Diagnostic system (DDs)
S. Gardner1, R. Day1, P. M. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, C. Harrison1, D. Donnai1, B. 
Kerr1, K. Metcalfe1, H. Brunner2, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska-
Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton-Smith1;  
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Universitair Medisch 
Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Instituto Mendel, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
5Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 6Assistance 
Publique - Hospitaux De Marseille, Marseille, France.
The rarity of dysmorphic conditions means that even in Centres of Ex -
pertise experience may be limited resulting in delayed or uncertain di -
agnosis. Correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient management, 
enabling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condition, 
share clinical experience and increase individual and collective knowl -
edge.
The web-based Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) developed 
by DYSCERNE ( www.dyscerne.org ) links thirty-two European Centres 
of Expertise for Dysmorphology to form a powerful diagnostic resource 
for rare dysmorphic conditions.
Eighty-five submitting nodes are licensed to submit patients’ clinical 
data and images via an online case submission form, which is then 
reviewed by thirty-seven Expert Dysmorphologists.
Results since the full launch of the DDS show the number of case 
submissions and expert reviews per case have steadily increased 
throughout the year. Summary diagnostic reports are prepared from 
the consensus of expert opinions and sent to the submitting node an 
average of 5 weeks after case acceptance onto the system. Cases 
receive 3-12 expert reviews, with diagnoses and investigations being 
suggested for 98% and 88% of cases, respectively.
The DDS suggested diagnosis has been confirmed at molecular level 
for one case and there have been 2 separate suggestions of new re -
cessive conditions based on affected sibling pairs. Five cases have 
also had a consensus confirmed clinical diagnoses. Overall the diag -
nostic rate for DDS cases is 15%.
These results show that the DDS is a workable and effective diagnos -
tic system facilitating timely and equitable access for clinicians from 
across Europe to expert opinions.
P02.073  Application of western blot for analyzing of dystrophin in iranian patients with mild dystrophinopathy
E. Keyhani ,J. Gharesouran, K. Kahrizi, Y. Shafeghati, M. Banan, E. Darabi, F. 
A.Moghadam;  
Genetics Research Center-University Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Dystrophinophaties (Duchenne muscular dystrophy and 
Becker muscular dystrophy)are X-linked recessive disorders manifest -
ing with muscle degeneration and weakness. The gene which is de -
fective in dystrophinophaties is the largest know gene , consisting of 
almost 0.1% of the human genome(2.500kbp) . The product of this 
gene in normal muscle, dystrophin , is a 427 kDa rod - shaped protein. 
The value of analyzing dystrophin on western blots of skeletal muscle 
for the differential diagnosis of Xp21 musclar dystrophies is now well 
established especially for mild forms of the disease (BMD) which im -
munohistochemistry techniques are not sufficient for the definite di -
agnosis.
Material & Methods : Here We describe a sensitive system based on 
monoclonal antibodies against dystrophin. System has been set up 
using GAPDH protein as control that extracted from k562 cells. In our 
study which was the first application of western blot analysis in muscle 
disorders in Iran , we examind muscle sample taken from 10 clinically 
suspected BMD first by immunohistochemistry methods and then by 
western blot analysis.
Results : Clinically and immunohistochemically suspected cases of 
BMD were confirmed by western blot analysis. These finding are not 
evident in other forms of muscular dystrophies ( Limb- Girdle MD) 
which are closely resemble to BMD clinically.
Conclusion : Results show the necessity of blotting techniques in diag -
nosis panel of mild forms of dystrophinopathies.
P02.074  Ebstein anomaly: genetic heterogeneity and 
association with microdeletions 1p36 and 8p23.1
M. Digilio1, L. Bernardini2, F. Lepri2, M. Giuffrida2, V. Guida2, A. Baban1, P. 
Versacci3, R. Capolino1, B. Torres2, A. De Luca2, A. Novelli2, B. Marino3, B. 
Dallapiccola1;  
1Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Cardiology, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
Ebstein anomaly (EA) is an uncommon congenital heart defect (CHD), 
characterized by downward displacement of the tricuspid valve into 
the right ventricle. Aim of the study was: 1) search for chromosomal 
imbalances (using standard cytogenetic and array-CGH analysis) and 
single gene conditions associated with syndromic EA; 2) screening of 
GATA4  and NKX2.5  mutations in patients with non-syndromic EA. Be -
tween January 2000 and October 2009, 44 patients with EA were en -
rolled. Syndromic EA was found in 12 (27%) patients, non-syndromic 
EA in 32 (73%). A distinct syndrome was diagnosed by clinical crite -
ria in 7 individuals (CHARGE syndrome in 2, VACTERL association, 
Noonan, Kabuki, Holt-Oram, and Cornelia de Lange syndromes each 
in one patient). In one syndromic patient a 18q deletion was diagnosed 
by standard cytogenetic analysis. Array-CGH analysis in 5 syndromic 
patients disclosed an interstitial deletion at 8p23.1 in one subject, and 
a del 1pter>1p36.32 /dup Xpter->Xp22.32 in another case. No muta -
tion in GATA4  and NKX2.5  genes were detected in 11 non-syndromic 
patients studied. In conclusion: 1) EA is genetically heterogeneous; 
2) the present study and published data suggest the following: a) del 
1p36 and del 8p23.1 are the more frequent chromosomal imbalances 
associated with EA; b) likely candidate genes include GATA4  (patients 
with del 8p23.1), NKX2.5  (published patients with isolated EA), and an 
hypothetic locus in the 1p36 region (patients with del 1p36).
P02.075  cloacal impaired development associated with multiple 
malformations in a young girl - case report
T. Marcovici , I. Simedrea, O. Marginean, O. Belei, C. Daescu, L. Tunea, M. 
Puiu;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Background: The ectopic anus is among the five most important types 
of cloacal malformations. It’s incidence is higher in females. Occasion -
ally, several anomalies exist, producing complex malformations. Some 
patients present associated congenital defects of mesonephric origin. 
The direct cause of the majority of these anomalies is unknown. Vi -
ral infections, teratogenic drugs, metabolic alterations and placental 
anomalies could be involved. The karyotype is generally normal. A 
superficially approach of these patients can facilitate the misdiagno -
sis of the associated defects. Material and methods: We present a 
girl aged 4 years, diagnosed with anal ectopia since neonatal period. 
Pediatric and surgical follow-up was done for a three years period. 
In our department, by persevering assessment, the case investiga -
tion was fulfilled. Anamnesis, clinical examination, genetic evaluation, 
biological and imaging studies were done. Results: Abdominal ultra -
sonographic examination identified agenesia of the right kidney. Car -
diac echography detected atrial septal defect. Abdominal and pelvic 
MRI specified congenital single left kidney, normal urinary bladder and 
uterus,inguinal right ovarian ectopia. Standard karyotype couldn’t ex -
clude some anomalies under optical resolution limit. Conclusions: As -
sociated malformations research was initiated due to the presence of 
the anal ectopia. Multifactorial mechanism could create propitious cir -
cumstances for these anomalies. Patient’s interdisciplinary integrated 
management is essential. Further genetic evaluations and counselling 
are required.
P02.076  congenital heart defects in Ellis van creveld syndrome
M. C. Panzaru1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, L. Caba1, C. Rusu1;  
1”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Medical 
Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania.
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVCS) is an autosomal recessive skeletal 
dysplasia characterized by short ribs, short limbs, postaxial polydac -
tyly, dysplastic nails and teeth, frequently associated with congenital 
heart defects. We present four cases in order to illustrate this rare 
entity and to discuss the variability of heart defects.
H.B.I. (5,8 y old female): disproportionate dwarfism, dysmorphic cra -
niofacies (sparse, fine hair; proeminent metopic suture, accessory gin -
gival frenulae, conical teeth), narrow thorax, pectus carinatum, distal 
limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, 
brachydactyly and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic nails, 
fused proximal and medium falanges (finger II - V); ecocardiography: 
ASD ostium secundum, pulmonary valvular stenosis, hypertrophic car -
diomyopathy.
T.L.A. (1,6 old male): disproportionate dwarfism, craniofacial dysmor -
phy (sparse hair, accessory gingival frenulae), narrow thorax, distal limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, 
brachydactyly and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic bilateral 
fibulae; ecocardiography: large ASD ostium primum, cleft anterior mi -
tral valve, hypoplastic tricuspid valve.
P.G.M. (6 days - deceased): disproportionate dwarfism, dysmorphic 
craniofacies (accessory gingival frenulae, neonatal teeth), narrow tho -
rax, distal limb shortening symmetrically affecting the forearms and 
lower legs, bilateral postaxial polydactyly (feet); echocardiography: 
ASD, enlarged right ventricle.
T.M. (5y old, female): disproportionate dwarfism, craniofacial dysmor -
phy (accessory gingival frenulae, conical teeth), distal limb shorten -
ing symmetrically affecting the forearms and lower legs, brachydactyly 
and bilateral postaxial polydactyly, hypoplastic nails.
In conclusion, we present four cases of EVCS in order to illustrate this 
rare genetic disorder but also to discuss the variable expression of 
heart defects, long term follow-up, management and genetic counsel -
ing.
P02.077  study of a lot of newborn with extremely low birth 
weight and malformative association
A. Manea1, M. Boia1, D. Iacob1, R. Pakai2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical 
Emergency Hospital for Children “L. Turcanu” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania.
Extremely low birth weigh is defined as a birth weight less than 1000 
grams. Extreme prematurity implies high risk of perinatal mortality and 
neonatal morbidity.
Material and method: The study was carried out in the Prematurity and 
Neonatology Department during two years, on a group of 20 prema -
ture newborns with birth weight under 1000 grams (800 grams-1000 
grams), with gestational age between 27-32 weeks and follows the 
congenital malformation association at this lot.
Results: In the group the distribution by sex show a number of 11 (55% 
) male newborns and 9 (45% ) female newborns.
The patent ductus arteriosus was revealed by ultrasound in 4 cases 
(20%), in 2 cases was associated with septal atrial defect. In 1 case 
septal atrial defect was associated with septal ventricular defect. In 2 
cases septal atrial defect had no association.
At 1 case was present agenesis of corpus callosum diagnosed by 
transfontanelar ultrasound.. One single case presented plurimalforma -
tiv syndrome with cheilognatopalatoschisis, varus equin and congeni -
tal heart disease but he died in the 3rd day of life.
Conclusions: Extreme prematurity is an important risk factor in increas -
ing neonatal morbidity and mortality and requires care in intensive care 
unit; association of congenital malformations increases that risk and 
influences further development.
P02.078  Genetic heterogeneity in the Facio-Audio-
symphalangism syndrome
J. J. van den Ende , V. Borra, W. Van Hul;  
Department of Medical Genetics, university of Antwerp, Edegem (Antwerp), 
Belgium.
In the past years it has become clear that many aspects of develop -
ment are regulated by opposing activities of secreted ligands and their 
intra-and extracellular antagonists. This is also the case in the BMP 
signaling in vertebrates. The BMPs (Bone-Morphogenetic Proteins) 
are multifunctional proteins, and they are very important in bone and 
cartilage formation. Mutations in several genes involved in this cas -
cade have shown to be responsible for many syndromes with synos -
tosis/ symphalangism.
One of these genes causing symphalangism is the NOG gene on chro -
mosome 17q21-22, coding for the polypeptide Nogging, which binds 
and antagonizes BMP 2, 4 and 7.
Noggin also interacts with GDF-5 (Growth differentiation factor 5). 
Recently mutations have also been described in the GDF-5 gene in 
families with symphalangism, and also in the BMP receptor BMPR1A 
to which GDF-5 binds. This binding leads to activation and regulation 
of transcription of target genes involved in bone formation.
Very recently also a mutation in another growth factor (FGF9) was 
found in a family with multiple synostosis.
We report a patient with a clinical phenotype that is very suggestive 
of the Facio-Audio-Symphalangism syndrome. Patients with this syn -
drome show proximal symphalangism, in combination with deafness 
due to stapes ankylosis, and a typical face, with a broad, hemicylin -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
drical nose. We could however not show a causative mutation in the 
genes that are thusfar known to cause this phenotype, giving evidence 
for further genetic heterogeneity of this syndrome.
P02.079  involvement of the neuromuscular junction in fetal 
akinesia deformation sequence (FADs)
S. Whalen1, M. Gonzales2,3, A. Laquerrière4,5, S. Quijano-Roy6, A. Delezoide7, F. 
Giuliano8, P. Richard9, A. Le Bail9, B. Hainque9,10, A. Chevallier11, E. Bieth12, D. 
Avila-Smirnow6, D. Héron1, D. Sternberg9;  
1Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France, 2Unité de Pathologie Foetale et Placentaire, Service de Génétique et 
d’Embryologie Médicales, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 3UFR de 
Médecine, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Service d’Anatomie 
et Cytologies Pathologiques, Hôpital Charles Nicolle, CHU Rouen, Rouen, 
France, 5UFR de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université de Rouen, Rouen, 
France, 6Service de Pédiatrie, Réanimation et Rééducation Infantiles, Hôpital 
Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France, 7Unité de Foetopathologie, Service de 
Biologie du Développement, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Service de 
Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence des Anomalies du Développement 
et Syndromes Malformatifs, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, 9Service de Biochimie 
Métabolique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 10Faculté 
des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université René Descartes, 
Paris, France, 11Laboratoire d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, CHU de 
Nice, Nice, France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux de Toulouse, 
Toulouse, France.
Introduction: Recently, neuromuscular junction (NMJ) genes have 
been implicated in FADS, mainly in multiple pterygium syndromes, 
lethal (LMPS) or not (Escobar syndrome). Recessive mutated geno -
types have been identified in CHRNG, RAPSN, CHRND, CHRNA1  
and DOK7 .
Patients and Methods: We received 32 patients with FADS for analysis 
of NMJ genes. Among those patients, 8 were alive and had arthro -
gryposis (+/- ptérygiums), 21 foetuses had FADS leading to pregnan -
cy termination, 1 foetus died in utero , and 5 patients died in the first 
year.
An analysis of  CHRNG, RAPSN , CHRND , CHRNA1, DOK7 and MUSK  
genes was undertaken by PCR-sequencing, in order to (i) determine 
etiological diagnosis (ii), estimate the frequency of NMJ dysfunction 
and (iii) try to determine genotype-phenotype correlations.
Preliminary results: Three patients were identified with biallelic muta -
tions of CHRNG,  coding for the foetal sub-unit of the acetylcholine 
receptor. Two of these patients were children diagnosed with Escobar 
syndrome and one was a foetus with LMPS (pregnancy termination at 
13 weeks). Different types of mutations were identified: stop, splice or 
frameshift, either at homozygous or compound heterozygous state.
A heterozygous frameshift mutation of DOK7  was identified in a foetus 
with FADS and pterygiums (pregnancy termination at 22 weeks). Stud -
ies are underway to find a second mutation.
Conclusion-PerspectivesScreening of NMJ genes is still underway in 
our cohort. Genetic confirmation is important for genetic counselling. 
However, up to date, sequencing of the NMJ genes has a low yield of 
positive diagnoses. Therefore, its use in FADS diagnostic algorithm 
remains to be defined.
P02.080  A Fragile X family with mitotically unstable premutation/
full mutation mosaics.
T. Kahre1,2, T. Reimand1,3, G. Dekomien4, N. Tõnisson1,5, P. Hämäläinen6, E. 
Õiglane-Šlik2,7, K. Õunap1,2;  
1Dept of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia, 
2Dept.of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Estonia, 3Dept of Obstetrics and 
Gyneacology, University of Tartu, Estonia, 4Human Genetics, Ruhr University 
Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 5Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University 
of Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics University 
of Turku, Finland, 7Children´s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia.
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by CGG triplet expansion in the 
first exon of FMR1 gene >200 repeats. In childhood, full mutation as -
sociates with mental retardation, characteristic behavior and physical 
phenotype. Premutation (55-200 CGG) carriers have a higher risk of 
developing premature ovarian failure and/or fragile X associated trem -
or ataxia syndrome. About 15-40% FXS patients show mosaic pattern 
of full mutation and premutation.
Here we report a FXS family with mitotically very unstable expansion in 
both premutation and full mutation region in three generations. Molec -ular analysis was performed with Fragile X PCR Test kit (Abbott) and 
with methylation-sensitive Southern blot using the StB12.3 probe.
Two children with FXS in this family showed mosaic pattern of premu -
tation and full mutations. The boy presenting mental retardation and 
behavioral problems at age 7 had expanded fragments with 81-370 
CGG repeats. The girl showed 135-950 CGG repeats in the expanded 
allele of the FMR1 gene and had only 5-10% normal allele band in -
tensity. Their mother showed full mutation between 350-460 CGG re -
peats and had normal allele activated in 95% of blood cells. Mitotically 
unstable expansion around 600 repeats and normal allele activation 
about 90% was detected on her sister. The grandmother had mosaic 
pattern of premutation of 102, 109 and 186 CGG repeats and clinically 
presents signs of mood lability and anxiety.
Molecular investigation of mitotically unstable expansions is challeng -
ing and requires combining of PCR with Southern hybridization analy -
ses. The latter allows to discover large mosaic fragments and to study 
methylation patterns
P02.081  New ALX phenotype due to novel homozygous 
mutation: p.Q225E
H. Kayserili , U. Altunoglu, H. Ozgur, S. Basaran, Z. O. Uyguner;  
Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
Fronto nasal Dysplasia (FND;OMIM#136760) results from abnormal 
frontonasal development. Craniofacial anomalies in FND include ante -
rior cranium bifidum, hypertelorism, orofacial clefting, notching of alae 
nasi. Most cases are sporadic and EFNB1  is the first gene identified to 
be responsible from the X-linked subgroup, cranio fronto nasal Dyspla -
sia (CFND;OMIM#304110). Autosomal dominant mutations in MSX2 
and ALX4  have been associated with parietal foramina. Recently, au -
tosomal recessive (AR) mutations in ALX3 were associated with fron -
torhiny, while AR ALX4  cases were shown to have additional features 
of alopecia, genital anomalies, craniosynostosis.
Here we report a 6,5 year-old boy, who presented with distinctive fa -
cial appearance; severe hypertelorism, wide-bifid nasal tip, anteverted 
nares, broad columella, notched alae nasi, unilateral preauricular tag, 
broad frenulum, missing permanent left upper incisor, bilateral parietal 
foramina of 3x3 cm. He was born to consanguineous parents after 
an un-eventful pregnancy and delivery. His motor milestones were 
achieved within normal limits and he has good school performance. 
Physical examination prompted the clinical diagnosis of frontorhiny as -
sociated with parietal foramina.
EFNB1 , ALX3, ALX4, MSX2 genes  were sequenced and homozygous 
p.Q225E mutation, changing neutral-polar glutamine to acidic-polar 
glutamic acid in the homeobox domain, was found in ALX4.  This varia -
tion was not identified in 100 control chromosomes.
To our knowledge, this is the second recessive mutation identified in 
ALX4  gene. The first reported recessive ALX4  mutation (p.R2655X) 
was responsible from an atypical frontonasal malformation in a large 
consanguineous Turkish family. Our findings demonstrate that ALX4  
cases may show variable clinical expressivity with overlapping fea -
tures of ALX3 and MSX2 phenotypes.
P02.082**  Geleophysic dysplasia is a clinically and genetically 
heterogenous disease
P. Piccolo1, J. Hicks2, V. Fano3, S. A. Caino3, M. G. Obregon3, R. Sutton2, M. 
García-Barcina4, J. Tolmie5, G. Andria6, G. Parenti1,6, L. Titomanlio7, S. K. Law8, 
V. Sabatino1, R. Polishchuk1, B. Lee9,10, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,6,10;  
1Telethon Insitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Department of 
Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Hospital 
J. P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Unidad de Genética, Hospital de 
Basurto Avda, Bilbao, Spain, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospital, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, 
Naples, Italy, 7Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Robert Debré, APHP, 
Paris, France, 8Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, United States, 9Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Houston, TX, United 
States, 10Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Geleophysic dysplasia (OMIM 231050) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by short-limb dwarfism, brachydactyly, and a 
‘happy-looking’ facial appearance. It is frequently associated with car -
diac valvular disease although the incidence and natural history of the 
heart complications remain unclear. Mutations in the ADAMTSL2  gene Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology77
resulting in dysregulation of TGF-β signaling have been recently rec -
ognized to be responsible for this condition. We screened for ADAMT -
SL2 mutations fourteen cases of geleophysic dysplasia diagnosed 
on the basis of clinical and radiological findings. Novel pathogenic 
mutations were found in three of the fourteen cases suggesting that 
additional and yet unknown gene(s) are involved in the pathogenesis 
of the disease. Short stature and brachydactyly were present in most 
of the cases while laryngeal stenosis, cardiac disease, and Perthes 
disease were variably present. Taken together, these findings show a 
significant clinical variability and are consistent with a broad disease 
spectrum. In 3 of 4 cases in which skin fibroblasts were available, we 
detected by electron microscopy cytoplasmic lysosome-like inclusions 
which have been previously reported as a characteristic finding of the 
disease. Inclusions were also detectable in lymphoblasts in one pa -
tient with mutations in ADAMTSL2 . Analysis for glycosphingolipids in 
geleophysic dysplasia fibroblasts did not reveal significant abnormali -
ties compared to control cells. Therefore, the nature of the accumulat -
ed material remains unclear and whether TGF-β signaling plays a role 
in the pathogenesis of the inclusions requires further investigations.
P02.083  GJB2  (Cx2 ) mutations and hearing impairment in 
southern Finland - experiences from a diagnostic genetic 
laboratory
E. Jakkula1, M. Ridanpää1, A. Orpana1, K. Aittomäki1,2, S. Kivirikko1,2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder and it is 
present in approximately 1 of every 500 newborns. The most frequent 
gene causing autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARN -
SHL) is GJB2 (Cx26)  and its mutations are responsible for 30-60% of 
congenital ARNSHL. There is a single common mutation, c.35delG in 
GJB2  that may account for up to 70% of all GJB2  mutations.
Our diagnostic laboratory has offered GJB2  mutation screening since 
2004 as either targeted screening for the most common c.35delG mu -
tation or full-sequencing analysis of GJB2. Using the patient samples 
with diagnosis of hearing impairment, referred for us for GJB2 muta -
tion screening during the years 2004-2009, we wanted to investigate 
how commonly mutations were identified, what was the mutation spec -
trum and if there were any obvious genotype-phenotype correlations. 
Majority of the patients were Finnish.
Results: Altogether 125 patient samples had been analysed in our lab -
oratory and GJB2 gene mutations were identified in 33 patients (26%, 
n=33/125) confirming diagnosis of ARNSHL. Of the mutation positive 
patients, 22 (67 %, n=22/33) were homozygous for the c.35delG muta -
tion, 10 (30 %, n=10/33) were compound heterozygous and 1 patient 
was homozygous for the c.71G>A (p.Trp24X) mutation. The following 
six mutation combinations were identified in compound heterozygous 
patients: c.35delG + c.101T>C (p.Met34Thr), c.35delG + c.269T>C 
(p.Leu90Pro), c.35delG + c.456C>G (p.Tyr152X), c.35delG + c.550C>T 
(p.Arg184Trp), c.427C>T (p.Arg143Trp) + c.101T>C (p.Met34Thr) and 
c.109G>A (p.Val137Ile) + c.233delC( p.Leu79CysfsX3). The patients 
with compound heterozygosity seemed to have either later onset or 
diagnosis of hearing impairment.
P02.084  High correlation of MRI, Chemical and Genetic finding 
of Glutaric Acidemia type 1
G. Mohammadian1, G. Baghal Shooshtari1, N. Athari1, J. , Ghavabesh1, A. 
Foroughmand2, H. Galehdari2, H. Galehdari2;  
1Khozestan walfare organizatio, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2shahid 
chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aim: Glutaric acidemia type 1 (GA-1), one of the most 
common organic acidemia, and autosomal inheritance, is due to de -
ficiency of glutaril-CoA dehydrogenase. Patients are often macroce -
phalic and develop other signs before age of 48 months. MRI shows 
widening of Sylvian fissure, acute striatal  degeneration and shrinkage 
of caudate and putamen. High concentration of glutaric acid in the 
urine, body fluids is usual. Treatment before symptoms presentation 
may prevent brain damage in most patients.
Material and method: Five cases in four families were studied, three 
girls with ages of 24, 27 and 31 months with clinical symptoms. The 
family with history of two deceased children was the last.
Results: In two cases no definite diagnosis was achieved in neurology 
surveys. But MRI report had exactly proved GA-1 as the most probable diagnosis. Enzyme study suggested the same, and finally GCDH  gene 
molecular analysis revealed a missense mutation at codon 181 . In 
other case, whose sister was deceased with just the same symptoms 
at, MRI study suggested (GA-1) as the first diagnosis, and  then or -
ganic acids in urine showed the typical pattern for the disease. In third 
case, the MRI diagnosis and enzyme study had suggested (GA-1) the 
same. In the girl with 27 months age compound heterozygosity for 
GCDH  gene at codon 181 & 255 was observed. In two desease cases 
with high GA we found no mutations in GCDH  gene.
Conclusion: The results suggest that exact study of MRI in suspicious 
patients could help in diagnosis.
P02.085  Goldenhar syndrome-possible microdeletion 
syndrome?
D. Raskova , M. Trkova, D. Stejskal;  
Institute of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine GENNET,, Prague 7, 
Czech Republic.
Goldenhar syndrome (oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia) is extremely 
variable congenital defect with incidence 1:3 000- 1:5 000. It results 
from the anomaly of the first and second branchial arches and is char -
acterized by unilateral deformity of external ear and small ipsilateral 
half of the face, praeauricular tags, epibulbar dermoid and vertebral 
anomalies. Most cases are sporadic, some families clearly support 
autosomal dominant and rarely autosomal recessive inheritance. The 
exact cause is not known, but it is possible, that it is caused by micro -
deletion.
We present the collection of 6 patients with Goldenhar syndrome and 2 
patients with microtia - atresia syndrome, which we intend investigate 
by Illumina SNP array.
P02.086  Co-occurrence of severe Goltz-Gorlin syndrome and 
pentalogy of cantrell - clinical and molecular analysis.
R. Smigiel1, A. Jakubiak1, P. Lombardi2, W. Jaworski3, R. Slezak1, D. 
Patkowski3, R. Hennekam4;  
1Genetics Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, 
2Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Pediatric Surgery Department, Wroclaw 
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Department of Pediatrics, Academic 
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Goltz-Gorlin syndrome is a highly variable multisystem defects of 
meso-ectodermal origin. Major manifestations include atrophic skin 
lesions with fat herniation, papillomas, ocular defects, hypodontia, 
hearing loss, limb malformations. Mutations in the X-linked PORCN 
gene can be identified in all patients with a classical Goltz-Gorlin phe -
notype.
The pentalogy of Cantrell is a specific combination of usually five 
anomalies: a midline abdominal wall defect; defect of lower sternum; 
deficiency of the diaphragmatic pericardium and anterior diaphragm 
and congenital heart anomalies. Cantrell pentalogy is infrequently re -
ported. The pathogenesis is still unknown.
We report an infant with both findings fitting Cantrell pentalogy (lack of 
the lower sternum; diaphragmatic hernia; ectopia cordis; omphalocele) 
and other findings fittig Goltz-Gorlin syndrome (sparse hair; anophthal -
mia; clefting; bifid nose; irregular vermillion of both lips; asymmetrical 
limb malformations; caudal appendage; linear aplastic skin defects; 
unilateral hearing loss). She shows a psychomotor and somatic re -
tardation.
Genetype analysis showed a normal karyotype, absence of subtelo -
meric deletions and CGH imbalances, but presence of a PORCN mu -
tation, which confirmed the diagnosis of Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.
This combination of Goltz-Gorlin syndrome and pentalogy of Cantrell 
has been reported recently in two patients with a confirmed PORCN 
mutation. The present patient confirms that the pentalogy of Cantrell is 
caused at least in some cases by a PORCN mutation. It remains as yet 
uncertain whether this can be explained by the type of localization of 
the mutation within PORCN, or whether the phenotype is additionally 
determined by mutations of polymorphisms in other genes, environ -
mental factors, and/or epigenetic influences.
P02.087  Gorlin syndrome - case report
F. F. Cionca1, L. Cionca2, C. Vizitiu2, C. Ardeleanu3;  
1“Victor Babes“ National Institute for Research and Development in Pathology 
and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
Dr. Dan Teodorescu“ Clinical Hospital of Oro-Maxilo-Facial Surgery, Bucharest, 
Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 31“Victor Babes“ National Institute for Research 
and Development in Pathology and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania,, 
Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: The nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome or Gorlin-
Goltz syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited disease with com -
plete penetrance, intra and interfamilial variation in expression and no 
evidence of anticipation. The syndrome is characterized by the de -
velopment of multiple. recurrent jaw odontogenic keratocysts (90%), 
frequently beginning in the second decade of life, multiple basal cell 
carcinomas, frequently on the
face, the back, and the chest, hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, ec -
topic calcifications (particularly intracranial), skeletal abnormalities, fa -
cial dysmorphism, ocular disorders, cardiac and ovarian fibromas,
The diagnosis is established using clinical diagnostic criteria. PTCH, 
located on chromosome 9q22.3-q31, is the only gene known to be as -
sociated with NBCCS and normally functions as a tumor suppressor 
gene, controlling growth and development of the normal tissues. Mo -
lecular genetic testing, available on a clinical basis, detects mutations 
in the majority of affected individuals.
Case presentation: A 30 years old female presented with unilateral 
enlargement of the mandible and no other clinical findings in physical 
examination.
Radiological examination revealed unilateral multicystic lesions of the 
lower jaw. Histological examination demonstrated the presence of mul -
tiple unilateral odontogenic keratocysts
The patient presented in the past other three similar lesions of the 
lower jaw and two facial basal cell carcinomas.
Family history identified other two members with similar lesions.
Conclusion: The case present two major diagnostic criteria for Gorlin 
syndrome.
The patient will require, long-term follow-up, treatment of the new or 
recurrent manifestations and molecular genetic testing to detect PTCH 
mutation.
P02.088**  Cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome with agenesis of 
the corpus callosum: the contribution of array comparative 
genomic hybridisation
E. Chabchoub1, P. Debeer2, J. R. Vermeesch1, P. Decock3, J. P. Fryns1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 
2Department of Orthopedics - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 
3Department of Paediatric Neurology - University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium.
In 1928, Greig reported a rare multiple congenital anomaly syndrome 
named Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS - MIM # 175700) char -
acterised by hypertelorism, macrocephaly with frontal bossing, poly -
syndactyly in the upper and lower limbs and other findings including 
central nervous system malformations with variable cognitive impair -
ment. The pattern of inheritance is autosomal dominant by loss of 
function mutations in the GLI3  (7p14) transcription factor gene. Later, 
other cephalopolysyndactyly clinical variants have been reported (e.g. 
the acrocallosal syndrome (ACS) (MIM #200990), …) expanding the 
clinical spectrum and making the differential diagnosis challenging 
since the findings in GCPS are relatively non-specific. The ACS has 
substantial overlap with GCPS including mental retardation, preaxial 
polysyndactyly, facial dysmorphism with macrocephaly, prominent 
broad forehead and hypertelorism, agenesis of the corpus callosum 
and mental retardation. It is autosomal recessive but many cases are 
sporadic. One patient had a mutation in GLI3 .
Here we report a series of 15 patients presenting with a cephalopoly -
syndactyly and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Conventional karyo -
typing, FISH using the BAC clone RP11-706L12 (7p14) and sequencing 
GLI3  were all normal. Subsequently, we performed array comparative 
genomic hybridisation (aCGH) using a 1 Mb resolution BAC aCGH and 
a 200 kb resolution oligo aCGH (105k OGT). We identified causal ge -
nomic rearrangements in 3 patients (i.e. a complex chromosomal rear -
rangement involving chromosomes 1 and 21q, a dup(X)(q13.3;q21.1), 
and a deletion on chromosome 22q13.1). Clinical and genotyping cor -
relations will be discussed together with the value of aCGH in the mo -
lecular diagnosis workup of CPS of unknown aetiology.P02.089  MODY type 2 with Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GcPs) patient - a part of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome (GcPs-cGs).
A. Singer1, S. Josefsberg2, J. Rosensaft2, C. Vinkler3;  
1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Genetic Institute Kaplan Medical Center, 
Rehovot, Israel, 3Genetic Institute Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel.
The Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome (GCPS) is a rare (1-
9/1,000,000), pleiotropic, multiple congenital anomaly syndrome that 
is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The primary findings 
include a triad of digital anomalies, ocular hypertelorisim, and macro -
cephaly. Other low frequency findings include central nervous system 
(CNS) anomalies, hernias, and cognitive impairment. GCPS is caused 
by loss of function mutations in the GLI3 trascription factor gene, lo -
cated on chromosome 7p13. These include point mutations, frameshift 
mutations, translocation, and gross deletion mutations. Treatment in -
clude plastic or orthopedic surgery of limb malformations when needed 
and care by child developmental team if there is cognitive impairment. 
Contiguous gene syndrome (CGS) have been previously reported to 
be associated with GCPS often with additional problems related to ad -
jacent genes on chromosome 7p13. Some CGS have stereotypical 
breakpoints while others not. In most CGS, the extent of the deletions 
is correlated with the severity of the symptoms. To date, several re -
ports of GCPS-CGS have been published with no common/hotspots 
breakpoint.
We present a 9 y old girl who presented with clinical diagnosis of GCPS 
with mental retardation and newly onset diabetes mellitus. Laboratory 
work-up was compatible with a diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes 
of the young (MODY). A contiguous gene deletion syndrome was sus -
pected. Chromosomal analysis reveled a 46,XX,del(7)(p13;p15) karyo -
type. The deleted area includes the glucokinas gene (GCK) causing 
MODY type 2 located at 7p15-p13.
This is the second report of MODY in GCPS-CGS patient.
Our results further emphasize the importance of chromosomal analy -
sis in cases of GCPS.
P02.090  Role of connexin genes (cx26, cx30 and cx31) in 
hereditary hearing loss
E. I. Sharonova , R. A. Zinchenko;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Connexins are the key components of the gap junction, which regu -
lates various physiological and development processes. The impor -
tance of the gap junction for human physiology has been identified as 
a result of detection of multiple genetic diseases that are associated 
with different connexin genes. Hearing loss is the most important in 
terms of incidence. Since mapping and identification of Cx26 gene we 
conducted comprehensive medical- and population-genetic studies in 
several regions of Russia. According to recent data, mutations in dif -
ferent connexin genes are associated with non-syndromic hereditary 
hearing loss (NSHL). In some populations of Europe and Asia muta -
tions in these genes are described in 70-90% cases of all NSHL pa -
tients. DNA studies of NSHL patients in Russia were made only for the 
Cx26, while identification of mutations in other connexin genes has not 
been previously conducted.
This study aims to determine the spectrum of mutations in Cx26 and 
Cx31 and two big deletions - del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6-
d13S1854) in Cx30. 240 NSHL patients from Kirov region were an -
alyzed . Different mutations in Cx26 gene were found, and 35delG 
(25,2%) was the most frequent. 150 patients with no mutations or het -
erozygous in the Cx26, were analyzed at Cx31. Mutations in Cx31 
798c> t (13,67%), R32W (4,67%), and 357c> t (3,67%) were present 
in a large number of cases. Deletions in Cx30 were not found in our 
group of patients.
We plan to conduct further analysis of connexin genes and create a 
system for searching mutations for NSHL patients based on pheno -
typic manifestations.
P02.091  Application of chromosomal microarray Analysis in Patients with Early Onset Hearing Loss and mild Dysmorphism
K. Õunap1,2, R. Teek1,2, M. Nelis3,4, O. Zilina4, K. Kruustük5, T. Reimand1,2;  
1Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, 
Genotyping Core Facility, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 5Ear Clinic, Tartu 
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
The aim of our study was to find out new etiological causes for early 
onset hearing loss (HL). We performed whole-genome analysis in 24 
children with still unknown HL and mild dysmorphism and/or other de -
velopmental complaints.
Our study group consisted of 233 children with early onset HL as a 
main complaint collected during 2000-2009. Of the 233 investigated 
probands we found 126 patients (54%) with GJB2  or other gene 
mutation(s). The clinical data of the rest of this investigation group 
was carefully reexamined. We selected out 24 patients who had in 
addition to early onset HL subtle facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive 
and/or developmental or behavioral problems. In order to detect copy 
number changes in selected patients, whole-genome genotyping was 
performed, using the Illumina platform. Three regions in three separate 
patients with the loss of one allele were found. All findings were con -
firmed by quantitative PCR analysis.
One 8.5-year-old girl has peculiar facial phenotype, developmental 
delay, mild sensorineural HL (SNHL) and ~2.94-Mb size deletion in 
chromosomal region 12q13.3-q41.1. She has haploinsufficiency of co -
chlear-expressed MYO1A gene (DFNA48). The 10-year-old girl with 
subtle facial dysmorphism and mild SNHL has ~0.74-Mb size deletion 
in 3p26.2 region, which she inherited from her father. In this region is 
located DFNB6 locus, however, the association between patient’s phe -
notype and deletion is unclear, as her father has normal hearing. Third 
patient (10-year-old) has severe SNHL, subtle facial dysmorphism and 
0.54-Mb size deletion in 1p33 region. There are not known previously 
identified SNHL locus in this area.
P02.092  A Report of three Egyptian Patients with Hereditary 
Osteolysis
S. I. I. Soliman ;  
National Research Centre (NRC), Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: Diseases exhibiting osteolysis in children are rare heredi -
tary disorders. Osteolysis disorders are characterized by destruction 
and resorption of affected bones. Several types have been recognized 
with different clinical manifestations. Subjects & Methods: The current 
study added three new cases from two unrelated consanguineous fam -
ilies with severe form of inherited osteolysis. Meticulous history taking, 
clinical examination, radiological and biochemical investigations are 
included. Results & Conclusions: The clinical and radiological findings 
in our patients were best compatible with the diagnosis of Winchester 
syndrome (WS) and Torg/ Nodulosis-arthropathy-osteolysis syndrome 
(Torg/NAO). Our findings confirm that Torg/NAO and WS represent a 
continuous clinical spectrum. The present study is a great opportunity 
for further molecular analysis to emphasize that Torg/NAO and WS 
are allelic disorders causing the clinical and radiological overlapping 
manifestations.
P02.093  complete screening of SPG  and SPGA  in a spanish 
patient cohort.
B. Quintáns1,2, S. Muñiz-Pérez3, M. García-Murias3, J. Pardo4, M. Zennaro3, Á. 
Carracedo3,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2;  
1University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de Compostela-SERGAS, Spain, 
2Genomic Medicine Group. University of Santiago de Compostela. Center 
for Network Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Spain, 
3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain, 4Department of Neurology, University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de 
Compostela-SERGAS, Spain.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) comprises a group of inherited 
neurodegenerative disorders with weakness and spasticity of the limbs 
(pure) or additional features (complicated). HSP shows genetic hetero -
geneity and can be autosomal-dominant (AD-HSP), autosomal-reces -
sive and X-linked-recessive. At least 45 different genes/loci can cause 
HSP. Mutations in SPG4  and SPG3A  account for approximately 40% 
and 10% of all AD-HSP cases, respectively. The frequency of muta -
tions in the Spanish population needs to be explored. Our preliminary 
study of 43 families indicated a high frequency of SPG4 . Now we pres -
ent the results of the complete analysis of an extended series of 92 
Spanish patients (67 families: 46 from Galicia, 21 from other regions 
of Spain). We performed direct sequencing of the whole coding region 
of SPG4  and SPG3A . Additionally, we searched for small and medium 
size structural abnormalities in both genes by MLPA. Ten mutations were detected in SPG4 , six of them new. We identified two previously 
described mutations in SPG3A  in two families with pure AD-HSP and 
childhood onset. All new sequence variations were screened for in 250 
neurologically normal control individuals. We confirm the high preva -
lence of SPG4  among AD-HSP also in Spain (21% of all cases, 52% 
of the AD-HSP). The frequency of mutations in SPG3A  was similar to 
previous reports (3% of all cases, 7,4% of AD-HSP). Together, screen -
ing of SPG4  and SPG3A  provides a diagnostic confirmation in over 
25% of all HSP and over 60% AD-HSP families and should be the first 
step in the study of these patients.
P02.094  craniofacial syndromes caused by endoplasmic 
reticulim export defects
S. A. Boyadjiev1, S. D. Kim1, J. Helms2, J. Kim1;  
1University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2Stanford 
University, Palo Alto, CA, United States.
We identified a novel autosomal recessive syndrome, cranio-lenticulo-
sutural dysplasia (CLSD, Boyadjiev-Jabs syndrome) due to SEC23A 
missense mutations. Characteristic features of this disease are late-
closing fontanels, sutural cataracts, facial dysmorphisms and skeletal 
defects. Prominent cellular features of skin fibroblasts from these pa -
tients are secretion defect and marked distension of the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER), concordant with the function of SEC23A in protein ex -
port from the ER. Knockout mice model for a partner of SEC23A within 
the COPII mediated vesicular export of secretory proteins from the 
endoplasmic reticulum exhibit an embryonically lethal phenotype of 
holoprosencephaly and severe craniofacial anomalies with the spec -
trum of Pierre Robin-otocephaly phenotype. Our results suggest that 
deficiency of COPII components cause craniofacial and brain pheno -
types that have thus far escaped classification.
P02.095  Hereditary spastic paraplegia in 25 Egyptian families
M. S. Zaki1, M. Y. Eissa1, A. K. Abdel Aleem2, J. C. Tolentino3, J. L. Silhavy3, J. 
G. Gleeson3;  
1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 
2Molecular Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 
3Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of 
Neurosciences, University of California., San Diego, CA, United States.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is characterized by progressive 
spasticity of the lower limbs that can be inherited in an autosomal re -
cessive, autosomal dominant or X-linked manner. The heterogeneity 
of the disease is not only demonstrated by the various forms of HSP, 
but also by the numerous HSP loci that have already been identified. 
We have recruited 63 patients from 25 Egyptian families with compli -
cated or uncomplicated forms of recessive HSP to identify additional 
HSP loci. One of these families with apparent X-linked inheritance dis -
played a mutation in PLP1  gene. We excluded linkage to known loci in 
15 families, which were subsequently evaluated by genome-wide 5K 
SNP linkage scan to identify new loci. Positive consanguinity was in 
23 families (92%) and patients‘ age ranged from 2 years to 40 years. 
The onset varied from 1 year to 18 years and complicated HSP was 
in 17 families. The only presenting symptom in uncomplicated HSP 
was spasticity of lower limbs while in complicated HSP there were 
variable manifestations in the form of dysarthria, mental retardation, 
nystagmus, peripheral neuropathy and acropathy with self mutilation 
that was excluded from linkage to Cct5 gene. Neuroimaging findings 
were thin corpus callosum, defective myelination, cerebellar atrophy 
and retrocerebellar cyst. Our analysis revealed that 8 families defined 
novel HSP loci, and 2 families mapped to known loci. These results 
demonstrate the genetic heterogeneity of the disease and that there 
are still many more causes yet to be explored. Our cohort shows the 
likelihood of identifying more novel HSP genes.
P02.096  molecular evidence of chimera formation resulting from 
parthenogenetic division and dispermic fertilization
J. Winberg1, P. Gustavsson1, K. Lagerstedt Robinson1, E. Blennow1, J. Lundin1, 
E. Iwarsson1, A. Nordenström1, B. Anderlid1, M. Bondeson2, A. Nordenskjöld3, 
A. Nordgren1;  
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Woman and Child Health, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology0
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Whole-body human chimerism is the result of two fertilization events 
giving rise to one individual, and is a rarely detected condition reported 
in the literature. We have studied the molecular background and dis -
cuss the likely mechanism for the detected chimerism in a patient with 
a 46,XX/47,XY,+14 karyotype and ambiguous genitalia, chryptorchi -
dism, pigmentary anomalies and normal psychomotor development. 
We have used karyotyping, interphase-FISH and array CGH analysis 
as well as molecular analysis of polymorphic markers at 48 loci in or -
der to define the origin and percentage of 47,XY,+14 cells in different 
tissues. Our results indicate that the chimerism in our patient is a re -
sult of dispermic fertilization of a parthenogenetically activated oocyte. 
Our report underlines that cytogenetic findings suggesting mosaicism 
might actually indicate chimerism as an underlying cause in patients. 
It also highlights the difficulties in predicting the clinical outcome in 
patients with genetic aberrations in mosaic or chimeric form.
P02.097  An emerging chromosome X duplication hot-spot, 
Xp11.21, involved in developmental delay; two new families
B. Argiropoulos1, M. Lines1, J. McGowan-Jordan1, P. Chakraborty1,2, M. T. 
Geraghty1,2;  
1Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada, 2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
To date, six unrelated families presenting with predominantly nonsyn -
dromic developmental delay have been reported with a microduplica -
tion of chromosome Xp11.2 (Am J Hum Genet. 2008;82(2):432-43). 
Here, we present two additional families with similar/overlapping 
Xp11.2 duplications. The first family consists of two boys, aged 8 and 
10, who presented with triangular face, prominent forehead, high pal -
ate and developmental delay. Microarray-comparative genomic hy -
bridization (array-CGH) identified a 513 kb duplication at Xp11.22 in 
this family. The second family consists of a boy, age 7, with mild facial 
features and developmental delay. G-band analysis showed an appar -
ent duplication of band Xq21.2 that was maternally inherited. Array-
CGH and FISH revealed a 4.6 Mb duplication of the Xp11.21-p11.22 
region that inserted into the X chromosome at Xq21.2. Comparison of 
the duplicated region in the eight families revealed that the minimal, 
commonly duplicated region encompasses the HUWE1  gene. HUWE1 
encodes an E3-ubiquitin ligase involved in neuronal cell cycle and pre -
viously linked to developmental delay. Other commonly duplicated 
genes in this region linked to X-linked developmental delay include 
PHF8 , HSD17B10 , and JARID1C . Our study underscores the utility of 
metaphase FISH to acquire positional information of the genomic im -
balances revealed by array-CGH and provides support that increased 
gene dosage of HUWE1  and PHF8 , or both, contribute to the etiology 
of this disease. Finally, it is known that several genes in this region 
escape X-inactivation. We propose that the sequence elements that 
facilitate the escape of X-inactivation contribute to the genomic insta -
bility, namely, the recurrence of duplications, in this region.
P02.098  Haploinsufficiency of IGF1R  is not always associated 
with short stature, ARVD can be caused by a deletion of the 
entire PKP2  gene, and other things that i have learned from 
ordering arrays.
S. M. Nikkel ;  
Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
Karyotype analysis was the standard of care for patients with devel -
opmental delays; however, arrays are now first line investigations in 
many clinical practices. More patients are receiving diagnoses as mi -
crodeletion/duplication syndromes are detected. With better coverage, 
smaller alterations are detected, which can help localize which genes 
may be responsible for a particular phenotype. Often these alterations 
contain only a single gene. From arrays that are ordered in a clinical 
practice, the results can add to our knowledge of clinical genetics. Ex -
amples of such insights include: arrhythmogenic right ventricular dys -
plasia (ARVD) can be due to a 112-kp deletion the contains the entire 
PKP2  gene, a 1.3 Mb deletion at 15q26.3 containing IGF1R  is NOT 
associated with short stature, there appears to be a facial phenotype 
associated with partial deletion of NRXN1 , and the threshold for order -
ing arrays should be very low.P02.099  Analysis of four patients withinv dup del(8): clinical, 
cytogenetic and molecular characterization of this alteration.
F. García-Santiago1,2, A. Delicado3,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, L. 
Fernandez1,2, M. Palomares1,2, J. Nevado1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, A. González-
Meneses4, P. Lapunzina1,2;  
1INGEMM-IDIPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid. 
ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3IINGEMM-IDIPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, 
Spain, 4Unidad de Dismorfología. Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.
Inverted duplication 8p associated with deletion of the short arms of 
chromosome 8 (inv dup del(8p)) is a complex chromosomal rearrange -
ment relatively common, with an estimated prevalence in the general 
population of 1/10000-30000 liveborns. Clinical manifestations of this 
alteration include generally severe to moderate mental delay and typi -
cal facial features. Furthermore, there are associated malformations of 
the CNS such as hypoplasia/agenesia of the corpus callosum (80%), 
skeletal abnormalities (scoliosis/kyphosis) (60%) and congenital heart 
defects (25%) (Guo WJ. Am J Med Genet 58(3):230-6).
The rearrangement of the chromosome consists of a deletion of the 
telomeric region 8p23-pter, and an inverted duplication of the 8p11.2-
p23 region. We present four children with this anomaly, which deletion 
and duplication size is variable and has been estimated by SNP array 
and array-CGH techniques. In the attached table, the deletion and du -
plication sizes and the highly variable clinical outcome of every one of 
the patients are correlated.
A microsatellite segregation study of the short arms of chromosome 
8 in these patients has been made, detecting the maternal origin of 
this chromosome in all of them. The inversion of the duplication of the 
region within 8p11.2-p23 has been confirmed with FISH technique.
It is important to characterize the size of both, the deletion and the 
duplication in every patient, as this might be related with the severity of 
the clinical manifestations.
P02.100  is it iPEX syndrome? case Report
O. N. Belei , M. Marazan, I. Micle, I. Simedrea, T. Marcovici, C. Daescu, G. 
Brad, M. Puiu;  
First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” 
Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania.
The authors present the case of a male patient aged 14 years old, 
diagnosed with polyendocrine autoimmune association (mellitus dia -
betes type 1, autoimmune thyroiditis and hypo-gonadotrophic hypogo -
nadism) by the occasion of keto-acidotic diabetes onset. This patient 
associated celiac disease, sustained on clinical, immunological and 
histological changes: recurrent diarrhea, positive IgA anti-endomisium 
and anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies and total villous atrophy 
on intestinal biopsy sample. He also presented recurrent eczematous 
dermatitis associated to elevated serum concentration of immunoglob -
ulin E. The authors sustain the diagnosis of IPEX syndrome in this 
case based on clinical and laboratory aspects presented, along with a 
positive family history of unexplained early deaths in the mother-side 
male relatives (two of patients’ uncles). Immune Dysregulation, Poly -
endocrinopathy, Enteropathy X-Linked (IPEX) Syndrome represents 
a rare X linkated disorder, characterised by development of systemic 
autoimmunity from the first year of life. Life expectancy is reduced, 
but there were described several cases as this one, associating late 
onset, that reached the second or the third decade of life. IPEX is 
a rare genetic autoimmune disease due to mutations in the FOXP3 
gene, located on the X-chromosome. There are no specific laboratory 
tests to confirm the diagnosis. Molecular analysis of the FOXP3 gene 
(Xp11.2-q13.3) is required for the diagnosis. Drug treatment includes 
immunosuppression, nutritional support and hormone replacement. 
The unique definitive treatment for IPEX is hematopoietic stem cells 
transplantation.
P02.101  Unusual case of bilateral iridocorneal endothelial 
syndrome with extraocular anomalies
M. Lamp1,2, K. Kaljurand3, R. Mikelsaar1;  
1Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and 
Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Eye Clinic, 
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
Iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome is a rare chronic ocular dis -
order with three subtypes: Chandler’s syndrome, Cogan-Reese syn -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology1
drome, and essential (progressive) iris atrophy. It is characterized by 
abnormal corneal endothelium, iridocorneal adhesions, corectopia, iris 
atrophy and increased intraocular pressure. In up to 82% of cases it 
progresses to glaucoma. The ICE syndrome is usually unilateral, how -
ever some bilateral and a few familial cases have been reported. The 
etiology of this syndrome is unclear, but the most common theory thus 
far suggests a potential viral origin.
We report a new case of bilateral ICE syndrome in a 38-year-old wom -
an with a family history (41 members) positive for genetic ocular dis -
eases from the paternal side: pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (proband’s 
uncle) and macular degeneration (proband’s grandmother). Patient’s 
main bilateral ocular symptoms were corectopia, iris atrophy and in -
creased intraocular pressure. Gonioscopy of the right eye revealed 
also extensive iridocorneal adhesions and narrow, partly closed ante -
rior chamber angle. Visual acuity and visual fields were normal. Unlike 
most reported ICE syndrome cases with an unremarkable medical his -
tory, our patient suffered also from endometriosis and allergic rhinitis, 
and had several extraocular facial anomalies such as prominent max -
illa, retrognathia, triangular-shaped opened mouth and high palate, as 
well as skeletal anomalies like mild kyphoscoliosis. Karyotype 46,XX.
In conclusion, both the previously reported bilateral and a few familial 
cases, as well as our patient with bilateral ICE syndrome and extra -
ocular anomalies, indicate the possibility that genetic factors might be 
involved in the etiology of this syndrome.
P02.102  Jeune syndrome: A case Description study.
V. Egorov1, N. Usurelu1, V. Sacara1, M. Stratila1, P. Stratulat2, A. Magulceac2, 
G. Covalciuc2;  
1National Center of Human Reproduction and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, 
Moldova, Republic of, 2Scientific Research Institute Motherhood and Childhood 
Health, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of.
Jeune syndrome (OMIM 208500, Q77.2) is characterized by poten -
tially lethal dwarfism, autosomal-recessive asphyxiating thoracic dys -
trophy with short horizontally ribs, short limbs, a respiratory distress 
which can be rapidly fatal. As well as is characteristic lung hypoplasia, 
polydactyly, cardiac anomalies, and renal failure. Incidence is 1 per 
100000 - 130000.
A newly-born female child was born in 7. 07. 2009, admitted to hospital 
in 9. 07. 2009, and died in 23. 07. 2009. The newborn was from first 
39-weeks pregnancy, bodyweight 3300, length 49 cm.
During the pregnancy in mother was diagnosed unilateral doubling of 
kidney, on the background of aggravation of chronic pyelonephritis.
The pregnancy was evidenced as late as in 22 weeks, and anomaly 
was diagnosed in fetus on 34 - 35 weeks of gestation, when was dis -
covered skeletal malformation and was suspected hypochondropla -
sia.
On X-ray investigation from was diagnosed significant chest constric -
tion with short ribs and secondary pulmonary hypoplasia, presumably 
Jeunes syndrome, cardiomegaly and signs of intrauterine pneumonia. 
the child was karyotyped with normal result.
On Doppler echocardiography - the presence of fetal communications, 
aortic coarctation and severe pulmonary hypertension.
On the 16-th day of life the status heavily worsened with progressive 
respiratory insufficiency and prominent bradycardia and following car -
diac arrest.
In this case the prenatal diagnosis is possible if DNA diagnosis is avail -
able, and is recommended ultrasonographic scan of fetus during next 
pregnancy.
P02.103  is hearing loss a feature of Joubert syndrome?
H. Y. Kroes1, G. A. Van Zanten2, S. A. De Ru2, M. Boon3, G. M. S. Mancini4, M. 
S. Van der Knaap5, B. T. Poll-The6, D. Lindhout1;  
1Dept. Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 
2Dept. Otonasopharyngology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 
3Dept. Child Neurology, University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 
4Dept. Medical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 
5Dept. Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 6Dept. Child Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
Objective: to asses if hearing loss is a feature of Joubert syndrome 
(JBS), one of the ciliopathies and therefore possibly associated with 
hearing loss.
Study design: we retrospectively collected the audiological data of Dutch JBS cases.
Results: data from 22 Dutch JBS cases (17 males, 5 females) aged 
3 to 40 years were available. In 14 cases audiological investigations 
were successfully performed. Three cases (from 17 to 26 years old) 
showed very mild sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) at different fre -
quencies. Conductive hearing loss due to middle ear infections oc -
curred frequently in young JBS children (6 out of 22 cases). In three 
cases (from 3 to 13 years old) the parents reported hypersensitivity to 
sound. In the five cases with two pathogenic AHI1  mutations only one 
subject had very mild SNHL.
Conclusion: There is no evidence for significant hearing loss in Joubert 
syndrome. However, given the already compromised speech develop -
ment in JBS, conductive hearing loss due to middle ear infections in 
young patients should be treated vigorously. SNHL at a later age can -
not be excluded on the basis of our data, since three of the cases in 
the older age range showed discretely increased hearing thresholds. 
Analogous to the ciliopathy Bardet Biedl syndrome, where subclinically 
increased hearing thresholds were reported in a group of adolescents 
patients, follow-up of JBS patients is important in view of the possibility 
of progressive late onset SNHL.
P02.104  Bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of ovary in a patient 
with 10q23 microdeletion
N. Babovic1, P. S. Simmons2, C. Moir2, E. C. Thorland2, B. Scheithauer2, D. 
Babovic-Vuksanovic2;  
1Mayo Medical School, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, United States.
Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is a rare hereditary condition 
caused by mutations in SMAD4 or BMPR1A genes. Multiple juvenile 
polyps can also be found in a related group of syndromes with mul -
tisystemic involvement including Cowden disease, Lhermitte-Duclos 
disease, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and Proteus-like syn -
drome, all grouped as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTS). 
All forms of juvenile polyposis manifest in older childhood or early 
adulthood. Infantile juvenile polyposis is a rare entity, presenting in the 
first year of life with severe gastrointestinal symptoms. Many of these 
patients have associated macrocephaly, hypotonia, and congenital 
anomalies. It was recently recognized that patients with infantile pol -
yposis have a 10q23 microdeletion, involving both BMPR1A and PTEN 
genes. There is a major risk for gastrointestinal malignancies in these 
patients, but the risk for development of other tumors is not known. We 
describe a patient with a history of infantile polyposis, macrocephaly, 
developmental delay, hypotonia and a 10q23 microdeletion. At age 
14 she presented with bilateral mucinous cystadenoma of the ovary. 
This type of tumor was not previously reported in association with JPS, 
10q23 microdeletion syndrome, or infantile polyposis. We believe that 
ovarian cystadenomas may be another neoplastic complication of in -
fantile polyposis, and that our report widens the spectrum of the 10q23 
microdeletion phenotype.
P02.105  Evidence for genetic heterogeneity of Keutel syndrome
S. A. Boyadjiev1, J. Liu1, M. Bober2, A. Yuksel3, E. Karaca3, L. Lambie4, K. 
Bolton4;  
1University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2A.I. Dupont 
Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 3Cerrahpasa Medical 
Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Division of Human 
Genetics, University of the Witwatersrand,, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Keutel syndrome (KS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder char -
acterized by abnormal cartilage calcifications, peripheral pulmonary 
stenosis, midfacial hypoplasia, and brachytelephalangia. Mutations in 
the MGP gene have been identified in four families. X-linked chondro -
dysplasia punctata (CDPX1) is caused by ARSE deficiency, and has 
clinical overlap with KS. We present the clinical manifestations of five 
new patients from three families, with a clinical diagnosis of KS. Muta -
tion analysis of the MGP and ARSE was performed. RESULTS: Three 
siblings born to a consanguineous Turkish couple had facial features 
and skeletal features of KS and carried a novel homozygous nonsense 
mutation, c.79G>T (E27X).. A fourth male patient, of Korean ances -
try had typical facial features, hearing loss and brachytelephalangia 
and a deletion of the entire ARSE gene was documented. The final 
female patient of South African descent had similar facial features, 
brachytelephalangia and laryngeal and tracheal calcifications, but no 
MGP or ARSE mutations were identified. CONCLUSION: MGP en -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology2
codes vitamin K-dependent matrix Gla protein that acts as a calcifica -
tion inhibitor by repressing BMP2. Despite the complete loss of MGP 
in the Turkish family, the mild clinical manifestations suggest functional 
redundancy of the mechanisms preventing cartilage calcification. Clini -
cal overlap of KS and CDPX1 suggests that MGP and ARSE share 
a common biological pathway and/or substrate. As neither MGP nor 
ARSE mutations were identified in the South African patient, we sug -
gest that further genetic heterogeneity exists for KS.
P02.106  clinical heterogeneity in a large family with a mutation 
in LMNA  gene
L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, M. Olive2, J. Juan1, E. Verdura1, M. J. Rodriguez1, E. 
Companys1, J. Bautista3, C. Paradas4, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1;  
1Genetics. Hospital Sant Pau. Ciberer, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute of 
Neuropathology. Hospital Bellvitge, Hospitalet de llobregat, Spain, 3Neurology. 
Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 4Neurology. Hospital Virgen del Rocio, 
Sevilla, Spain.
Mutations in LMNA  gene, which is located in 1q21.2 and codifies for 
twelve exons, can be considered to cause four different groups of 
overlapping disorders: 1) Diseases of striated muscle, 2) Lipodystro -
phy syndromes, 3) A peripheral neuropathy and 4) Accelerating aging 
disorders.
We present a large family including four generations, with limb girdle 
muscular dystrophy Type 1B LGMD1B showing a particular heteroge -
neity in the cardiological involvement. Eight patients present limb girdle 
muscular dystrophy, mainly in proximal lower muscles and pelvic gir -
dle. From a cardiological point of view three patients presented sudden 
death and three others have a pacemaker. The genetic analysis was 
performed in genomic DNA of the patients and relatives. All patients 
showed a frameshift mutation in exon 1 of LMNA  gene in heterozy -
gous state: c.240delG, p.Ala80Ala_fsX16 . The mutation has not been 
previously described and 180 control chromosomes were analysed in 
order to exclude a polymorphism. The analysis of different markers in 
LMNA  locus as well as the absence of mutation in desmin gene ( DES) 
shows that the disease is caused by the LMNA  mutation.
Four out of the eight fourth generation children presented the mutation 
although they remained asymptomatic at the moment of the molecu -
lar study. The genetic diagnosis is useful to offer close cardiological 
monitoring of the patients in order to prevent a possible sudden death. 
Moreover the detection of the mutation allows for genetic counselling 
in the family.
P02.107  First deletion mutation in SPRED1  in Legius syndrome
S. Kivirikko1, S. Järvinen2, E. Sankila3, J. Ramsey4, F. Mikhail4, L. Messiaen4, 
M. Pöyhönen1,2;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of 
Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Helsinki University 
Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Genetics, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
The proband was born as a second child of healthy, non-consanguine -
ous Caucasian parents at week 35 because of mothers diabetes mel -
litus. Birth measurements were 4035 g/ 51 cm/ 34 cm. As a newborn 
ptosis of her left eye was noticed. She was initially referred to a clinical 
geneticist at the age of 14 months for evaluation of multiple small cafe 
au lait macules (CALM). At the age of 4 years she had 6 CALM over 1 
cm in diameter and several smaller ones and ptosis of the left eye. She 
had no freckling, no neurofibromas and no iris Lisch nodules. Her brain 
MRI, speech and motor development are normal. In ophthalmological 
follow ups her vision has been normal.
Her 7-year-old brother has 10 CALM over 1 cm, flat feet, no freck -
ling, no neurofibromas, no Lisch nodules, a normal brain MRI, normal 
milestones, and mild learning difficulties. The 41-year old father has 6 
CALM larger than 1.5 cm, a few xanthelasmas under the eyelids, no 
freckling, no neurofibromas, no Lisch nodules and his brain MRI was 
normal.
Comprehensive mutation analysis of NF1 was negative. Because of 
multiple CALMs SPRED1  mutation analysis was performed but no 
mutation was found by direct sequencing of the entire coding region. 
Further analysis for presence/absence of copy number changes using 
MLPA, qPCR and aCGH showed presence of a deletion of the first 
exon and the promoter region in SPRED1  in this family. This report 
shows the importance of copy number studies in Legius syndrome.P02.108  Identification of mitochondrial mutations in LHON 
patients
M. Kumar1, P. Sharma2, R. Saxena2, R. Dada1;  
1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for 
Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
LHON (Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy) is a maternally inherited 
disease typically leading to acute bilateral blindness due to loss of optic 
nerve and papillomacular bundle nerve fibers, predominantly in adult 
males with prevalence estimated to be 1:50,000. Many factors like 
mtDNA background, heteroplasmy of mtDNA mutation, nuclear genes, 
and environmental factors, have been shown to play active roles in 
pathogenesis of LHON. It has been well established that optic atrophy 
is a very common and sometimes the singular pathological feature in 
mitochondrial disorders. We studied the prevalence of primary LHON 
mutations and other mitochondrial abnormalities by sequencing the 
entire mtDNA coding region. 10 LHON diagnosed cases were enrolled 
for this study. DNA was extracted from whole blood samples and PCR 
were done for coding region of the mitochondrial genome. All frag -
ments were sequenced in both forward and reverse directions for con -
firmation of any detected variant. Total 31 variants were found in this 
study, 12 (38.70%) were nonsynonymous and 19 (61.30%) were syn -
onymous. Our results imply a broader association between potentially 
pathologic mtDNA sequence changes and severity of optic nerve injury 
in LHON. As the percentage of mutant mtDNAs increases, mitochon -
drial energy production declines and ROS increases. Increased ROS 
acts as a mitogen, but excessive ROS together with reduced energy 
production can lead to apoptosis. We report a fairly small group of 
patients from a restricted ethnic population and highlight the need for 
analysis of large number of samples to identify primary casual muta -
tions in Indian population.
P02.109  Ligneous conjunctivitis with severe ligneous 
periodontitis and decreased serum plasminogen: the first 
Egyptian case report.
M. I. Mostafa1, G. Y. El Kamah1, A. Zayed2, M. El Darouti2;  
1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
Ligneous conjunctivitis (MIM 217090) is a rare autosomal recessive 
hereditary disorder. We report a 12 year old girl with dysmorphic fea -
tures with both ligneous periodontitis  and ligneous conjunctivitis  in 
association with plasminogen type I deficiency. Intra-oral examination 
revealed remarkable gingival enlargement, with pinkish, waxy, pain -
less masses. The gingival papillae were hyperplastic concealing most 
of the teeth. Areas of the gingival tissues were covered with a dull and 
rather tough whitish yellowish membrane. A thin pseudomembrane 
that could be wiped away overlay the tough part of the membrane. 
Ophthalmic examination revealed mild swelling of both eye lids, white 
pseudomembranes on the upper and lower tarsal conjunctivae with 
slight involvement of the bulbar conjunctivae and scarring of the tar -
sal conjunctivae Diagnosis was based on the clinical and histological 
findings and most importantly, decreased serum level of plasminogen 
type I.
P02.110  A French experience of limb malformation gene 
analyses: stringent clinical selection guaranties better 
percentage of mutation identification.
S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2,3, M. Holder-Espinasse1,2,3, A. Verloes4,5, S. Odent6,7, 
L. Olivier-Faivre8,9, P. Edery10,11, N. Philip12,13, P. Sarda14,15, D. Lacombe16,17, 
A. Mezel18, P. Saugier-Veber19, A. Dieux-Coeslier1,2, O. Boute-Bénéjean1,2, C. 
Vincent-Delorme1,2, F. Petit1,2, J. Andrieux20, M. Buisine21,3, N. Porchet21,3, F. 
Escance-Narducci21;  
1Clinical Genetics University Hospital, Lille, France, 2Rare disease reference 
centre for MCA syndromes “North of France”, Lille, France, 3Lille 2 University, 
Lille, France, 4Genetic Department University Hospital Robert Debré, Paris, 
France, 5Rare disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “Ile de France”, 
Paris, France, 6Clinical Genetics University Hospital, Rennes, France, 7Rare 
disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “West of France”, Rennes, 
France, 8Genetic Department University Hospital, Dijon, France, 9Rare disease 
reference centre for MCA syndromes “East of France”, Dijon, France, 10Genetic 
Department University Hospital, Lyon, France, 11Rare disease reference 
centre for MCA syndromes “East-Centre of France”, Lyon, France, 12Genetic 
Department University Hospital, Marseille, France, 13Rare disease reference 
centre for MCA syndromes “Sud-East of France”, Marseille, France, 14Genetic Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
Department University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 15Rare disease reference 
centre for MCA syndromes “Languedoc-Roussillon Region”, Montpellier, 
France, 16Genetic Department University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 17Rare 
disease reference centre for MCA syndromes “Sud-West of France”, Bordeaux, 
France, 18Paediatric orthopaedics, University hospital, Lille, France, 19Genetics 
Department University hospital, Rouen, France, 20Cytogenetics Laboratory 
University Hospital, Lille, France, 21Molecular Genetics University Hospital, Lille, 
France.
Our objective was to evaluate the consequences of accurate clinical 
selection in the mutation identification for genes implicated in limb de -
velopment
Patients: 403 DNAs from index patients (30% familial) were sent to our 
laboratory with a diagnosis and a request for molecular analyses.
Methods: For each syndrome, we classified the cases as “typical”, 
“atypical” or “excluded”. 451 PCR-sequence of exonic and flanking 
intronic regions as well as MLPA or Q-PCR were performed for each 
analysed gene (133 TBX5 , 83 SALL4 , 69 TP63 , 47 SALL1 , 37 LMX1B , 
28 CDMP1 , 22 ROR2 , 13 TBX3 , 11 IHH, 4 TBX4 , 4 ZRS).
Results : 192 cases were considered “typical”, 164 “atypical” and 47 
“excluded”.
139 (34.5%) deleterious anomalies were identified. 134 among “typi -
cal” (70%), 5 among “atypical” (3%), and none among “excluded” cas -
es. In the atypical group referred for Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), four 
cases were mutated for SALL4 and one carried a TBX3 -5 deletion. 
Further tests (Array-CGH or molecular analyses) lead to a diagnosis in 
22 additional cases. The final diagnostic rate was 53%.
The mutation rate differed among diseases: 95% Nail-Patella pa -
tients were considered “typical”, 83% of whom were LMX1B mutated. 
When typical (47 %), 81% HOS patients were carrying TBX5  muta -
tion. CDMP1 mutation rate reached 94% in typical patients with type 
C brachydactyly or Grebe syndrome. TP63  associated diseases were 
more difficult to diagnose (41% typical) and a mutation was identified 
in 46%.
Conclusion : an accurate clinical diagnosis allows improving mutation 
detection rate for limb malformation genes.
P02.111  congenital muscular Dystrophy associated with a de 
novo LmNA variant: Pathogenic mutation or polymorphism?
S. G. Mehta1, E. Graham2, J. Hudson2, D. Booth3, K. Bushby4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 2Northern Molecular Genetics Service, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 
3Department of Paediatrics, Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, Norwich, United 
Kingdom, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
Aims: To describe a newly emerging congenital muscular dystrophy 
phenotype associated with a de novo LMNA variant
Methods: Extensive genetic, histological, neurological and radiological 
investigations were undertaken.
Results: A term baby, born with bilateral severe positional talipes, was 
investigated after initial respiratory distress, developed an oxygen re -
quirement and was eventually ventilated due to progressive respira -
tory muscle weakness. Central hypotonia was noted initially, but then 
was shown to have absent reflexes and profound axial hypotonia yet 
milder peripheral hypotonia and muscle weakness. There was facial 
weakness as well. There was progressive right atrial enlargement 
on echocardiogram. Muscle CK was 1243 U/L , brain MRI and nerve 
conduction studies were unremarkable, muscle biopsy showed only 
mild myopathic change. LMNA mutation analysis identified a de novo 
heterozygous change that is likely to be associated with the severe 
presentation. This patient died after developing seizures and interstitial 
pneumonitis as an end stage event.
Conclusion: LMNA mutations can cause a severe congenital muscular 
dystrophy that have been hitherto under recognised. Functional stud -
ies and further reports of a similar presentation with the same variant 
may help provide proof of pathogenicity. Awareness of this phenotype 
may allow increasing diagnosis of this rare presentation in the future.
P02.112  Loeys Dietz syndome: clinical and molecular characterization of 4 spanish patients
V. López-González1, M. Ballesta-Martínez1, E. Guillén-Navarro1, F. Escudero-
Cárceles2, B. Loeys3;  
1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario 
Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Unidad de Cardiología Infantil. Servicio 
de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3Department of Medical Genetics. Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences. 
University Hospital, Gent, Belgium.
Introduction: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is characterized by vascu -
lar and skeletal manifestations, with aggressive arterial aneurysms 
and high incidence of pregnancy-related complications. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance pattern with clinical variability. No genotype-phe -
notype correlation.
Objective: Clinical and molecular characterization of four patients with 
LDS.
Results: Three patients are members of the same family and the fourth 
patient is an isolated case. All of them were sent to consultation with 
Marfan syndrome diagnosis. All of them have aortic root dilatation, with 
progressive course. Two of them required surgery. One patient also 
has dilatation of intracranial arteries. All of them have marfanoid-like 
habitus with no true dolichostenomelia, severe scoliosis, and normal 
ophtalmologicall evaluation. Two of them have bifid uvula. Two pa -
tients have atopic dermatitis. TGFBR2 mutations have been identified 
in both families (one with autosomal dominant inheritance-c.1273A>G 
exon 5 (p.M425V); and the other case is de novo-c.1583G>T exon 7 
(p.R528H)). All patients have been sent for strict follow up by cardiolo -
gist, total body angioMRI, and given risk assessments of pregnancy. 
Conclusions: 1) Loeys Dietz syndrome must be considered in the dif -
ferential diagnosis of Marfan syndrome. 2) An early diagnosis is impor -
tant due to the natural history of this condition (worse prognosis of aor -
tic root dilatation-dissection, risk of uterine rupture during pregnancy 
etc). 3) Clinical variability is present in the family described suggesting 
other modifying genetic factors. 4) The identification of mutations in 
TGFBR2 in our patients allows adequate genetic counselling. 5) To our 
knowledge this is the first report of LDS in Spanish patients.
P02.113  mitochondrial 4917 A>G mutation in a iranian Family 
with Long QT Syndrome (LQTs)
M. Heidari , M. Khatami;  
Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
LQTS are inherited or acquired disorders of repolarization identified 
by the electrocardiographic (EKG) abnormalities of prolongation of the 
QT interval corrected for heart rate (QTs) usually above 460 -480 ms. 
Several reports indicate a relationship between mitochondrial DNA 
mutation and heart disorders. We identified a homoplasmic 4917 A>G 
mutation in the Mitochondrial ND2 gene in 14 members of a family with 
Long QT syndrome by PCR-SSCP. This Mutation causes a change of 
Asn to Asp (N150D Missense mutation). In this study, the effects of 
this Missense mutation upon transmembrane helixes were assayed by 
means of SOSUI System (transmembrane helix prediction).The result 
of this prediction showed that N150D mutation caused to decrease 
nine to eight transmembrane helixes. Thus, this mutation might trigger 
syncope or sudden death with emotional stress and exercise.
Key words: Long QT syndrome, mt DNA, Muration, SSCP.
P02.114   
madelung’s deformity in a girl with a novel GNAS  mutation
P. Rump1, J. D. H. Jongbloed1, R. B. van der Luijt2;  
1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
Division of Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
Madelung’s deformity is an uncommon congenital anomaly of the 
wrist. It is characterized by a decreased carpal angle with a triangular 
arrangement of the carpal bones, a shortened and curved radius, a 
widened distal radioulnar joint and a posterior displacement of the ulna 
head. The deformity is progressive and usually seen in adolescent 
girls. Although some asymmetry can occur, the anomaly is typically 
bilateral and symmetrical. The presumed cause is a partial early fusion 
of the ulnar side of the radial epiphysis. Turner syndrome and Leri-
Weill dyschondrosteosis are disorders most commonly associated 
with Madelung’s deformity. Here we present a 14-year-old girl with a 
Madelung’s deformity, mild mental retardation, some dysmorphic fa -
cial features and a relative short stature. She also has a brachydac -
tyly type E, with brachymetacarpia and brachytelephalangy. Standard 
chromosome analysis, array-CGH and analysis of the SHOXab  gene 
showed no abnormalities. However, we did identify a novel and de 
novo  mutation (c.476T>C; p.Val159Ala) in exon 6 of the GNAS  gene, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
the gene associated with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report of Madelung’s deformity in a patient 
with a GNAS  mutation.
P02.115  mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly, cleft 
palate, and anomalous ears
M. A. Lines1, S. Douglas2, M. Guion-Almeida3, Y. Alanay4, G. Utine4, D. Böhm5, 
A. Grix6, C. Nava7, D. Wieczorek8, L. Huang2, J. Kohlhase5, G. Baujat7, D. 
Bulman2, K. Boycott1;  
1Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada, 2Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Clinical 
Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of 
Săo Paulo, Săo Paulo, Brazil, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey, 5Center for Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 
6Department of Genetics, The Permanente Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, 
United States, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Université Paris Descartes, 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 8Institute für Humangenetik, 
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) is an inborn error of craniofacial 
development affecting structures derived from the first and second 
branchial arches. Treacher Collins syndrome is the prototypical form 
of MFD, however, MFD is also a feature of several other syndromes 
whose genetic basis remain largely unknown. Two previously published 
reports describe seven patients with a novel MFD phenotype charac -
terized by microcephaly, cleft palate, and anomalous ears (Guion-Al -
meida et al, Clin Dysmorphol 15(3):171-4; Wieczorek et al, Am J Med 
Genet A 149A(5):837-43); we believe these reports describe the same 
phenotype, and have provisionally termed this conditon ‘MFD with mi -
crocephaly’ (MFDM). Building upon these earlier reports, and incorpo -
rating five additional cases, we present an updated clinical description 
of the MFDM phenotype. Cardinal features of this condition are short 
stature, developmental delay, microcephaly, metopic craniosynostosis, 
midface hypoplasia, micrognathia, and cleft palate. A highly specific 
ear phenotype is also observed, characterized by small, low-set ears, 
preauricular tags, auditory canal stenosis, and hypoplastic lobe/tragus. 
Other, inconsistently observed anomalies include cardiac septal de -
fects, polydactyly, choanal atresia, and epilepsy.
We are presently studying the molecular basis of this condition. 
TCOF1 mutations have been excluded in several probands, confirm -
ing that MFDM is both genetically and clinically distinct from Treacher 
Collins syndrome. Genomic microarray delineated a complex de novo 
rearrangement in one proband; this individual has a microdeletion of 
an agenic region of 4p12, in conjunction with a deletion/duplication 
situated at 17q21.31. The latter region contains a number of appealing 
positional candidates for the causative gene underlying this condition.
P02.116  molecular studies in patients with marfanoid features
V. A. Seidel1,2, M. del Campo2,3;  
1IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 2Programa de Medicina Molecular y Genética, 
Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad de Genética, Departamento 
de Ciencias Experimentales, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.
The Marfan Syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by mutations in the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene. Ghent criteria are 
commonly followed for the clinical diagnosis of MFS.
The purpose of our study is to evaluate the diagnostic approach to 
MFS. We have analyzed the medical histories of 154 patients with 
“marfanoid features” referred to the Marfan multidisciplinary clinic. The 
results are shown in tables 1&2.
Several observations are relevant: Altogether 5 “new” mutations have 
been found, 2 in the group not fulfilling the Ghent criteria (MF-like). 
On the other hand, 3 cases with mutation in the TGFBR1 gene were 
detected, thus confirming the suspicion of the Loeys-Dietz Syndrome. 
In addition, 7.8% of our confirmed MFS cases would not have a diag -
nosis of MFS if molecular analysis had not been performed.
We conclude that in patients with “marfanoid features”, molecular stud -
ies are relevant to confirm or sometimes change our clinical diagnosis, 
and particularly for reproductive counseling and evaluation of relatives 
at risk. Finally, our experience contributes to expanding the clinical 
phenotype of FBN1 and other genes´ mutations, and may elicit minor 
revisions to the current Ghent criteria.Table 1: Yield of molecular studies in 
our series of patients with marfanoid features
Total number of
patients referredClinical 
diagnosisMolecular study 
performedResult
154MFS 87 68FBN1+ 55 (81%)
Pending 7 (10%)
Negative 6 (9%)
MF-like 36 22FBN1+ 222.7%TGFBR1 3
Pending 5 (22.7%)
Negative 12 (54.5%)
Table 2: Evaluation of clinical data (following Ghent Nosology) 
after molecular diagnosis of FBN1+
FBN1+Only 1 > criterion and involvement 
of other organs/systemsFamily history
 (2nd > criterion)
positive negative
57 
index 
cases15Cardiovascular 7
8 7 (7.8%) Skeletal 6
Ophtalmological 2
P02.117  the case report of causal mutation of neonatal marfan 
syndrome
H. Slavikova1, E. Prusova1, A. Baxova2, A. Boday1;  
1P&R lab a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2First Faculty of Medicine of Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Neonatal Marfan syndrome is a rare and serious illness of connec -
tive tissue with atypical features of Marfan syndrome. It is a hereditary 
disease, but its neonatal form has a spontaneous mutation tendency. 
Neonatal Marfan syndrome also differs from classical form not only in 
certain symptoms, but in higher mortality rates during young age. Life 
span of patients with neonatal Marfan syndrome is less than 2 years, 
and it depends on the severity of cardiovascular complications.
Mutation analysis of neonatal form is different from the classical form, 
which is due to mutations in all 65 exons of the gene FBN1 . Screening 
is associated with ,,neonatal region“ of the FBN1  gene, that includes 
exons 24 to 32. Direct sequencing of these exons allows quick detec -
tion of mutation.
We described the case of this rare form of Marfan syndrome. Our pa -
tient after birth showed a clear phenotype: tall stature, thin body build, 
long arms, legs, fingers and toes and other symptoms typical for neo -
natal Marfan syndrome.
Based on the patient‘s phenotype without family history, we have de -
cided to do molecular genetic analysis of this region of FBN1  gene. We 
detected mutation in exon 29 and we confirmed the neonatal Marfan 
syndrome. Heart failure was the reason of death of our patient in the 
second month after birth.
P02.118  Marshall syndrome in a nine-year-old Turkish girl
A. G. Zamani1, M. S. Yıldırım1, A. Karalezli2, A. Yıldırım3;  
1Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Konya, Turkey, 2Baskent University, Konya Practice and Research Center, 
Department of Ophthalmology, Konya, Turkey, 3Public Health Physician, 
Şükriye Sert Village Clinic, Konya, Turkey.
Marshall syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant trait which is charac -
terized by ocular abnormalities, early sensorineural hearing loss, high 
myopia and a distinct craniofacial anomalies.
We present a nine-year-old girl who was the second child of a non-
consanguineous couple. She was referred to our department for dys -
morphic appearence. Her karyotype was found 46.XX.
She was diagnosed with Marshall syndrome based on the clinical fea -
tures of a depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nares, hypertelorism, 
short strature, micrognatia, high palate, and ophthalmologic anoma -
lies. Ophthalmologic examination revealed cataracts, strabismus and 
severe degenerative myopia. Audiologic test showed sensorineural 
hearing loss. Her mother had osteoporosis, sensorineural hearing loss 
and severe myopia. It was evaluated the result of decreased pene -
trance.
Marshall syndrome proceeds variable ocular, otologic and skeletal 
symptoms so these patients require regular folllow up to insure early 
detection of problems.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
P02.119  mEcP2 gene duplication in a czech family with four 
affected boys
M. Simandlova , M. Vlčkova, P. Hedvicakova, M. Hancarova, A. Vazna, Z. 
Sedlacek, M. Havlovicova;  
Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
Duplications of a part of Xq28 involving the methyl CpG binding protein 
2 (MECP2) gene have been described in male patients with severe 
mental disability, delayed milestones, absence of language, hypoto -
nia replaced by spasticity and retractions, and recurrent severe infec -
tions. We present a family with four affected boys in two generations. 
Three of the boys died in childhood due to respiratory infections. The 
proband, an eight-year-old boy, was found to carry a submicroscopic 
duplication of approximately 1.25 Mb in Xq28 including the MECP2 
gene. He suffered from severe mental retardation, epilepsy and au -
tistic features. The duplicated region contained about 56 protein-cod -
ing genes. These included 13 genes where loss-of-function mutations 
are known to cause X-linked disease. The MECP2 gene is essential 
in neuronal development, and is the only gene in the aberration of 
our patient where duplications have a known phenotypic effect. The 
mother of the patient, his maternal grandmother and aunt also car -
ried the duplication. All of them were asymptomatic. The mother and 
the maternal grandmother of the patient showed skewed X-inactivation 
(15:85 and 7:93, respectively). In addition, the proband and his mother, 
but not the maternal grandmother and aunt, carried a duplication of the 
terminal 0.5 Mb of Xp. This de novo aberration most likely exerted no 
phenotypical effect, in accord with other published cases, and the phe -
notype observed in the family was most likely attributable solely to the 
duplication of the MECP2 region. This work was supported by grants 
MZOFNM2005 and CHERISH (EC FP7 223692).
P02.120  Duplication of Xq28, including  MECP2 , in a boy with the 
de novo  cryptic unbalanced t(X;6)(q28;q27) translocation
M. Krajewska-Walasek , A. Gutkowska, M. Juszczak, M. Pelc, D. Jurkiewicz, 
M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, M. Kugaudo, A. Jezela-Stanek, K. H. Chrzanowska, 
E. Ciara;  
Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland.
Duplication of the distal long arm of the X chromosome is a rare chro -
mosomal abnormality. It may result from an intrachromosomal dupli -
cation or an unbalanced translocation with an autosome or with a Y 
chromosome.
We report a case of de novo  duplication of Xq28-qter resulting from 
translocation onto the long arm of chromosome 6 in a boy with severe 
developmental delay, microcephaly, axial hypotonia, spasticity of upper 
and lower limbs, seizures, and severe recurrent infections. Apart from 
an open mouth and protruding tongue no other specific dysmorphic 
facial signs were seen. Feeding difficulties with poor sucking, general -
ized hypotonia and cryptorchidism were observed during the neonatal 
period. Prader-Willi syndrome was excluded in differential diagnosis.
Routine cytogenetic analysis results were normal. Using FISH, MLPA, 
and array CGH (Affymetrix Whole Genome 2,7M Array), we identified 
and characterized a terminal duplication of chromosome X at q28-qter 
(approx. 3.346 Mb in size) involving MECP2  and a 6q terminal deletion 
with the breakpoint in q27 (approx. 1.89 MB). This is the second report 
of a boy with a cryptic unbalanced Xq-autosome translocation.
Subtelomeric 6q27 deletion due to relatively mild phenotypic presenta -
tion is difficult to recognize clinically. Disomy for the Xq28 chromosome 
region yields a more characteristic phenotype, however, so that a clini -
cally oriented FISH study using subtelomeric probes or MLPA can eas -
ily detect a cryptic rearrangement.
We strongly recommend the use of MLPA as the first screening method 
for the detection of copy number aberrations in such patients because 
of its cost-effectiveness.
P02.121  Refining the phenotype associated with MEF2C  
haploinsufficiency
H. Van Esch1, F. Novara2, S. Beri3, R. Giorda3, S. Nageshappa1, F. Darra4, B. 
dalla Bernardina4, O. Zuffardi2,5;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Genetica Medica, Università 
di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Biologia Molecolare, IRCCS “E. Medea”, Bosisio Parini, 
Lecco, Italy, 4Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico GB Rossi, Verona, Italy, 5IRCCS Fondazione C. Mondino, Italy.
Recently, submicroscopic deletions of the 5q14.3 region have been 
described in patients with severe mental retardation, stereotypic move -
ments, epilepsy and cerebral malformations. Further delineation of a 
critical region of overlap in these patients pointed to MEF2C  as the 
responsible gene. This finding was further reinforced by the identifica -
tion of a nonsense mutation in a patient with a similar phenotype. In 
brain , MEF2C  is essential for early neurogenesis, neuronal migration 
and differentiation. Here we present two additional patients with se -
vere MR, autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy, carrying a very small 
deletion encompassing the MEF2C  gene. This finding strengthens the 
role of this gene in severe MR, and enables further delineation of the 
clinical phenotype.
P02.122  melnick-Fraser syndrome in Four Generations
R. Tajbakhsh1, B. Bozorgmehr2, J. Abedi Asl3;  
1Golestan Medical University, Gorgan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad-
Najmabadi Genetic center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Brancio-Oto-Renal (BOR) Syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder.The association of branchial arch anomalies (Ear malforma -
tions, preauricular pits,branchial fistula) ,hearing loss and renal hypo -
plasia.The hearing loss is variable cunductive , mixed forms,and sen -
sorineural cause usually in lower frequencies from 20 to 100 db.The 
more severe disiase ,the grater degree of hearing loss patients have. 
Renal anomalies have included: bilateral renal dysplasia,bilateral poly -
cystic kidneys and various malformations of collecting system which 
end to chronic renal failure.We are repoting four generations with dif -
ferent type of renal anomalies and hearing loss in a large family with 
14 affected patients.They have variable expression of BOR syndrome, 
which confirmed by detection of EYA1 gene.For one of families we did 
prenatal diagnosis becuse they had two affected offsprigs.
P02.123  Duplications of 17q12-q21 in patients with mental 
retardation, growth disturbances and facial dysmorphism
L. L. Klitten1,2, R. S. Møller1,2, B. Dallapiccola3, M. C. Digilio3, H. C. Mefford4, R. 
C. M. Hennekam5, N. Tommerup1, H. Hjalgrim2;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, 
Denmark, 3Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS Rome, Italy, 4Department 
of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Purpose: In recent years, small genomic rearrangements of 17q12 and 
17q21.31 have been described in patients with autism, cognitive im -
pairment/ mental retardation, renal disease, epilepsy, and/or growth 
retardation. We present three unrelated patients with partially overlap -
ping duplications in the 17q12-q21.32 region.
Methods: Microarray analysis (Affymetrix SNP_6.0, BAC array, or oligo 
array) was performed on purified DNA from peripheral lymphocytes. 
FISH analysis was done on cultured lymphocytes according to stan -
dard protocols.
Results: We identified three unrelated patients with partially overlap -
ping de novo  duplications in the 17q12-q21.32 region. All patients were 
investigated with genome wide array platforms, showing sizes of the 
duplications of 1.5 Mb, 6.6 Mb, and 7.7 Mb respectively. Though the 
patients had diverse clinical features as well, all presented with mental 
retardation, facial dysmorphism and growth disturbances.
Conclusion: We report three patients with mental retardation, growth 
disturbances and facial dysmorphism carrying partially overlapping du -
plications of the gene-rich locus on chromosome 17q12-q21.32. We 
add new clinical features to the variable phenotype of 17q12-q21.32 
duplications.
P02.124  screening for common submicroscopic deletions 
/duplications in Bulgarian mR/DD patients
R. V. Vazharova1, S. Bichev1, I. Bradinova1, E. Simeonov2, V. Bojinova3, I. 
Kremensky1;  
1Medical University Sofia, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National 
Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital Alexandrovska, 
Pediatric Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Neurology and Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
Psychiatry “St Naum”, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Since the discovery that humans possess 46 chromo -
somes and association of different aneuploidies with specific pheno -
types karyotyping was rapidly introduced into workup of patients with 
mental retardation (MR) and birth defects. With the introduction of fluo -
rescence in situ hybridization the detection of submicroscopic chro -
mosomal imbalance became possible. Methods as MLPA, QF-PCR 
and array based CGH blur the boundaries between karyotyping and 
molecular genetics. Submicroscopic deletions and duplications are 
observed in at least 3-5% of patients with variable degree of MR/DD. 
MLPA is shown to be a rapid, inexpensive alternative of FISH, allowing 
simultaneous screening of multiple specific submicroscopic deletions/ 
duplications.
Material and methods: A cohort of 30 preselected patients with varying 
degree of developmental delay or MR was screened for subtelomeric 
imbalances using MLPA.
Results: In this pilot study we started screening for known disease 
related microdeletion/duplications of our patients using MRC’s MLPA 
kit P245-A2. In patients showing normal results additional testing for 
subtelomeric rearrangements using P070-B1 was performed. Patients 
were pre-selected by karyotyping and when needed by metabolic 
screening. Using P245-A2 we found 3 (10%) aberrations - 2 deletions 
and 1 duplication. Screening for subtelomeric regions revealed aber -
rations in 10 patients (43%) - 7 deletions and 3 duplications. High de -
tection rate in our pilot study could be explained by the strong clinical 
selection of patients.
P02.125  cHERisH - improving Diagnoses of mental Retardation 
in children in Eastern Europe and central Asia through Genetic characterisation and Bioinformatics/statistics
C. Graziano1, E. Bonora1, P. Magini1, J. Baptista1, G. Tortora1, S. Miccoli1, P. 
C. Patsalis2, J. A. Hettinger2, V. Anastasiadou2, L. Kousoulidou2, A. Kurg3, K. 
Männik3, S. Parkel3, O. Zilina3, M. Nõukas3, E. Õiglane-Slik3, V. Kučinskas4, 
J. Kasnauskienè4, I. Lebedev5, A. Latos-Bieleńska6, M. Badura-Stronka6, 
B. Budny6, Z. Sedlacek7, M. Havlovicova7, M. Vlckova7, M. Hancarova7, T. 
Sarkisian8, D. Babikyan8, S. Midyan8, L. A. Livshits9, A. Cuppoletti10, G. Romeo1;  
1U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department 
of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology University 
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific 
Centre, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 6Department of Medical Genetics Poznań 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 7Department of Biology and 
Medical Genetics Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 8Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, 
Armenia, 9IMBG National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine, 
10Molecular Stamping (SME), Trento, Italy.
The CHERISH consortium, funded by EU FP7 under grant agreement 
#223692, is made mainly of Eastern European countries. It aims at 
creating a large collection of patients affected with developmental de -
lay (syndromic and non-syndromic). The project will enhance the diag -
nostic possibilities for these patients and gather epidemiologic data on 
the genetic causes of mental retardation in Eastern Europe. General 
information and updates can be retrieved through http://www.cherish -
project.eu/.
During the first year of the project, partners started the collection of clini -
cal data using a specific questionnaire. So far, data of more than 400 pa -
tients have been uploaded on the dedicated database. Search of cryptic 
chromosome rearrangements is carried out through array-CGH or SNP-
CGH analysis in the laboratories of University of Bologna and University 
of Tartu. Candidate genes from aberrant regions will be sequenced in 
patients with similar phenotypes. Families with X-linked mental retarda -
tion are being analyzed, on a first approach, through an all-exons X-chro -
mosome array, available in the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genet -
ics, while the laboratory of Poznan University of Medical Sciences will 
analyze specific genes on the X chromosome for patients with normal 
array results. In sporadic cases with normal array analysis and in families 
with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, sequence analysis of the 
SYNGAP1 and STXBP1 genes is performed in Bologna. Special atten -
tion is dedicated to siblings affected with mental retardation born from 
consanguineous parents, who are suitable for homozygosity mapping.
The final results on the first cohort of up to 100 families will be dis -
cussed in details.P02.126  Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (mLPA) analysis of subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements 
in individuals with idiopathic mental retardation.
A. P. Marques-de-Faria1, C. R. Lincoln-de-Carvalho2, D. R. B. Belgini3, M. P. 
de Mello4;  
1Departamento de Genética Médica - Faculdade de Ciências Médicas 
- UNICAMP, 2Departamento de Genética Médica – Faculdade de Ciências 
Médicas – UNICAMP, 3Laboratório de Genética Humana do Centro de Biologia 
Molecular e Engenharia Genética (CBMEG) – UNICAMP, 4Laboratório de 
Genética Humana do Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética 
(CBMEG) – UNICAMP, Campinas,SP, Brazil.
INTRODUCTION: Described in approximately 5% to 7% of individuals 
with unexplained MR, subtelomeric rearrangements have emerged as 
a significant cause of both idiopathic and familial mental retardation. 
The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) tech -
nique has been considered as a suitable alternative to identify these 
anomalies. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the contribution of subtelo -
meric rearrangements among the causes of idiopathic MR using the 
MLPA technique. METHODS: 141 unrelated patients were selected 
based on clinical criteria; all of them had previously been subjected 
to karyotyping and molecular analysis for fragile X syndrome. DNA 
samples were extracted and purified from peripheral blood leukocytes. 
They were tested using specific subtelomeric MLPA kits SALSA P036-
E1 and P070-A2 HUMAN TELOMERE according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. The amplification products were separated by capillary 
electrophoresis using an ABI PRISM 310 automated sequencer and 
size standard. MLPA data were extracted and analysed by GeneS -
can®, Genotyper® and specific Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet for 
each kit. RESULTS: Until now, 91 patients with idiopathic MR were 
analyzed and four subtelomeric deletions/duplications were identified 
(4.4%): one case with a 1p36 deletion and one with a 6p deletion, be -
sides two cases with a combined deletion/duplication, involving 5p/9p 
and 4p/12p regions, respectively. These subtelomeric rearrangements 
had not been previously identified by conventional technique and FISH 
tests are being provided in order to confirm them. CONCLUSION: 
Subtelomeric rearrangements must be investigated in individuals with 
unexplained MR and MLPA is a rapid and effective technique for de -
tecting these abnormalities.
P02.127  A New case of metaphyseal Acroscyphodysplasia
M. Gabaldo1, F. Benedicenti1, C. Castellan1, F. Stanzial1, G. Canepa2,3;  
1Servizio di Consulenza Genetica dell’Alto Adige, Ospedale Generale di 
Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, 2Primario Ortopedico Emerito, Ospedale di Merate, 
Merate (LC), Italy, 3Scuola di Specializzazione in Genetica Medica, Università 
di Siena, Siena, Italy.
Metaphyseal acroscyphodysplasia (MASD), also known as Bellini’s 
metaphyseal dysplasia, is a particularly rare skeletal dysplasia with 
presumed autosomal recessive inheritance. So far, no disease-genes 
have been identified. The main clinical features of MASD are dishar -
monic dwarfism, micromelia predominating in the lower limbs, severe 
brachydactyly, cranio-facial dysmorphism, scoliosis, flexion contracture 
of knees, and mental retardation. The diagnosis is based on typical 
radiographic findings such as cupped metaphyses (‘scypho-’ comes 
from the word ‘scyphus’, meaning cup) and cone-shaped epiphyses 
of long bones, especially appreciable at the knees, coxa valga, genua 
vara, short and broad femurs, tibial bowing, mild humeral shortening, 
short metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges, and advanced bone 
age.
We report the case of a 12-year-old boy with clinical and radiological 
features that are consistent with the diagnosis of MASD (dwarfism, 
short limbs with marked acromelic shortness, coxa valga, cup-shaped 
metaphyses and cone-shaped epiphyses of knees, flexion contracture 
of knees, cranio-facial dysmorphisms, and mental retardation). The 
family history was negative for mental retardation, short stature and 
other signs suggestive of skeletal dysplasia. Although the parents de -
nied consanguinity, they were both born in the same small town, which 
counts only 11,000 inhabitants. So far this is the 14th case of MASD 
described in the literature.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
P02.128  Micro syndrome: report of a two-year old boy
M. S. Yildirim , A. Zamani, B. Bozkurt;  
Selcuk University, KONYA, Turkey.
Micro syndrome is a rare, severe autosomal recessive disorder and 
characterized by microcephaly, microcornea, congenital cataract, 
mental retardation, optic atrophy, and hypogenitalism.Third child of a 
consanguineous couple was referred to our clinic because of facial 
dysmorphism and neurodevelopmental delay. Two death children in 
this family were also thought to be affected. Physical examination of 
2-year-old boy revaled that he had microcephaly, hypertrichosis on his 
forehead, prominent nasal root, thin and overhanging upper lip, short 
philtrum, large prominent ears, high arched palate, a pointed chin, con -
tracture at the hands, obesity,mental-motor retardation and hypotonia. 
His weight was 15 kg, length 88 cm(25th centile), and OFC 47 cm (10th 
centile). Chromosomal analysis showed a normal 46,XY karyotype. He 
had congenital hypothyroidism.
Ocular findigs are the most reliable diagnostic findings of Micro syn -
drome. Our patient had ophthalmologic signs include: microphthalmia, 
microcornea, congenital cataract, bilateral mild ptosis, and severe cor -
tical vision impairment. Cataract surgery was performed at 7th month.
Hypogenitalism is an another major feature of this sydrome. This case 
had micropenis, cryptorchidism and small scrotum. Urether dilatation 
and bladder diverticul detected by ultrasonogrphy(US). His cryptorchi -
dism confirmed by US,too
Neurological examination showed hypotonia. He had no seizures but 
electroencephalogram revealed left hemisphere asymmetry with ce -
rebral bioelectric dysfunction. Brain MRI showed enlarged lateral and 
third ventricles, hypoplasia of corpus callosum and cerebellum in both 
hemispheres and hypotrophy of the white matter. The symptoms and 
features of our case compared with the previous Micro syndrome cas -
es in literature.
P02.129  How a non-compaction left ventricle detect a 
monosomy 1p36 syndrome
G. Doros1, V. Stan2, M. Gafencu2, M. Puiu2, G. Miclaus3, B. Zoica2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „V. Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Neuromed Clinic, 
Timisoara, Romania.
Aim: To present how a 1p36 monosomy syndrome was detected, due 
to a cardiac examination, after many years of neurologic follow up. Our 
patient, a 10 yo. boy, was treated for recurrent seizures; he associated 
right small cerebral cavernoma and arachnoid cyst. From birth he had 
distinct facial features and intellectual disability.
Material and methods: This patient was sent for a cardiologic examina -
tion due to a muscular hypotrophy. We performed clinical examination, 
ECG, Echocardiography and angio MRI. A genetic examination was 
done.
Results: No cardiac murmur and normal ECG was registered. Non-
compaction of the left ventricle (NCLV), with deep trabeculations and 
deep inter-trabecular spaces were detected in apical, mid ventricular 
inferior and lateral wall; normal ejection fraction. Angio MRI confirmed 
the diagnose. The laboratory tests were normal, so a muscular pathol -
ogy was excluded. Genetic examination mentioned a normal karyo -
type. In the context of particular face, with deep-set eyes, straight eye -
brows, midface hypoplasia, flat nose and associated cardiomyopathy, 
mental delay, seizures and cerebral tumors, an extended FISH test 
was performed. The suspicion of monosomy 1p36 syndrome was con -
firmed.
Conclusions: Muscular hypotrophy in a patient with particular face and 
complex neurologic modifications conduct to a cardiac exploration, be -
cause a muscular disease was suspected. Left ventricular non-com -
paction was detected; it is a rare cardiomyopathy, present in muscular 
diasease, which were excluded and in other genetic syndromes. In 
the clinical context , a monosomy 1p36 syndrome was suspected and 
confirmed by FISH. NCLV when present, the genetic involvement has 
to be searched.P02.130  C677T and A1298C mutations in 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene in mothers of 
children with trisomy 21
S. Bucerzan1, R. Popp2, A. P. Trifa2, C. Al-Khzouz1, P. Grigorescu-Sido1;  
1First Pediatric Clinic - UMF „Iuliu Hatieganu“, Cluj, Romania, 2Department of 
Medical Genetics - U.M.F.“Iuliu Hatieganu”, Cluj, Romania.
introduction. Deficiency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
(MTHFR) causes a deficiency of the active metabolic form of folic acid. 
This deficiency is cited as a promoting factor of chromosomal non -
disjunction in gametogenesis, with increased risk for the appearance 
of aneuploidies, therefore folic acid therapy could interfere with their 
prophylaxis. The study aims to evaluate the prevalence of C677T and 
A1298C mutations in MTHFR gene for mothers of children with trisomy 
21.
Patients and methods. The study group consisted of 58 mothers of 
children with trisomy 21, ages between 18- 47 at the time of gesta -
tion, who were registered at the Genetic Pathology Centre of the First 
Paediatric Clinic, in the range 2008-2009. DNA analyse was performed 
using a PCR-RFLP technique.
Results. The two mutation prevalence (the evaluated group, in com -
parison with other studies), is presented in the table below:
mutationthe 
present
studystuppia L.
(italy,2002)Acacio G.L.
(Brasil,2005)Kohli U.
(India,2008)
Homozygous c667t 8.6 % 44 % 7.1 % 0
Homozygous A1298C 13.7% 4.3 %
All Homozygous 22.3% 11.4 %
compound 
heterozygous18.9% 27.1 % 28 %
conclusions . Our study, a priority on a national scale, reveals im -
portant differences regarding the prevalence of the two mutations, in 
comparison with studies conducted on other population groups. For a 
reliable assessment of their role, studies conducted on larger groups 
compared to control groups are necessary.
P02.131  myhre syndrome: report of three unrelated patients
E. F. Belligni , E. Biamino, C. Molinatto, G. Baldassarre, N. Chiesa, A. 
Marinosci, G. B. Ferrero, M. Silengo;  
Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy.
Myhre syndrome (MS) is a very rare condition mainly characterized 
by short stature with rhizomelia, muscular hypertrophy in males, a 
non-progressive joint stiffness, mixed deafness, hypertension and a 
peculiar facial appearance consisting in midfacial hypoplasia, short 
philtrum, thin lips and prognathism. Sixteen sporadic cases (11 males 
and 5 females) have been reported so far. The higher predominance 
of males and the milder manifestation in the females suggested an 
X-linked recessive inheritance, even if a de novo dominant mutation 
is still a possibility. Here we describe 3 unrelated patients (2 females 
and 1 male), fitting the clinical diagnosis of MS. One female patient 
presented megacolon, whilst the male developed multiple neoplastic 
lesions. Both these striking clinical findings haven’t been previously 
reported in this condition, allowing to expand the clinical phenotype of 
MS. Moreover we performed array-CGH analysis in the patients, but it 
gave normal results in all of them.
P02.132  myotonia congenita (mc) in Russia: the two frequent 
mutations in cLcN1 gene allows to reveal 14% mutant chromosomes of patients with mc.
E. Ivanova1, V. Fedotov2, E. Dadali1, G. Rudenskaya1, S. Kurbatov2;  
1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2VOCDC Genetic Conseling, Medical Diagnostic Center, Voronezh, Russian 
Federation.
Myotonia congenita (MC) is a hereditary muscle disorder character -
ized by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary contrac -
tion (myotonia). MC is caused by mutations in the skeletal muscle 
chloride channel gene CLCN1  (7q35).
The study group was consisted of 61 unrelated patients (12 dominant, 
9 recessive and 40 sporadic cases) with myotonia revealed by clinical 
examination. We analyzed all DNA samples by direct sequensing of 
exons 3, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22 of CLCN1  gene and detected Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
16 different mutations for 29 patients (21 patients had one mutant al -
lele and 8 ones had two mutant alleles). Seven of them have not been 
described earlier (c.912A>C, c.1024C>T, c.1699A>C, c.1679T>C, 
c.1720C>A, c.2555_2558delCCTT, c.2284+9_2284+10insg). Other 
mutations were brought in mutation data bases (Leu198Val, Thr268Met, 
Phe413Cys, c.1447_1450del, Ivs13+1G>A, Ala493Glu, Tyr686Stop, 
Ivs18+5C>T, Ivs19+2T>A). Two of these mutations were detected in 
several unrelated patients: c.1436_1449del in exon 13 of CLCN1  gene 
and Ala493Glu in exon 14 of CLCN1  gene. The c.1436_1449del in 
exon 13 was detected at the compound geterozygous state in 6 spo -
radic cases and in 3 recessive cases and in 1 dominant case. The Ala -
493Glu in exon 14 was detected at the compound geterozygous state 
in 3 sporadic cases and in gomozygous state in one reccesive case. 
The c.1436_1449del and Ala493Glu mutations were found in
29 % and 13 % accordingly of all mutant chromosomes. Diagnostics 
only two these mutations allows to reveal 14% mutant chromosomes 
of patients with MC. The investigation is in progress now.
P02.133  Clinical and molecular findings of an Italian family with 
atypical myotonic dystrophy type 1 (Dm1) associated with a ccG 
repetition in the 3’UtR of the DmPK gene
C. Catalli1, A. Morgante1, R. Iraci2, F. Rinaldi1, V. Pisani3, C. Terracciano3, R. 
Massa3,4, A. Botta1, G. Novelli1,2;  
1Biopathology and diagnosing imaging, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Roma, 
Italy, 2Policlinico Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Tor 
Vergata University of Rome, Roma, Italy, 4Policlinico Tor Vergata, Austria.
Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1, MIM #160900) is the most frequent 
form of adult muscular dystrophy and is caused by a CTG expansion 
located in the 3’ UTR of DMPK  gene. It is a multisystemic disorder 
characterized by dystrophic changes of muscles, electrical or clinical 
myotonia, bilateral cataract, and variable involvement of other tissues 
and organs, including central nervous, cardiac, gastrointestinal, endo -
crine and immune systems. In some patients, other symptoms may 
be present, but the causes for this widely variable expression are still 
largely unknown. Here, we describe the clinical and molecular features 
of a large Italian family whose affected members show an atypical form 
of DM1, manifesting in adult age, with encephalopathy, aspects of neu -
rogenic atrophy of muscles, pes cavus, deafness and variable features 
of classic DM1. Analysis of the DMPK  gene revealed the presence of 
unusual molecular findings, with CCG repeats interspersed at the 5’ 
and 3’ portion of the CTG repeated region. This is the first description 
of patients with atypical DM1 associated with triplets repeats different 
from CTG. The contribution of the CCG repetition to the clinical phe -
notype and variable expression of DM1 in this Italian family is currently 
under investigation.
P02.134  severe demyelinating polyneuropathy, sensorineural 
hearing loss, spasticity, vestibular dysfunction and stroke like 
episodes in homozygous myotonic dystrophy
J. Rankin1, T. Antoniadi2, E. Woodward2, M. Sadler3;  
1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Genetics 
Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Department of Neurology, Derriford 
Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom.
In 2009, a family with atypical myotonic dystrophy, characterised by 
intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth, sensorineural hearing loss and at -
tacks of impaired consciousness with focal neurological signs, was re -
ported by Spaans and colleagues. We report a 40 year old male with 
a similar phenotype.
His mother and maternal uncle have very mild late onset myotonic 
dystrophy type 1, both being heterozygous for a small expansion at 
the DMPK locus. There is no information about his father. Our patient 
developed progressive sensorineural hearing loss from childhood re -
quiring hearing aids from age 10 years. Since the age of 14 years he 
suffered with episodes of vertigo and by age 30 had persistent vestibu -
lar impairment resulting in use of a wheelchair. Aged 39 he suffered 
two stroke-like episodes during which there was reduced conscious -
ness, dysphasia, dysarthria and left hemiplegia following which he had 
residual left sided weakness. Examination aged 39 revealed lower 
limb spasticity with pes cavus and sustained clonus along with signs 
of peripheral neuropathy and left hemiplegia. Cerebellar signs and 
myotonia were absent. Neurophysiology confirmed a severe demye -
linating sensorimotor neuropathy but myotonia was absent. Brain MRI 
showed non specific periventricular high signal and spinal MRI was normal. Genetic testing of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 17 
and mitochondrial mutations m.3243A>G and m.8993T>C/G revealed 
no abnormality. Direct PCR at the DMPK locus revealed expansions of 
approximately 53 and 71 CTG repeats.
Our patient’s clinical presentation will be discussed and compared to 
that reported in both atypical myotonic dystrophy and DMPK expan -
sion homozygotes.
P02.135  Phenotypic variability in patients with deletions in the 
neurexin-1alpha gene
J. Schoumans1,2, N. Hanemaaijer3, M. Eriksson4, A. Liedén1, J. Lundin1, E. 
Fernell5, M. Giacobini1, B. Anderlid1,4;  
1Department of molecular medicine and surgery, CMM, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne,, 
Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Neuropediatic Department, Astrid 
Lindgrens Childrens Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 5Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Child psychiatry, 
Göteborgs Universitet, Göteborg, Sweden.
Deletions in the neurexin-1alpha gene (NRXN1 α) have been identified 
in large-scale screens for copy-number variations in patients with au -
tism or schizophrenia. In addition, homozygous deletions in the gene 
were recently described in a patient with Pitt-Hopins like phenotyope. 
Neurexin-1alpha codes for a cell-surface receptor that binds to neuroli -
gin and is associated with synaptogenesis and neurotransmission.
Here we report 4 patients with NRNX1α deletions, ranging in size be -
tween 110 and 400 Kb and located in the 5´end of the gene, identified 
by array-CGH. Three of them had unexplained learning difficulties and/
or autism. In the first patient the deletion was inherited from his mildly 
affected mother and in the second the deletion had occurred de novo 
in addition to a de novo 16p11.2 deletion. The third patient was com -
pound heterozygote with two different, partly overlapping deletions 
inherited from the healthy parents. This patient demonstrated a more 
severe phenotype. In addition, a deletion was identified in a newborn 
child with persistent neonatal hypoglycemia and feeding difficulties.
Our data confirms previous findings and suggest that deletions of the 
neurexin-1alpha gene are highly associated with neurodevelopmental 
symptoms but with a very variable penetrance. Homozygous deletions 
are expected to cause a more severe phenotype and the recurrence 
risk for next pregnancy is in this family very high with two carrier par -
ents.
The variable penetrance and the detection of a deletion in the NRNX1α 
as a coincidental finding in a newborn child illustrate some of the dif -
ficulties in genetic counseling of array findings.
P02.136  Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and genetic diagnostic 
shown with a case
A. K. Eek1, B. S. Henrichsen2, G. J. Braathen1;  
1Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hosptal, Skien, Norway, 2Departments 
of Pediatrics,Telemark Hosptal, Skien, Norway.
Background: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a clinical diagnosis. 
NF1 includes symtomatology from different organ systems and ana -
tomic localizations such as macrocephali, iris hamartomas, hyper -
telorism, glaucoma, hypertension, scoliosis, spina bifida, pseudoar -
throsis, plexiforme neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots, axillar and ingui -
nal freckling, mental retardation, learning disabilities, hydrocephalus 
and different types of cancer.
Patients and families with NF1 are regularly referred to Telemark Hos -
pital for diagnostics and genetic counselling .
Methods: We present a child with primary unknown diagnosis. The 
presentation illustrates genetic methods, FISH, mlpa and aCGH, used 
to diagnose NF1 in this child and the family.
Possibilities and limitations with todays diagnostics will be presented.
Results: Our results will be presented at the conference.
P02.137  Gonadal function in male patients with Nijmegen 
breakage syndrome, a cancer-prone disease with the DNA repair 
defect.
K. H. Chrzanowska1, M. Szarras-Czapnik1, M. Kalina2, M. Gajdulewicz1, M. 
Gajtko-Metera1, H. Rysiewski1, B. Dembowska-Bagińska1, H. Gregorek1, D. 
Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Ciara1, M. Syczewska1, R. Janas1, M. Krajewska-
Walasek1;  
1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a severe chromosomal insta -
bility disorder, caused by hypomorphic mutations in the NBN  gene, 
which product is critical for processing DNA double strand breaks. It is 
characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, immune deficiency, 
and predisposition for malignancy. Due to diverse information on the 
reproductive function, depending on the Nbs1 murine model, we in -
vestigated the course of puberty with respect to humans with NBS. 
Previously we presented hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in NBS 
females, however data on gonadal function in male patients are still 
limited.
The aim of the study was to evaluate sexual development along with 
hormonal assays in 18 NBS males (ages 1.17-25.92), homozygous 
for c.657_661del5 mutation, followed between years 1993 and 2008. 
They were divided in 6 subgroups, according to the age and pubertal 
Tanner stages. Concentrations of gonadotropins (FSH, LH) and tes -
tosterone were evaluated.
Puberty in NBS boys was initiated spontaneously and progressed sim -
ilarly as in healthy peers. Gonadotropin levels in the prepubertal period 
were normal, whereas in older subjects the mean values tended to be 
slightly higher than the references ranges. Testosterone levels were 
normal in all groups.
Despite normal pubertal development in our group of NBS males, in -
creasing gonadotropin levels in older patients may be indicative of go -
nadal dysfunction, which demands further supervision.
The study was supported in parts by the Polish Ministry of Science 
and Higher Education (grant No 2 P05E 066 28) and by the Children’s 
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland (grant No 112/09).
P02.138  Family anamnesis with Nijmegen breakage syndrome 
with regard to the bronchial asthma
N. Kitsera1, H. Àkîpyan1, N. Markevych1, R. Polishchuk2, L. Kostyuchenko2;  
1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Lviv Regional Children 
Specialized Clinical Hospital, Lviv, Ukraine.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is autosomal-recessive disease 
(homozygous carriage of 657del5 gene mutation NBS1) characterized 
phenotypically by microcephalia, “bird” face, combined immunodefi -
ciency and susceptibility to malignant growths. It is the most spread 
in the Czech Republic, Poland and the Western Ukraine and carriers 
approximately 1% of population.
Purpose: to analyse genealogical peculiarities in families of patients 
(Ukraine) with NBS and cases of bronchial asthma in relatives of pro -
bands.
Patients and methods: Among 17 families there are four families 
(23,5%), in which NBS was diagnosed in two own siblings. In seven 
families (41,2%) the child with NBS was the only child. The clinical-
genealogical method was used.
Results: In the 17 families, where a child with NBS was born, in 4 
(23,5%) families bronchial asthma cases have occurred: from 1 to 4 
cases. In the seven families, where a malignant tumor has developed 
in a child with NBS, there had been only one case of bronchial asthma 
(14,3%).
In the 10 families, where a child has been diagnosed NBS without 
oncopathology, the cases of bronchial asthma had been revealed in 3 
families (30%) from 1 to 2 cases, which is by 2,1 times more frequent, 
than in the families, where a proband had had oncopathology. Prob -
ably, in such families the cases of bronchial asthma act as a protective 
mechanism with regard to the development of malignant tumors in a 
proband.
Conclusion: Medical-genetic consultation with the use of clinical-ge -
nealogical method is necessary for the families, where a child with 
NBS was born.
P02.139  Prevalence of the c.35delG and p.W24X mutations in 
the GJB2 Gene in North-West Romania 
C. Lazăr1, R. Popp2, A. Trifa2, C. Mocanu3, G. Mihut3, C. Al-Khzouz1, M. 
Farcas4, E. Tomescu5, P. Grigorescu-Sido1;  
11- Department of Pediatrics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Department 
of Otolaryngology, Clinical Pediatric Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania, 4- Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5Department of Otolaryngology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj- Napoca, Romania., 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Objective : To determine for the first time in Romania the prevalence of 
the most frequent GJB2 mutations (c35delG and p.W24X) in healthy 
subjects and in patients with non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL).
Material:  300 healthy adults (group A) and 75 unrelated children with 
NSHL (group B) from North-West Romania.
Methods:  a. Group A : phonic acumetry and detection of the c.35delG 
(semi-nested-PCR, RFLP and ARMS-PCR analysis) and p.W24X 
(ARMS-PCR and RFLP analysis) mutations; b. Group B: audiologi -
cal examination (otoscopy, tympanogram, acoustic otoemission and 
tonal audiogram or auditory evoked potentials) and detection of the 
c.35delG (semi-nested-PCR, RFLP and ARMS-PCR analysis) and 
p.W24X (ARMS-PCR analysis) mutations.
Results:  Group A: The c.35delG mutation was present in heterozy -
gous state in 11 cases (1.83% of the total 600 alleles examined), while 
the p.W24X mutation was absent. Group B: The number of reported 
mutation cases as against the number of alleles indicates a 33.3% 
frequency for c.35delG mutation and respectively 5.3% for p.W24X 
mutation. All 22 patients with 35delG/c.35delG genotype (19 patients), 
c.35delG/p.W24X genotype (2 patients) or p.W24X/p.W24X genotype 
(1 patient) presented profound/severe hearing loss.
Conclusion : Our study confirms that the frequency of the c.35delG mu -
tation in healthy subjects and the c.35delG and p.W24x mutations in 
patients with NSHL from North-West Romania is comparable to that 
seen in other Central and South-Eastern European countries.  The ho -
mozygot or compound heterozygot states represent a major risk factor 
for profound or severe deafness. 
Acknowledgements: The screening part of this study was supported by 
Fundatia „Dinu Patriciu“- Romania. 
P02.140  systemic lupus erythematosus in a patient with Noonan 
syndrome and KRAs mutation
G. Leventopoulos1, E. Denayer2, K. Kritikos1, E. Kanavakis1, H. Fryssira1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium, Leuven, Belgium.
Noonan syndrome is characterized by dysmorphic facial features, 
short stature and congenital heart defects. It is associated with co -
agulation factor deficiencies and thrombocytopenia. Development of 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) has been described as a rare 
complication. PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1 and KRAS are the responsible 
genes for the Noonan syndrome. PTPN11 mutations concern 50% of 
the patients.
The 11 year old female was referred to the clinic due to morphologia -
cal stigmata and psychomotor retardation. The patient had short stat -
ure, a broad forehead, ptosis pf eyelids, low set ears, curly hair and 
pectus excavatum. She also presented hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
After clinical evaluation DNA sequencing was performed. The mutation 
c77A>T, pAsn 26Ile was deleted in the KRAS gene. KRAS mutations 
are detected only in 2% of Noonan patients and this particular mutation 
has never been described before in the literature. Onset of Throm -
botic Thrombocytopenic Puprpura (TTP) associated with positive di -
rect Coombs implied an immunological substrate which was confirmed 
by anti ds DNA. The TTP manifestations belonged to the SLE clinical 
spectrum.
Follow up is mandatory for the proper diagnosis of clinical signs and 
symptoms related to Noonan syndrome. Genetic testing should not 
be limited to the most frequent responsible gene PTPN11, because 
Noonan syndrome has high genetic heterogenity
P02.141  A case of Noonan syndrome with late onset of bleeding 
disorder
M. T. Bataneant1, M. Serban2, E. Boia2, L. Pop2, M. Baica2, M. Lelik2, D. 
Savescu2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction. Noonan syndrome (NS) is an inherited disorder charac -
terized by typical various phenotypic features. Bleeding disorders are 
one of the most serious and common complications associated with 
NS.
Case report. A 17 years old male with typical Noonan features was 
admitted for a giant post-traumatic right buttock hematoma. He didn’t Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology0
present bleeding tendency in childhood and at 7 years of age he had 
a heart surgical intervention without abnormal bleeding. At clinical 
examination splenomegaly was detected. Laboratory test show mild 
thrombocytopenia, with small platelet and reduced cloth retraction, 
normal bleeding and cloth time, prolonged APTT (40”), decreased pro -
thrombine consume (25”), normal level of factors VIII, XI, IX, X, VII, 
V, vonWillebrand and decreased factor XIII (20%). He needed three 
surgical interventions to cure the hematoma: first with Novo Seven, 
second with Feiba - both with important bleeding despite of high dos -
es of concentrate factors and the third intervention with Novo Seven, 
platelet concentrate and plasma with a good intra- and post- surgery 
control of hemorrhage.
Conclusions. In our case the bleeding disorder had a proved late onset 
and consists in a complex anomaly: thrombocytopenia with abnormal 
platelet function, factor XIII deficiency and possible von Willebrand dis -
ease with normal antigen and activity.
The existence of various types of bleeding disorders within one syn -
drome is unusual and the relation between abnormal bleeding and the 
underlying cause of Noonan syndrome is not clear. It is recommended 
to screen for bleeding disorders every patient with NS for improvement 
the clinical care of these patients.
P02.142  increased lifetime risk of cancer in patients with 
Noonan syndrome carrying a PTPN11 mutation. 
M. Jongmans , I. van der Burgt, P. M. Hoogerbrugge, K. Noordam, H. G. 
Ijntema, W. M. Nillesen, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, A. Geurts van Kessel, J. J. J. M. 
van Krieken, L. A. L. M. van Kiemeney, N. Hoogerbrugge;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by short stature, facial dys -
morphisms and congenital heart defects. Mutations in PTPN11 are the 
most common cause of NS. Patients with NS have a predisposition for 
developing leukemia and specific solid tumors. Exact data on the inci -
dence of malignancies in NS are lacking. Consequently, the necessity 
of a surveillance program is unclear.
We performed a historical cohort study among 297 Dutch NS patients 
with a germline mutation in PTPN11 (median age 12.7 years, range 
0.6-94.8 years). The cancer histories were derived based on the re -
ferral forms for DNA diagnostics, by consulting PALGA, a nationwide 
registry of pathology in the Netherlands, and the Netherlands Cancer 
Registry.  The reported numbers of cancer in the patients with NS were 
compared with the expected numbers based on population-based in -
cidence rates.
Twelve patients with NS developed a malignancy, yielding a cumula -
tive risk of developing cancer of 23.0% [95% confidence interval (CI), 
7.6-38.4%] up to age 55, which represents a 3.5-fold [95% CI, 2.0-5.9] 
increased risk compared to the general population. Haematological 
malignancies occurred most frequently. Two rare malignancies were 
found not yet observed in NS, being malignant mastocytosis and ma -
lignant epithelioid angiosarcoma. We did not find a correlation between 
specific mutations in PTPN11  and the occurrence of cancer.
This first large cohort study of cancer incidence in patients with NS 
and a mutation in PTPN11 , shows an excess risk of cancer  compared 
to the general population. Our data do not warrant a specific cancer 
surveillance program for patients with NS.
P02.143  spectrum of anomalies in Polish patients with Noonan 
syndrome and N308D, N308S mutations in PTPN11  gene
D. Jurkiewicz , E. Ciara, A. Jezela-Stanek, A. Tanska, M. Kugaudo, S. Luczak, 
M. Pelc, P. Kowalski, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, K. 
Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a congenital condition inherited in an auto -
somal dominant manner. The associated abnormalities include short 
stature, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, cardiovascular and hae -
matological defects and lymphatic dysplasias. Approximately 50% of 
NS cases are caused by mutations in the PTPN11  gene encoding the 
Src homology protein-tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP-2) acting in the 
Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. The p.N308D amino acid substitution 
represents the most prevalent mutation (nearly 20%) in NS patients. 
We present Polish patients with Noonan syndrome and mutations 
p.N308D and p.N308S in PTPN11  gene. The molecular analysis of 
PTPN11 gene in a group of 58 unrelated patients with Noonan syn -
drome revealed the c.922A>G (p.N308D) mutation in five patients and the c.923A>G (p.N308S) mutation in two patients. In total, mutations 
affecting the 308 amino acid position were identified in 12% of investi -
gated patients. Three mutations were of maternal origin, one appeared 
de novo , in three cases parental DNA probes were not available for 
the analysis. Moreover, the mutations were revealed in other mem -
bers of patients’ families. All the patients presented clinical features 
typical for NS, although in various degree, e.g. short stature (height < 
3 pc) was noted in five patients, chest deformity in all cases, bilateral 
undescended testes in all male cases, relative macrocephaly in three 
patients. Of note, the high frequency of congenital heart defects (PVS, 
ASD, VSD, PFO, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and learning difficul -
ties (with normal / borderline IQ level) were observed.
The study was supported by MNiSW Project PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35 
and by CMHI project 190/08.
P02.144  Cardiac findings in 61 Noonan syndrome patients with proven mutations in genes of the RAs/mAPK signaling pathway.
D. R. Bertola1, A. S. Brasil1,2, A. Jorge3, A. Malaquias3, L. Wanderley2, C. A. 
Kim1, J. Krieger2, A. Pereira2;  
1Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratório de 
Cardiologia e Biologia Molecular do InCor/HC - FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 
3Endocrinologia - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil.
Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder due to muta -
tions in genes of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. The cardiac in -
volvement is the one that poses more threatening outcomes.
We evaluated the cardiac findings in 43 patients presenting PTPN11 , 
13 with SOS1  and 5 with RAF1  gene mutations.
Cardiac abnormality was present in 53/61 patients (87%). The most 
frequent one was pulmonary stenosis (37/53 -70%), followed by hy -
pertrophic cardiomiopathy (8/53 - 15%), atrioventricular septal defect 
(3/53 - 6%), isolated septal defects (2/53 - 4%), mitral valve prolapse 
(2/53 - 4%) and Ebstein anomaly (1/53 - 2%). In the group of patients 
with pulmonary stenosis, 20/37 (54%) required a surgical procedure 
and in 2/6 a ballon pulmonary valvuloplasty was not effective. In accor -
dance to the literature, in patients presenting RAF1  gene mutations, 
4/5 presented hypertrophic cardiomiopathy and among the individuals 
with PTPN11  gene mutations, 26/36 (72%) presented pulmonary ste -
nosis. Ebstein anomaly (disclosed here in a patient with SOS1  gene 
mutation) was rarely described in Noonan syndrome and its genetic 
mechanisms are still uncovered. Based on these data, 26 patients pre -
senting this cardiac anomaly as an isolated form was screened for 
SOS1  gene mutations, but no abnormalities in the coding region of 
this gene was found, suggesting that this gene is not a main one in the 
etiology of this particular cardiac abnormality.
Our data supports preview reports emphasizing that cardiac abnor -
malities in Noonan syndrome are particularly important, with high fre -
quency of surgical procedures in patients presenting pulmonary ste -
nosis. (FAPESP).
P02.145  Identification of co-occurring SHOC2 and PTPN11 
muations in a patient with Noonan syndrome
S. Ekvall1, L. Hagenäs2, G. Annerén1, M. Bondeson1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2Department of Neuropediatrics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder associated 
with short stature, congenital heart defect and facial dysmorphism, and 
a variable clinical expression. NS is a heterogeneous disorder caused 
by activating mutations in PTPN11 (50%), or in SOS1 , RAF1 , KRAS 
and BRAF  located in the RAS-MAPK signalling pathway. Recently, 
mutations have also been reported in SHOC2  in a few NS patients 
with loose anagen hair and in NRAS .
Here, we present a clinical and molecular characterization of a patient 
with NS phenotype and associated features including mild psychomo -
tor developmental delay, hoarse voice, osteoporosis, loose anagen 
hair, gingival hyperplasia, spinal neuroblastoma and liver haeman -
gioma. Mutation analysis of PTPN11 , SOS1 , RAF1 , KRAS , BRAF , 
MEK1 , MEK2 , NRAS  and SHOC2  was conducted revealing the co-
occurrence of two previously identified mutations in the index patient. 
The mutation SHOC2  c.4A>G; p.S2G represents a de novo  mutation, 
whereas the mutation in PTPN11  c.1226G>C; p.G409A is of maternal 
origin. The mother had no clincial evidence of NS but short stature, 
supporting that the PTPN11  p.G409A mutation represents a mild par -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology1
tial mutation.
We propose that the atypical phenotype of the NS patient reported 
here is the result of an additive effect where the mild PTPN11  mu-
tation acts as a modifier. Interestingly, co-occurrence of RAS-MAPK 
mutations has previously been found in a few patients with variable 
NS or NFNS phenotypes. Taken together, the results suggest that the 
concurrence of mutations in the RAS-MAPK pathway may contribute 
to the clinical variability observed among NS patients.
P02.146  sOs1 gene mutations in Polish patients with Noonan 
syndrome
E. Ciara , S. Luczak, A. Jezela-Stanek, D. Jurkiewicz, A. Tanska, M. Kugaudo, 
M. Pelc, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, K. 
Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Noonan syndrome (NS), an autosomal dominant disorder is character -
ized by congenital heart defects, short stature, facial dysmorphism, 
chest deformity, scoliosis, hearing loss, motor and neurocognitive de -
lay, various coagulation defects, lymphatic dysplasias and tumorigen -
esis predisposition. Heterozygous gain of function mutations in various 
genes ( PTPN11 , SOS1 , RAF1 , KRAS ) encoding proteins of the Ras-
MAPK signaling pathway have been identified as the genetic basis 
of NS. Mutations of SOS1 , the gene encoding a guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor for Ras, are the second major cause of Noonan syn -
drome after PTPN11  mutations and account for 17-20% individuals. 
The aim of the study was to determine the SOS1  gene mutation rate 
and profile in a cohort of well-characterized 43 unrelated Polish patients 
with Noonan syndrome lacking PTPN11  mutations and to study the 
genotype-phenotype correlation. Molecular analysis of SOS1  gene re -
vealed six recurrent  mutations (p.M269T, p.M269R, p.G434K, p.L550P 
p.R552K, p.R552G) in 8 affected individuals (18,6%). All mutations oc -
curred de novo  and are known or predicted to disrupt autoinhibition 
of SOS1 RAS-EGF activity. The various congenital heart anomalies 
(pulmonary valve stenosis, ventricular septal defect, and mitral valve 
anomaly) and short stature were observed as being the most frequent. 
Retarded speech development was observed in one patient, while all 
cases have normal level of cognitive function. In comparison to the 
group of cases with PTPN11  gene mutations, patients with SOS1 gene 
mutations show higher frequency of ectodermal abnormalities (kerato -
sis pilaris, wavy hair, sparse eyebrows, ulerythema ophryogenes). The 
study was supported by MNiSW Project PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35 and 
by CMHI project 190/08.
P02.147  De novo deletion of NRXN1  in a girl with mild 
developmental delay and speech development disorder
I. M. Bader1, S. Nagl2, M. Cohen1, C. Nevinny-Stickel-Hinzpeter2, C. Schulz1, 
M. Marton1, M. Hardt1;  
1Kinderzentrum München, Munich, Germany, 2Synlab Medizinisches 
Versorgungszentrum Humane Genetik GmbH, Munich, Germany.
Mutations in the NRXN1  gene have been associated with a wide range 
of neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders, such as au -
tism spectrum disorder, mental retardation and schizophrenia. Recent -
ly, dominant as well as recessive mutations in the NRXN1  gene have 
been described to cause developmental delay of variable degrees.
Here we report the phenotype of a 6 year old girl who was referred 
to our clinic because of discrete facial dysmorphisms, mild develop -
mental delay with an emphasis on speech development problems. Mo -
lecular karyotyping was performed on the patient showing an approxi -
mately 462 kb loss of genomic material in 2p16.3 encompassing the 
5` region and several exons of the NRXN1 gene. Array-CGH analysis 
of the parents revealed no aberration indicating that the deletion in the 
patient has occurred de novo. The clinical implication of NRXN1  dele -
tions is not clear. The NRXN1 gene locus is known to harbor a number 
of benign copy number variants (CNVs). High phenotypical variability 
and reduced penetrance make NRXN1  deletions difficult to assess. It 
has been proposed that exon disrupting deletions in NRXN1  are more 
likely to be pathogenic. Our case report supports this idea and broad -
ens the spectrum of phenotypes.P02.148  Investigation of “extreme” patients sheds light on new 
mechanisms of obesity
A. J. de Smith1, R. G. Walters1, R. J. Ellis2, M. M. van Haelst3, I. S. Farooqi4, P. 
Froguel1,5, A. I. F. Blakemore1;  
1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom, 2North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, 
Harrow, United Kingdom, 3UMC Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Metabolic Research 
Laboratories, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5CNRS 8090-Institute 
of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.
Investigation of carefully-selected patients with extreme phenotypes 
may shed light on the mechanisms of common diseases. We aimed to 
identify genomic structural variants that could underlie the phenotypes 
of 34 dysmorphic children with obesity and mental retardation, with 
the hope of uncovering new loci that may be associated with common 
obesity. We have previously reported the discovery of causative dele -
tions at chromosome 15q11-3 (the Prader-Willi syndrome region) and 
at chromosome 16p11.2. Also detected in this cohort were 19 further 
aberrations over 50kb in size and not overlapping known copy number 
variants, including: a ~1Mb duplicated region at chromosome Xq12; 
a ~500kb duplication at Xq13.2; a ~500kb duplication at 6p12.3; and 
a ~175kb deletion at 19p13.3. Characterisation of the latter deletion 
showed that it had arisen de novo , as it was not found in the patient’s 
parents, and that one of the breakpoints lay within the MAP2K2  gene, 
mutations in which cause cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. The dele -
tion includes ZBTB7A , a good candidate gene for the patient’s obesity 
and cognitive phenotypes: this gene is involved in adipogenesis and 
mouse knockout models have revealed disruption of the Notch path -
way, which is central for neuronal development. Similar analysis of the 
other candidate regions is ongoing, and it is possible that additional 
rare variants contributing to the genetics of common obesity may be 
identified, as for the 16p11.2 deletion which accounts for 0.7% of mor -
bid obesity in the general population.
P02.149  Odontoonychodermal Displasia: A case report
S. Kayipmaz1, M. Ikbal2, A. Kusgoz3, M. Y. ALP2, O. S. Sezgin1, A. H. Cebi2;  
1Karadeniz Technical Universirty, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral Diagnosis and 
Radiology, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Karadeniz Technical University, Medicalf Faculty, 
Medical Genetics, Trabzon, Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical Universirty, Faculty of 
Dentistry, Pediatric Dentistry, Trabzon, Turkey.
Odontoonychodermal Displasia (OD)(OMIM 257980) which is also 
called Fadhil Syndrome is an otosomal recessive disorder character -
ized by ectoderm anomalies including hyperhidrosis, hyperkeratosis 
palmaris, distrophy of nails, dry and sparse hair, facial erithema, geg-
shaped incisors and malformated teeth. The aim of this case report is 
to present a patient with odontoonychodermal dysplasia with clinical 
and radiographical features. Our case is a 10-year-old boy was attend -
ed to clinic with a chief complaint of teeth crowding . He has sparse 
hair , dry skin , plantar fissur on the feet . Clinical and radiographical 
examination revealed Angle Class I malocclusion , oligodontia , erup -
tion cyst on right upper first molar teeth, and conical-shaped tooth. In 
accordance of this findings a diagnosis of odontoonychodermal dys -
plasia was made.
P02.150  A case report:Onycotrichodysplasia with mental 
retardation but without neutropenia
M. Ikbal1, H. Kocak Eker2, M. Y. Alp1, A. H. Cebi1, T. Tos3;  
1Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Ankara Dıskapı Children 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, SB Sami Ulus 
Women’s and Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
A four years old boy who presented with abnormal hair was found to 
have sparse, short, dry, curly hair. His hair was never been cut. Hair 
microscopy concluded as trichoreksis nodosa. He has dysplastic nails. 
His nails of hand and foot finger is spoon-shaped.Eyebrow is sparse 
at medial and absent at lateral. Eyelash is absent at down eyelid. He 
has mild mental retardation (IQ:70). Cranial Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging and skeletal radiography showed normal findings.A diagno -
sis of onycotrichodysplasia with mental retardation was made. Ony -
chotrichodysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. First case 
is shown by Cantu et al. (1975) Cantu et al. (1975) described a male 
infant with hypoplastic fingernails, trichorrhexis, chronic neutropenia, 
and psychomotor retardation. In contrast to cases described earlier, 
our patient has normal neutrophil .Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology2
P02.151  Osteogenesis Imperfecta subtypes - importance to the 
clinic?
A. Beleza1, S. Sousa1,2, S. Maia1, L. Ramos1, P. Garcia3, J. Saraiva1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Coimbra‘s Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, 
Portugal, 2Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, 
London, United Kingdom, 3Center for Child‘s Development, Coimbra‘s 
Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta - OI - is a heterogeneous group of diseases 
characterized by susceptibility to bone fractures with variable severity 
and presumed or evidenced defects in collagen type I biosynthesis. 
The definition and classification of OI have been subject of debate, 
with recent addition to four new types (V-VIII) to the original Sillence 
classification. This has, indeed, generated confusing statements in the 
literature, and added complexity to the diagnosis.
The present work describes 10 cases of Portuguese children and ado -
lescents with OI . There is no consensus on how to classify these cases 
among specialists. Should further diagnostic tests, including the analy -
sis of bone histology and mutation screening in the genes LEPRE1 , 
CRTAP  and PPIB , which are not yet routinely performed, be pursued 
irrespective of the desire of prenatal diagnosis? How important is it to 
subclassify these patients? What will it add to the management and 
care of these patients? The aim of this poster is to generate debate 
and consensus.
P02.152  case Report - Autosomal Recessive infantile malignant 
Osteopetrosis in india with novel mutation in tciRG1 gene
R. Devi1, S. Siddaiahgari1, L. Lingappa1, E. Bliznetz2;  
1Rainbow Children’s Hospital and Perinatal Centre, Hyderabad, India, 
2Research Center for Medical Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Autosomal recessive malignant osteopetrosis (OPTB, OMIM no. 
259700) is a severe form of inherited osteosclerosis. The disease is 
rare and is found all over the world. We report the first case of OPTB 
proven by mutation analysis in India. A boy at the age of 4 months 
had neonatal seizure with hypoglycaemia and hypocalcaemia. On 
examination he was found to have mild hepatomegaly and moderate 
splenomegaly; mild anemia (11.4 gm%), thrombocytopenia (68,000/
cumm), increased retic count (8%), increased alkaline phosphatase 
serum level (1883 IU/L). His X rays revealed evidence of osteopetrosis 
with dense cortex and obliteration of marrow. The patient is first born 
child on second degree consangineous parents; there is no family his -
tory of similar illness. The DNA sequencing of the entire coding re -
gion and exon-intron junctions of TCIRG1 gene revealed the mutation 
c.1276C>T at the homozygous state in a patient. The mutation results 
in premature stop-codon formation (p.Arg426X) in osteoclastspecific 
a3 subunit of the vacuolar ATPase proton pump, in which various de -
fects cause most cases of OPTB.
P02.153  Partial trisomy of the long arm of chromosome 6 in a 
family: clinical variability among affected members
D. Melis1, G. Cappuccio1, R. Genesio2, M. Cozzolino1, P. Boemio1, F. Vitiello1, P. 
Tedeschi2, R. Della Casa1, L. Nitsch2, G. Andria1;  
1Department of Pediatrics „Federico II“ University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology „Federico II“ University, Naples, 
Italy.
Partial duplication of the long arm of chromosome 6 is a rare cytoge -
netic abnormality identified in about 40 patients. It causes a recog -
nizable syndrome characterized by: microcephaly, downward slanting 
palpebral fissures, telecanthus, micrognathia, carp shaped mouth, 
short neck and severe psychomotor retardation. The minimal critical 
region for the clinical phenotypic manifestations of the syndrome in -
cludes the 6q25-26 bands.
We describe a partial 6q trisomy in four related patients, as the re -
sult of an abnormal segregation of balanced maternal interchromo -
somal insertion. Probands facial dysmorphisms included: telecanthus, 
depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, short neck. One patient 
showed moderate mental retardation, another one only mild neurologi -
cal impairment and interatrial septum defect. The remaining two pa -
tients had normal psychomotor development. The probands’ karyotype 
confirmed by FISH and array-CGH analysis showed: “dup(6)(q22q23)”. 
Karyotype analysis of balanced translocation carriers confirmed by 
FISH showed: 46 XX, ins(12;6)(q22;q22q23).
The patients showing 6q22-23 partial trisomy share the dysmorphisms 
of the so called “6q syndrome”; they didn’t have severe mental retar -dation, described in the syndrome. Our data could suggest that the 
6q22-23 duplication cause a mild “6q syndrome”.
P02.154  Nail Patella syndrome: A case Report
A. H. Cebi1, K. Shermatov2, M. Ikbal1, B. Kırhan2, M. Alp1, N. Cebi3;  
1Karadeniz Technical Universiry Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics, Trabzon, 
Turkey, 2Harran University Medical Faculty Department of Pediatrics, Şanlıurfa, 
Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical Universiry Medical Faculty, Medical Biochemistry, 
Trabzon, Turkey.
An 11 year-old-boy was taken to the orthopedy clinic because of the 
pain on his right knee. Patellar hypoplasia was determined in the MR 
report at the right knee. Then the patient refered to the pediatry clinic 
for futher investigation. In the physical examination the supination 
and extantion of the right elbow was restricted, nail of the first and 
second fingers were dysplastic and there was morphological defect 
on the both knee. X-ray imaging of the right elbow revealed that the 
medial chondyle of the humerus ,the head of the proximal radius was 
hypoplastic and the lateral angulation was seen ,also dislocation was 
found. Both patellar contours were irregular and hypoplastic at the X-
ray imaging of the knee. Patella laterally dislocated. Bilateral distance 
of knee joints were laterally narrowed. The spina bifida was detected at 
the anteroposterior pelvic X-ray. The patient thoght to be the Nail Pa -
tella Syndrome and refered to the ophtalmologist for the investigation 
of the glaucoma,microcornea and cataract. No pathology was found. 
There were no pathological findings at the other laboratory findings 
and physical examinations except of the urinary incontinence
P02.155  Identification of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in a two-
year-old boy
A. Blomhoff , T. Barøy, O. Rødningen, M. Fannemel;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
A two year old boy was referred due to psychomotor developmental 
delay, nystagmus and hypotonia. He could not crawl, walk, nor sit. 
The nystagmus was first noticed when he was six weeks old. He had 
five words and no distinct dysmorphic features. He had an abnormal 
fat distribution on his thighs and pubic area. The family history was 
negative.
Investigations: SMA, Myotonic Dystrophy, Prader-Willi, CDG Ia and 
karyotype were normal. MRI scans showed thin corpus callosum and 
marked dysmyelination. ArrayCGH identified a 500kb duplication of 
Xq22.2, including the PLP1  gene.
Background: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher (PMD) disease is a rare X-linked 
genetic disorder caused by deletions, duplications or pointmutations 
in the proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1)  gene. PLP1 is the major structural 
protein of the CNS myelin and mutations in the gene result in dysmy -
elination. Mutations in PLP1  produce a wide spectrum of clinical phe -
notypes, from PMD to spastic paraplegia type 2. Boys are affected and 
their mothers are usually asymptomatic carriers. In common with most 
cases (50-70%)our patient had a duplication of PLP1  as the causative 
mechanism and presented with classic PMD. Some patients have 
three or more copies of PLP1 , which usually causes a more severe 
phenotype. Missense mutations often result in the connatal form, the 
most severe form of PMD. Clinical signs may be nystagmus, hypoto -
nia, ataxia, titubation, cognitive impairment and spastic quadriparesis 
beginning in the first five years. In severe cases perinatal stridor and 
seizures may develop.
P02.156  Genetic variants in DRD2 gene and therapeutic 
response to antipsychotic treatment in schizophrenia patients 
from Volga-Ural region of Russia: pharmacogenetic study
A. Gareeva , E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific center of RAS, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
Antipsychotic drugs exert both therapeutic and adverse effects through 
dopamine D2 rceptor (DRD2) antagonism. Genetic variants of this re -
ceptor may be responsible for individual variations in antipsychotics 
response and may therefore be useful in predicting response. In this 
study we evaluated the role of two polymorphic loci: TaqI A and Nco 
of DRD2 gene in 120 drug-naive patients (Russians and Tatars) with 
first-episode schizophrenia, from Volga-Ural region of Russia who 
treated with typical antipsychothics for 45 days. Improvement and re -
sponse was assesed by using the Positive and Negative Syndrome 
Scale (PANSS) on the day of admission and subsequently after 21 and Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
45 days following the treatment. Association tests between genotypes 
and percentage improvement in total PANSS score, as well as Posi -
tive and Negative subscale scores were performed using analysis of 
variance (ANOVA). TaqI A polymorphic locus of DRD2 gene was as -
sociated with Positive symptom response to treatment. Patients with 
DRD2*A1/A1 genotype showed substantial improvement as regards 
Positive symptom response (F4.867; df 2; P=0.009) compared with 
patients who carried DRD2*A1/A2 and DRD2*A2/A2 genotypes. No 
association was observed between Nco polymorphic locus of DRD2 
gene and changes in PANSS scores.The results suggest that TaqI A 
polymorphic locus of DRD2 gene may be a useful predictor of reduc -
tion in positive symptoms in schizophrenia patients treated with typical 
antipsychotics.
P02.157  A family with Pierre Robin syndrome caused by a 
microdeletion in the long arm of chromosome 17 (17q24.3) 
W. Courtens1, L. Desmyter2, B. Bayet3, M. Vikkula2;  
1Center of Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Cliniques 
Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 2Human Molecular Genetics, de 
Duve institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre 
Labiopalatin, Division of Plastic Surgery, Université Catholique de Louvain, 
Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
Pierre Robin syndrome or sequence (OMIM 261800) is defined by 
micrognathia, cleft palate and glossoptosis, resulting in upper airway 
obstruction, neonatal distress and feeding problems that can be life-
threatening. This sequence appears also as a feature of campomelic 
dysplasia, an autosomal dominant short limb dwarfism, caused by mu -
tations in the SOX9 gene.
We report on a male child, his mother and grandmother. The child 
presented at birth with an important retromicrognathia, a posterior U-
shaped cleft palate, a left palmar crease, and normal birth measure -
ments. His mother also had a Pierre Robin syndrome (with cleft pal -
ate), diagnosed at birth, that was followed by multiple hospitalisations 
and surgical interventions. The maternal grandmother also had a his -
tory of cleft palate and surgery. Further family history revealed that 3 
brothers and 1 sister of the maternal grandmother died in the neonatal 
period because of “problems of the face”. The child, mother nor grand -
mother have other associated anomalies. Chromosome analyses and 
FISH 22q11.2 were normal.
Affymetrix SNP chip analyses (250K NspI) revealed a small deletion of 
approximately 249 kb localized in 17q24.3 in the child, the mother and 
the maternal grandmother. There is no known gene or polymorphism 
in this region but it is situated at 1.3Mb of the SOX9  gene. This micro -
deletion is thus very probably causative for the Pierre Robin syndrome 
in this autosomal dominant family. A possible role of SOX9  in the etiol -
ogy of Pierre Robin sequence seems to be confirmed by recent find -
ings in the literature.
P02.158  4G/5G Polymorphism of PAI-1 Gene is Associated with 
multiple Organ Dysfunction and septic shock in Pneumonia 
induced severe sepsis
I. Aladzsity1, K. Madách2, Á. Szilágyi1,3, G. Fust1, J. Gál2, I. Pénzes2, Z. 
Prohászka1,3;  
13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Research Laboratory, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive 
Therapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Research Group of 
Inflammation Biology and Immunogenomics, Semmelweis University and 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
Activation of inflammation and coagulation are closely related and mu -
tually interdependent in sepsis. The acute-phase protein, plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a key element in the inhibition of fibrino -
lysis. Elevated levels of PAI-1 have been related to worse outcome in 
pneumonia. We aimed to evaluate the effect of functionally relevant 
4G/5G polymorphism of PAI-1 gene in pneumonia-induced sepsis.
We enrolled 207 Caucasian patients with severe sepsis due to pneu -
monia admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU). Patients were fol -
lowed up until ICU discharge or death. Clinical data were collected 
prospectively and the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism was genotyped by 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
technique. Patients were stratified according to occurrence of multiple 
organ dysfunction syndrome, septic shock or death.
Our results showed that carriers of the PAI-1 4G/4G and 4G/5G geno -
types have 2.74-fold higher risk for multiple organ dysfunction syn -drome (p=0.005) and 2.57-fold higher risk for septic shock (p=0.015) 
than 5G/5G carriers. The multivariate logistic regression analysis ad -
justed for independent predictors, such as age, nosocomial pneumo -
nia and positive blood culture also supported that carriers of the 4G 
allele have higher prevalence of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 
(p=0.009) and septic shock (p=0.024) than patients bearing the 5G/5G. 
However, genotype and allele analyses have not shown any significant 
difference regarding mortality in models non-adjusted or adjusted with 
APACHE II.
Carriers of the 4G allele of PAI-1 polymorphism have higher risk for 
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and septic shock in Caucasian 
patients with severe sepsis due to pneumonia.
P02.159  Quantitative SNRPN  methylation analysis in neonates 
with central hypotonia
G. Queipo1, J. Pérez-Duran1, N. Nájera1, L. González1, N. Garibay2, E. 
Barragan3, S. Kofman-Alfaro1;  
1Hospital General de México-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, México DF, Mexico, 
2Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, México DF, Mexico, 3Hospital 
Infantil de México Federico Gonzalez, México DF, Mexico.
The hypotonic infant is an issue in pediatric neurology, this condition 
can be due to many different pathological processes in brain or any 
structure in the motor unit. In a central hypotonic baby approach is 
important discard syndromic causes, being the most frequent, Prader 
Willi Syndrome (PWS) caused by the loss of expression of the paternal 
allele in a group of imprinted genes located in a 2 Mb domain within 
15q11-q13. PWS is characterized by severe prenatal and postnatal 
hypotonia. SNURF-SNRPN gene methylation analysis in the critical 
region detect 99% of the cases but does not provide information about 
the etiology of the syndrome, FISH analysis the choice tool to detect 
microdeletions. Real time PCR analysis could make the diagnosis, 
verify deletions and detect mosaicism in one reaction. In infants the 
diagnosis is difficult, clinical approach alone is not enough to differenti -
ate this condition from others. It has been proposed that around 40% of 
the hypotonic patients have PWS but an accurate percentage has not 
been established. SNRP-Quantification of methylated alleles (QAMA) 
in 24 central hypotonic infants showed in 5/13 patients (41.5%) with 
PWS. QAMA permits calculate gene dosage with the comparative CT 
method and detect those cases with microdeletion.
P02.160  Prader - Willi syndrome - classic Disorder, New 
Features
C. Rusu1, E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, D. Dan3, M. Puiu4;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2“Sf Maria“ Children‘s 
Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3Prader Willi Association, Zalau, Romania, 4University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Prader Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a relatively common disorder (1/15,000 
newborns) due to abnormalities in the 15q11.2-q13 region (microdele -
tion, uniparental disomy, methylation defect, deletion).
Major manifestations include hypotonia with poor suck and poor weight 
gain in infancy, early childhood-onset hyperphagia and obesity, char -
acteristic appearance, hypogonadism, growth hormone insufficiency 
causing short stature, mild mental retardation and characteristic be -
haviour. Diagnostic is based on a clinical score (Cassidy 2005). Se -
lected cases follow investigations (methylation test, FISH, karyotype).
We present the clinical study of 50 cases with PWS (diagnosis con -
firmed by genetic tests), in order to illustrate and discuss particular 
clinical features. Some of them are relatively frequent in our patients 
(e.g. multiple allergies, tall/ normal stature in childhood, long ears, ear -
ly onset puberty, particular behavior, normal appetite etc) and should 
be considered when evaluating a patient. Our results are comprehen -
sively illustrated, discussed and compared with literature data.In con -
clusion, we present a clinical study of PWS that illustrates particular 
features relatively frequently found in our patients.
P02.161  New perspectives on Prader-Willi syndrome: report of 2 
patients and review of the literature
M. Martins1, P. Botelho1, M. Souto1, J. Guedes1, I. Soares1, F. Pereira2, O. 
Moutinho1, R. Pinto Leite1;  
1Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Centro 
Hospitalar do Nordeste, Mirandela, Portugal.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; MIM #176270 ), a rare genetic disorder, 
is an example of a genetic condition involving genomic imprinting and Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
the first shown to be caused by uniparental disomy. It can occur by 
three main mechanisms, which lead to absence of expression of pa -
ternally inherited genes in the 15q11.2-q13 region: paternal microdele -
tion (70%), maternal uniparental disomy (25%), and mutation or other 
abnormality in the imprinting process (2% to 5%). Althought caused by 
the disturbed expression of genes from the imprinted region of 15q11-
q13, the specific contributions of individual genes remain unknown.
PWS is a neurodevelopment disorder, with an estimated prevalence 
of 1 in 15.000, with a complex phenotype that changes with age. The 
most consistent major manifestations include neonatal hypotonia, 
short stature, global developmental delay and mental deficiency, be -
havioral and sometimes psychiatric abnormalities, early childhood-on -
set hyperphagia and obesity, hypothalamic hypogonadism, and char -
acteristic appearance.
Diagnosis of PWS on a clinical basis only is difficult in newborns and 
young infants; thus cytogenetic approaches such as fluorescent in situ 
hybridization combined with molecular tests like DNA methylation test 
and UPD studies are essential. Selection of suitable patients based on 
clinical criteria according to age, enhances diagnostic yield.
We describe the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular characterization of 
2 patients with PWS and discuss the new perspectives on therapeutic 
and educational programmes, rehabilitation issues and the potential 
role of the genes within the deleted region in the pathogenesis of these 
various phenotypic abnormalities.
P02.162  Prevalence of Prader-Willi and FRAXA syndromes 
among patients with mental retardation
A. R. Shorina1,2, A. B. Maslennikov1, V. A. Makasheva2, E. N. Tolmacheva3, E. 
A. Sazhenova3, I. N. Lebedev3;  
1State Novosibirsk Regional Clinical Diagnostic Center, Novosibirsk, Russian 
Federation, 2Novosibirsk Regional Children’s Psychoneurological Dispensary, 
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, 
Tomsk, Russian Federation.
One of the main tasks of medical genetic consulting is timely and 
correct diagnostics of diseases. However, there are several groups 
of pathologies including mental retardation, which are characterized 
by broad clinical polymorphism and genetic heterogeneity. The aim 
of present investigation was assessment of Prader-Willi and FRAXA 
syndromes prevalence among children with intellectual disorders in 
Novosibirsk region. Among 433 patients clinical diagnosis of Prader-
Willi syndrome (PWS) was suspected for 22 children (5.1%). Results 
of molecular genetic analyses were positive in 10 cases (45%). One 
family with two affected sibs and unusual mechanism of inheritance 
was described. One child had microdeletion of 15q11-q13 on paternal 
chromosome, whereas the other UPD(15)mat. FRAXA syndrome was 
suspected for 25 patients (5.8%) on the basis of clinical examination. 
Combined cytogenetic and molecular genetic tests were positive for 
11 children only (44%). Our experience indicates that about a half of 
the patients with clinical features of frequent mental retardation syn -
dromes and negative testing results require more detailed molecular 
genetic analysis.
P02.163  Achondroplasia - case report
M. Boia , A. Manea, D. Iacob;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction: Achondroplasia, a non lethal form of chondrodysplasia, 
is the most common form of short-limb dwarfism. Positive diagnosis is 
relatively easily established based on salient phenotypic features that 
include: disproportionate  short stature, megalencephaly, a prominent 
forehead (frontal bossing), middle face hypoplasia, rhizomelic shorten -
ing of the arms and legs, a normal trunk length, thoraco lumbar gibbus 
(lumbar kyphosis) genu varum, and a trident hand configuration.
Materials and method: Premature newborn - cytogenetic, imaging and 
clinical examination.
Results: L.M new born, aged 4 days was admitted to our clinic pre -
senting a plurimalformativ syndrome. The patient comes from clinically 
healthy parents, gestational age was 37 weeks, birth weight was 2260g, 
the length = 35 cm and Apgar index 1 to 5 minutes. The disease was 
diagnosed in the 6th month of pregnancy by fetal ultrasonography.
Positive diagnosis was established based on salient phenotypic fea -
tures: middle face hypoplasia, a prominent forehead (frontal bossing), 
moderate exophthalmia, posterior palatoschizis, shortening of the 
arms and legs (the arms = 13 cm), short global stature, sitting down stature = 30 cm and varus equine.
Diagnosis was also supported by other investigations:
Radiographic findings : shortened long bones of the limbs with epiphy -
sis osteocondritis  
Genetic study : without changes in karyotype
Evolution during neonatal period was difficult with slow growth in 
weight, due to infections, (especially respiratory) and eating difficul -
ties.
Conclusion: Achondroplasia is a rare disease in current medical prac -
tice. Diagnosis is established easily, both antenatal and postnatal pe -
riod, based on clinical data, imaging and cytogenetic testing.
P02.164  mitochondrial DNA analysis in primary congenital 
glaucoma
M. Tanwar1, T. Dada2, R. Sihota2, R. Dada1;  
1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. R.P. Centre for 
Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,, New Delhi, India.
Purpose: To identify mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) nucleotide changes 
in primary congenital glaucoma (PCG). Methods: The entire coding 
region of the mitochondrial genome was amplified by polymerase 
chain reaction from 35 patients and 40 controls. Whole mtDNA ge -
nome except D-loop was sequenced. All sequences were analyzed 
against mitochondrial reference sequence NC_012920. Results: MtD -
NA sequencing revealed a total of 132 and 58 nucleotide variations 
in PCG and controls respectively. Thirty one novel mtDNA variations 
were detected in PCG. Of 132 nucleotide variations, 41 (31.06%) were 
non-synonymous and 83 (62.87%) were synonymous changes, and 
8 were in RNA genes. Highest numbers of nucleotide variations were 
recorded in complex I followed by complex IV then complex V. Two 
non-synonymous changes (p.W239C in ND2 and p.A20T in ATPase6) 
were present both in cases and controls. Discussion: Mitochondrial 
function can be affected by mutations in mitochondrial and nuclear 
DNA. MtDNA variations result in reduced mitochondrial respiration 
and elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Reduced mi -
tochondrial respiration may lead to trabecular dysgenesis which is a 
characterstic feature of PCG. OS affects both TM and retinal ganglion 
cells (RGCs) and is involved in the neuronal cell death affecting the 
optic nerve. Conclusion: Mitochondrial DNA variations adversely affect 
respiratory chain and impair OXPHOS pathway and result in reduced 
mitochondrial respiration and elevated ROS production. This leads to 
oxidative injury to TM and RGCs. Thus, early identification of mito -
chondrial DNA variations and prompt antioxidant administration may 
delay oxidative stress induced injury to TM and RGCs and, therefore, 
improve visual prognosis.
P02.165  salt Loosing Form of cystic Fibrosis (Pseudo-Bartter 
syndrome): A case Report
N. Cebi1, K. Shermatov2, A. Cakmak2, M. Ikbal3, M. Y. Alp3, A. H. Cebi3;  
1Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical Biochemistry, 
Trabzon, Turkey, 2Harran University Medical Faculty Department of Pediatrics, 
Sanlıurfa, Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical University Medical Faculty, Medical 
Genetics, Trabzon, Turkey.
11 months girl patient admitted to our emergency clinic with vomiting 
, cough and diarrhea complaints. She had clinical picture of PBS and 
her sweat test results was suspicious and to confirm CF diagnosis we 
apply to supporting findings. Patient diagnosed with salt loosing form 
of CF (Pseudo Bartter’s Syndrome). Treatment with appropriate anti -
biotics, intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement biochemical find -
ing and general condition of patient improved. She discharged from a 
hospital with an oral salt and potassium support.
This case presented on purpose to underline the distinctive diagnosis 
of PBS related with CF infants which are applied with an electrolyte 
imbalance and metabolic alkalosis particularly in a hot climate.
P02.166  A new storage disorder resembling morquio syndrome 
in two sibs
L. Perrin , O. Fenneteau, C. Baumann, M. Gerard-Blanluet, K. Mazda, A. 
Verloes;  
Robert Debré Hospital, 75019 paris, France.
We report two brothers born to unrelated French Caribbean parents 
presenting with an unclassifiable storage disorder. Pregnancy and 
delivery were uneventful. They have short stature (below - 4SD) with Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
short trunk, barrel chest, micromelia with rhizomelic shortening, severe 
kyphoscoliosis, pectus carinatum, ulnar deviation of the hands, short 
hands and feet with metatarsus adductus, excessive joint laxity of the 
small joints and umbilical hernia. Mild developmental delay was pres -
ent in both. There was no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, nor dysmor -
phia. Skeletal X rays demonstrated generalized platyspondyly with a 
tongue-like deformity of the anterior part of the vertebral bodies (remi -
niscent of Morquio syndrome), and hypoplasia of the odontoid. Gener -
alized epiphyseal dysplasia and abnormally shaped metaphyses were 
also present. Ophthalmologic examination was normal. Spine defor -
mity required surgical correction in one of the patient at age 4.
Despite similarities with mucopolysacaccharidosis IV, lysosomal en -
zymes assays including alpha galactose-6-sulfatase and beta-galac -
tosidase were normal on lymphocytes. Traces of urinary glycoamino -
glycans were found in one of the two brothers. They were no vacuol -
ized lymphocytes, but abnormal coarse inclusions were present in the 
eosinophils. The azurophiles granulations of the polymorphonuclears 
were also abnormal. Those morphological anomalies are indicative of 
a lysosomal dysfunction. Skin biopsy was normal. Ultrastructural ex -
amination of the cartilage is pending.
We hypothetize that these two boys have an undescribed lysosomal 
storage disorder of unknown origin that share clinical and radiological 
features with Morquio disease.
P02.167  An atypical case of pseudoxanthoma elasticum with 
abdominal cutis laxa: evidence for a clinical disease spectrum
O. M. Vanakker1, B. P. Leroy1,2, L. J. Schurgers3, I. Pasquali-Ronchetti4, P. J. 
Coucke1, A. De Paepe1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 
2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 
3VitaK & Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Introduction. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), featuring papular skin 
lesions, a retinopathy and cardiovascular complications, results from 
elastic fibre calcification and fragmentation due to ABCC6 mutations. 
The PXE-like syndrome (PXEL), caused by GGCX mutations, features 
generalized cutis laxa, mild retinopathy and a clotting deficiency. The 
GGCX carboxylase activates vitamin K (VK)-dependent calcification 
inhibitors {matrix gla protein (MGP), osteocalcin (OC)}. We present a 
patient with a clinical and histochemical overlap phenotype between 
PXE and PXEL.
Methods & Results. The proband presented typical PXE features 
- yellowish papules in the neck and severe retinopathy - together 
with marked abdominal cutis laxa, as in PXEL. Dermal ultrastructural 
evaluation revealed mineralization in the periphery of elastic fibres, 
typical for PXEL. Immunohistochemistry showed marked staining for 
uncarboxylated (uc) MGP and ucOC, seen in PXE and PXEL, though 
not confined to the middermis - as in PXE - but affecting the whole 
dermis as in PXEL. Measuring circulating levels of carboxylated (c) 
and ucMGP and OC revealed elevated ucOC/cOC ratios, as in PXEL 
(normal in PXE), but normal ucMGP/cMGP ratios, as in PXE (elevated 
in PXEL). Molecular analysis unveiled two known compound hetero -
zygous ABCC6 mutations, while GGCX harboured a gain-of-function 
polymorphism. Circulating VK levels were severely decreased, pos -
sibly neutralising the effect of the latter.
Conclusion. This phenotype, reminiscent of PXE and PXEL, suggests 
that PXEL may represent a spectrum of ectopic calcification disorders 
who are clinically and pathogenetically related to PXE. The low VK se -
rum levels suggest a pathophysiological role for a deficient VK status 
in these disorders.
P02.168  Ramon Syndrome in a 38-year-old male
S. Turyk , M. Sakurai, C. Galliuss, E. Maloberti;  
Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Ramon Syndrome (RS) was initially described by Ramon et al. (Oral 
Surg. 24:436-48, 1967). Since that time there have been few patients 
reported in the literature with this rare, presumed autosomal reces -
sive syndrome. Described patients were mostly children. We report 
a new case of RS, a rare disorder, characterized primarily by gingival 
overgrowth, congenital generalized hypertrichosis, mental retardation 
and epilepsy.
Our proband was a Caucasian, 38-year-old male. Third son of non-consanguineous parents and his older brothers of whom were unaf -
fected. He was born full-term by normal vaginal delivery and his birth 
weight was 2kg. Developmental milestones were delayed. Reportedly, 
he attended regular school up to 9th grade. Our patient had mental de -
ficiency, epilepsy, gingival fibromatosis, cherubism due to the fibrous 
dysplasia of the maxillae, hypertrichosis and pigmentary changes in 
the retina. Chromosomal study of peripheral blood lymphocytes con -
firmed the 46, XY karyotype.
Ocular features were not described in the original report on this syn -
drome. Recent reports of other families with R.S. describe pigmentary 
retinopathy and optic disc pallor. It may be concluded that ocular ab -
normalities are another feature of Ramon syndrome and are develop -
ing later.
P02.169  A novel mild phenotype associated with FOXG1  gene
R. De Filippis , I. Meloni, M. Amenduni, A. Spanhol Rosseto, D. Rondinella, M. 
Mencarelli, M. Pollazzon, F. Mari, F. Ariani, A. Renieri;  
Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy.
We recently identified FOXG1  gene as responsible for the congenital 
variantof Rett syndrome. This is the severe variant of the syndrome in 
which thenormal perinatal period is very short or absent. After the first 
twoItalian patients more than 20 patients have been further described. 
These patients represent a quite homogenous group showing mild 
postnatal growth deficiency,severe postnatal microcephaly, severe 
mental retardation with absentlanguage development, midline stereo -
typies and jearky movements, poor eyecontact, irritability in infancy 
and gastroesofageal reflux. In this form,patients can neither speak 
nor walk and have severe dispraxia. We present here a12.5 year-old 
female with postnatal microcephaly (48 cm, 7.5 y), ataxicgait, hyper -
activity, seizures, stereotypies, protruding tongue, prognatism,midface 
hypoplasia resembling 9qter microdeletion syndrome, normal karioty -
peand normal EHMT1  gene. Although she was able to walk, listen -
ing music, andmanipulate objects (with moderate apraxia) we decided 
to test FOXG1  gene. A de novo early truncating mutation (c136C>T; 
p.Q46X) has been identified in this gene. To our knowledge this is the 
first report with a mild phenotype associated with FOXG1  mutation. 
This discovery paves the way to the possibility that also FOXG1  may 
be associated with mild variants, as for MECP2  gene in Zappella vari -
ant.
P02.170  A systematic metabolic approach to the evaluation of 
nutrition in Rett syndrome according to the cardiorespiratory 
phenotype in Dutch Rett girls.
N. S. J. Halbach1,2, E. E. J. Smeets1,2, J. Bierau1, I. Keularts1, J. Bakker1, L. M. 
G. Curfs1,2;  
1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Governor Kremers 
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Background: Despite their good appetite, many females with Rett syn -
drome (RTT) meet the criteria for moderate to severe malnutrition. Al -
though feeding difficulties may play a part in this, other constitutional 
factors as altered metabolic processes are suspected. Irregular breath -
ing is a common clinical feature, which leads to chronic respiratory al -
kalosis or acidosis. The aim of this study was to examine the influence 
of breathing irregularities on metabolic processes, as a possible cause 
of impaired nutritional status.
Methods: The study population consisted of a well-defined group of 
thirteen Dutch RTT girls with complete clinical, molecular and neuro -
physiological work-up. A complete nutrition assessment and measure -
ment of body composition was carried out. Blood and urine samples 
for biochemical screening of metabolites from multiple pathways were 
collected.
Results: Six RTT girls had a significantly elevated creatine concentra -
tion in plasma and creatine/creatinine ratio in urine. Five girls were 
forceful breathers, one girl had an undetermined cardiorespiratory phe -
notype. A significantly elevated creatine/creatinine ratio in urine only 
was seen in one girl, she was a feeble breather.
Conclusion: Chronic respiratory alkalosis may alter the creatine metab -
olism in females with RTT. Furthermore, MeCP2 deficiency may cause 
epigenetic aberrations affecting the expression of the creatine-trans -
porter gene, which is located at Xq28. Further studies concerning the 
nutritional and cardiorespiratory requirements of RTT girls are impor -
tant in order for them to receive appropriate and effective treatment.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
P02.171  Ophthalmologic findings in one case of Rieger 
syndrome
O. K. Janvareva1, M. O. Mkheidze2;  
1Medical Centre of St.Petersburg University, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Rieger syndrome or mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and retina 
(MIM180500, 4q25-q27) is a consequence of abnormal cleavage of 
the anterior chamber. This results in iris hypoplasia and strands run -
ning from the iris to the posterior surface of the cornea (synachiae). 
Posterior embriotoxon is usually present and glaucoma may be a 
complication. Here we report on 14 years old girl suffered form Rieger 
syndrome. Her parents deny consanguinity. She is under our observa -
tion during 5 years. Proband’s phenotype included short proportionate 
stature, shield-shaped chest, arachnodactyly, oligodontia, peg-shaped 
teeth. Extensive ophthalmologic studies showed bilateral inborn glau -
coma and pronounced mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and retina, 
posterior embriotoxon, microcornea (d~8mm vs. 11.5-12mm). In the 
angle of the anterior chamber residual mesodermal tissue was shown 
with biomicroscopy. Congenital stromal prelimbal cloudy cornea was 
found here. In addition proband’s phenotype included the irregular oval 
pupils displaced towards nasal area and turned vis-à-vis. There were 
two false congenital pupils (the left eye). Using gonioscopy the angels 
of the anterior chambers were found to be closed but intraocular pres -
sure was below 22 mmHg without hypotensive medication. Refractive 
myopia was revealed. Her mental intellectual faculties were excellent. 
Trophic medication and optic correction were applied.
P02.172  Autistic features and unusual behavior in a girl with 
ring chromosome 11: clinical, psychological and molecular 
cytogenetic characterization
E. A. Saprina1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,3, Y. B. Yurov1,3, V. Y. Voinova3,2, O. S. 
Kurinnaia1,3, A. D. Kolotii1,3, I. Y. Iourov1,3;  
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, 
Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We report an 8 year-old Caucasian girl with a ring 11 chromosome pre -
senting with microcephaly, short stature, intellectual disabilities, spas -
tic-ataxic syndrome and autistic features. The majority of phenotypic 
features resemble those previously reported for r(11), whereas spas -
tic-ataxic syndrome and autistic features are not. The proposita is a 
girl delivered at term to non-consanguineous parents. She has severe 
growth and psychomotor retardation, bicuspid aortic valve, congenital 
strabismus, hipoplastic thymus gland, pancreas dysfunction, “cafe-
au-lait” pigmentary skin changes, partial ptosis, abnormal ear shape, 
high-arched palate, broad nasal bridge, shortening of III metatarsal 
bone. MRI has showed slight frontal lobe atrophy, hydrocephalus and 
myelination deficit. She has inconsistent eye contact, increased anxi -
ety/fears and ritualistic, stereotyped, self-injurious behavior, and is ner -
vous, depressive and tearfulness. Total CARS score is 36 (moderate 
autism). Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised score is 37 (high scores 
for self-injurious, restricted and ritualistic/sameness behavior; median 
scores for stereotyped behavior; low score for compulsive behavior). 
Speech difficulties refer to rhinolalia and poor vocabulary. The girl has 
good concentration span and long-term verbal memory, being ex -
tremely good in gestalt recognition with occasional difficulties of com -
mon things recognition. Molecular cytogenetic characterization was 
performed by FISH with site-specific DNA probes for subtelomeric and 
interstitial chromosome 11 regions as well as by whole-genome BAC 
array 1Mb CGH. We found ring chromosome to be associated with 
loss of 11q24.1->11qter (121,411,392-134,916,587 or ~13.5Mb) with -
out chromosomal DNA loss within 11pter. To the best our knowledge, 
this is the first case of r(11) characterized by array CGH.
P02.173  sensenbrenner syndrome (cranioectodermal 
Dysplasia): A candidate human ciliopathy. Presentation of new 
cases, review of the literature and possible mechanisms.
A. Innes1, C. Loucks1, M. Thomas1, D. McLeod1, A. Wade1, E. Puffenberger2, J. 
Parboosingh1;  
1University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Clinic for Special Children, Lancaster County, PA, United States.
Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner syndrome, OMIM 
218220) is a rare syndrome characterized by dolicocephaly/sagittal 
craniosynostosis and ectodermal anomalies. The majority of individu -
als have short stature and normal intelligence although developmen -
tal delay has been reported. CED is presumably autosomal recessive 
based on sibling recurrence, and parental consanguinity. Several CED 
patients have developed tubulo-interstitial renal disease, hepatic fibro -
sis and retinitis pigmentosa supporting that CED is a congenital hepa -
tofibrocystic syndrome (CHFS). The majority of CHFS are now known 
to be members of the growing class of human ciliopathies. Several of 
the early cases of CED were reported in the literature multiple times 
which was not appreciated in some of the previous published reviews 
of this condition.
Herein we report our experience with several new cases of CED. This 
includes a child born to consanguineous Tatarian parents with con -
firmed situs inversus - a prototypic ciliopathy feature. We have also 
seen 3 Hutterite children with CED features and developmental delay, 
and we have mapped their disorder to the short arm of chromosome 
17. The nearly 400 genes in this region are currently being priorized 
for sequencing based on published ciliary databases-an update will be 
provided. We will also review all the published CED cases and the core 
phenotype. If CED is indeed a ciliopathy a number of predictions can 
be made prior to the first gene being identified- genetic heterogeneity 
can be anticipated, patients will be seen with CED and features over -
lapping other known ciliopathies, and that alleles at other ciliary loci will 
modify phenotypic expression.
P02.174  sHORt syndrome: autosomal dominant transmission 
and prenatal diagnosis
M. Mathieu1, B. Devauchelle1, B. Demeer1, P. Bitoun2, S. Lanta1, A. De Sandre-
Giovannoli3, G. Viot4, P. Naepels1, J. Gondry1, G. Morin1;  
1Amiens University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, 
France, 3La Timone Hospital, Marseille, France, 4Saint-Vincent-de-Paul 
Hospital, Paris, France.
The SHORT syndrome was first described by Gorlin and Sensen -
brenner in 1975 where the acronym stands for: S stature, H hyperex -
tensible joints and/or hernia, O ocular depression, R Rieger anomaly 
(iris stroma hypoplasia,posterior embryotoxon and iridocorneal syn -
echia), T teething delay. It has now been reported in more than 24 
patients of the two sexes. A partial lipodystrophy of the thorax and the 
face gives them a progeroid facial appearance. Intellect is generally 
normal .Some inconstant features can be present as hearing loss and 
renal anomalies. Adults present a high risk of mellitus diabetes with in -
sulin resistance. The inheritance is autosomal dominant and until now, 
the etiopathogeny remains unknown.
In 2001, we reported the observation of a 27-year-old affected woman 
with absence of familial history. A first pregnancy was complicated by 
severe diabetes requiring high doses of insulin allowing the birth of an 
unaffected girl born prematurely at 29 weeks. At the age of 8, she is 
in good health. The watch of a second pregnancy of the 33years-old 
index case confirmed the event of gestational diabetes. Ultrasound ex -
amination shows a craniofacial fetal microsomia with dysmorphic fea -
tures at 27 weeks of gestation. This confirmed the autosomal dominant 
inheritance from mother to the fetus. The pregnancy was terminated
Even if features are common with Rieger or progeroid syndromes, no 
mutations in PITX2 or lamine A/C genes was detected. Array-CGH 
was normal.
P02.175  small duplication of the GPc3 gene in a spanish 
family as a newly recognized cause of simpson-Golabi-Behmel 
syndrome.
B. Gener1, C. Romano2, A. Schinzel3, G. Ariceta4, D. Di Benedetto5, M. 
Fichera5;  
1Clinical Genetics. Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 2Unit of Pediatrics 
and Medical Genetics. Oasi Institute (I.R.C.C.S.) for Research and Care in 
Mental Retardation and Brain Aging, Troina, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Genetics. 
University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 4Pediatric Nephrology Unit.
Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 5Laboratorio di Diagnosi Genetica. 
IRCCS Oasi Maria Santísima, Troina, Italy.
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) is an X-linked recessive 
overgrowth disorder characterized by prenatal onset of overgrowth, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology7
characteristic facies, frequently mild to severe mental retardation and 
different associated congenital anomalies. Up to date only mutations 
or deletions of the glypican 3 (GPC3) gene have been reported associ -
ated to this syndrome.
Here we describe a three generation Spanish family with a clinically 
recognizable SGBS Subsequently to negative mutational screening of 
GPC3 gene in the proband, we decided to perform array-CGH analy -
sis (180K Agilent array), and identified a small duplication of about 
35 kb within GPC3 gene whereas no other significant copy number 
variants were recognized in the rest of the genome. The rearrange -
ment, was checked using a SALSA MLPA KIT P154 SGBS-GPC3-4 
(MRC-Holland) assay which confirmed the duplication of exon 6 lead -
ing to disruption of the GPC3 gene. Further analysis in the pedigree 
demonstrated that the rearrangement co-segregated with the disease. 
A total of eleven family members have been molecularly investigated. 
Two affected males presented basically with neonatal hypoglycaemia 
(in one), coarse face, macroglossia, overgrowth, normal or mild learn -
ing difficulties, and renal anomalies. The clinical phenotype in the four 
female carriers varies from absolute normal to mild clinical manifesta -
tions.
To our knowledge this is the first case of SGBS encompassing dupli -
cation of the GPC3 gene reported so far. As already demonstrated for 
other genes, the molecular screening of the GPC3 gene should always 
include a gene dosage analysis in order to exclude small deletions / 
duplications.
P02.176  A De Novo  Deletion of the SMC1A  gene at Xp11.2 in a 
female associated with cleft lip and palate, overlapping fingers, 
refractory seizures and hemivertebrae
E. S. Goh , G. De Veber, D. J. Stavropoulos, D. Chitayat;  
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
The SMC1A  (OMIM 300040) gene located at Xp11.2 is reported to 
escape X inactivation and is associated with a variant of Cornelia de 
Lange (CdLS). Previous research suggested that mechanistically the 
SMC1A-related CdLS is due to the mutant proteins that maintain a 
residual function in males and cause a dominant negative effect in 
females. We report a case of a de novo  deletion at Xp11.2 which in -
cluded a partial deletion of exons 19-25 in SMC1A . The proband is a 
term female born to non-consanguineous healthy parents. Her birth 
parameters and APGAR scores were normal. On examination, she 
had hypotonia, left cleft lip and cleft of the anterior part of the second -
ary palate, bilateral camptodactyly and overlapping of the 2nd and 3rd 
digits. She also had a small VSD and hemivertebrae at C4-C5 and 
T9-T11. Brain MRI showed mild increased T2 signal in the white mat -
ter of the frontal and parietal lobes and suggestion of volume loss. At 
2 months of age she developed intractable seizures with episodes of 
apnea, desaturation and bradycardia. Her karyotype was 46,XX and 
microarray analysis also showed a maternally inherited duplication at 
15q11.2 which did not include the SNRPN  locus. To our knowledge, 
our case is the largest known deletion in SMC1A. Analysis of SMC1A  
expression is undertaken in the patient’s lymphoblast line. If this shows 
lack of the mutant proteins, it will question the validity of the theory that 
in females, the condition is the result of a dominant negative effect (Liu 
et al., 2009).
P02.177  Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism due to mosaic sOX2 
mutation, and anophthalmia/microphthalmia in two offspring 
born after assisted reproductive treatment
Z. Stark1, R. Storen2, R. Savarirayan1,3, R. Jamieson2;  
1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 2Eye Genetics Research 
Group, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Children’s Medical Research 
Institute, Save Sight Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 
3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factor SOX2 are the com -
monest single-gene cause of anophthalmia/microphthalmia (A/M). In 
some patients with eye anomalies and SOX2 mutations, hypogonado -
trophic hypogonadism (HH) has been reported. Deficiency of lutein -
izing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone secretion often neces -
sitates the use of assisted reproductive technology to assist fertility in 
individuals with HH.
We report two children with anophthalmia/microphthalmia who were 
born following infertility treatment of their mother who had HH. A novel 
heterozygous frameshift mutation in the SOX2 transactivation domain was found in both children on sequence analysis. Their mother, who 
had isolated HH with no eye or other anomalies, was found to har -
bour the same SOX2 mutation at mosaic levels in a peripheral blood 
sample. Although most SOX2 mutations arise de novo, the recurrence 
in this family as a result of mosaicism in the mother highlights the im -
portance of clinical and molecular evaluation of parents of children with 
anophthalmia due to a SOX2 mutation to enable accurate recurrence 
risk counselling.
This is the first report of HH in the absence of eye involvement in a 
SOX2 mutation patient. The SOX2 mutation was present in mosaic 
form in a peripheral blood sample and it was detectable using routine 
sequencing methods. Most SOX2 mutations have been ascertained 
through the study of patients with ocular abnormalities, and it is not 
known what proportion of patients with HH may harbour SOX2 mu -
tations. This report has important implications for the evaluation of 
patients with isolated HH, particularly in the setting of infertility treat -
ment.
P02.178  Stickler Syndrome and mental retardation in a patient 
with a de novo 12q13.11 microdeletion
S. Gimelli1, M. Periklis1, C. Stouder1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1, F. Béna1;  
1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of 
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
Proximal 12q deletions are rare events. To date only 2 cases have 
been reported with a 12q13 partially overlapping deletion [Gallego et 
al., 2000 (Case1); Tonoki et al., 1998 (Case2)]. We describe an 11-
year-old girl with mental retardation, microcephaly, cleft palate and 
severe bilateral myopia.
Array-CGH analysis (Agilent 244K) revealed a de novo interstitial 
12q13.11 deletion of 1.3 Mb. The deleted region encompasses 16 
genes including COL2A1 and AMIGO2. The former gene is known to 
cause Stickler Syndrome type I ‘OMIM 108300’ when haploinsufficient, 
while the latter is specifically expressed on fiber tracts of neuronal tis -
sues and involved in their formation [Kuja-Panula et al.,2003]. We hy -
pothesize that AMIGO2 haploinsufficiency is responsible for the men -
tal handicap of our patient, providing further arguments for the role of 
AMIGO2 in mental development. Our findings support the hypothesis 
that the haploinsufficiency of AMIGO2 is probably responsible for the 
mental handicap of our patient. Characterization of additional patients 
with intragenic mutations of this gene will help advance our under -
standing of its involvement in mental retardation.
P02.179  Stuve- Wiedemann: a newly confirmed case in a 
chilean infant 
M. I. Aracena1, A. Superti-Furga2, V. Cormier Daire3, N. Dagoneau3, J. Kattan4, 
T. P. Solís5, G. Córdova6;  
1Departamento Pediatría Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile - Genética 
H. Luis Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, Chile, 2Chair, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 3Departement de Genetique Unite 
de Genetique Clinique Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Departamento 
de Pediatría- Unidad Neonatología Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile, 5Residente Neonatología Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
Chile, Santiago, Chile, 6Unidad de Cuidados Intensivo Pediátrico- Hospital 
Clínico Pontifica Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
Introduction: Stuve- Wiedemann syndrome (STWS) is a rare autoso -
mal recessive disorder characterized by a congenital bone dysplasia 
and autonomous dysregulation, frequently associated with early death. 
It was described by Stuve and Wiedemann in 1971. In 2004 Dagoneau 
et al. identified mutations in the leukaemia inhibitory factor receptor 
(LIFR ) gene. We describe a Chilean infant whose diagnosis and con -
firmation was done with the cooperation of the Skeldys network.
Case Report: first daughter of consanguineous parents. Prenatal ul -
trasound showed long bones <p5. BW: 3140g, BL: 46cm, CC:33.3cm. 
She developed severe respiratory distress at birth requiring mechani -
cal ventilation for 10 days.
Physical examination showed a normocephalic newborn, with rhizo -
melic shortening of the limbs, slightly bowed legs. She had a round 
face with low nasal bridge, high palate, short neck, and overlapping fin -
gers. Intraoral reflexes were diminished, with absent corneal reflexes, 
and normal patellar reflexes. She was unable to swallow requiring a 
gastrostomy. She has presented frequent hyperthermic episodes ac -
companied by dehydration, sweating, respiratory distress and poor Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
perfusion. Infectious screening have been repeatedly negative. Now 
she is 7m old and despite several hospitalizations, growth develop -
ment is adequate to her age.
Skeletal survey showed mild osteopenia, irregular metaphysis, short -
ening and bowing of femur and tibia. Molecular study confirmed a LIFR  
mutation present at the homozygote state.
We stress the importance of sharing the history and radiological stud -
ies of patients with a suspected though infrequent skeletal dysplasia in 
the skeldys group. This permitted to achieve a prompt and confirmed 
diagnosis in this case.
P02.180  RARE SUBMICROSCOPIC REARRANGEMENTS
E. Gean1, I. Plensa1, C. Garrido2, V. Catala2, M. Pineda1, J. Campistol1;  
1Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain, 2Prenatal Genetics, 
Barcelona, Spain.
Submicroscopic rearrangements involving chromosome ends are 
responsible for the unexplained mental retardation and multiple con -
genital anomalies observed in some patients. These results provide a 
new and useful tool to inform families and for genetic counselling. We 
present three families with a cryptic reciprocal translocation, detected 
using subtelomere specific FISH probes, where proband inherited an 
unbalanced segregant from the mother.
Case 1. A 9-years-old girl, affected of severe mental retardation, dys -
morphic face and malocclusion of teeth, strabismus, seizures and joint 
laxity. MR show hypoplasia of corpus callosum, periventricular hetero -
topia and white matter alteration. Patient has a monosomy 6qtel and 
a trisomy 15qtel inherited from her mother. A healthy brother also has 
the same mother’s balanced translocation.
Case 2. A 5-year-old boy with severe mental retardation, dysmorphic 
face and velopalatine insufficiency, hypospadias and seizures. Patient 
has a monosomy 17qtel and trisomy 19qtel inherited from his mother.
Case 3. A 5-year-old girl was referred to us because the cytogenetic 
blood analysis showed an extra material on the short arms of chro -
mosome 8; Karyotype: 46,XX, add(8)(p22). Proband presents severe 
mental retardation and dysmorphic features. FISH study shows mono -
somy 8ptel and trisomy 4ptel inherited from her mother.
To our knowledge there are no other cases described in the literature 
with the same subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements. We discuss 
genetic counselling aspects and patients evolution.
P02.181  Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects 
(TODPD): follow-up of the first reported family, characterization 
of the radiological phenotype, and refinement of the linkage 
region.
N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2,3, R. Lachman4, P. Piccolo1, A. Cardinale1, K. Lee4, S. M. 
Leal2, I. Van Den Veyver2, C. A. Bacino2;  
1Telethon Insitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Department of 
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 
4Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, David Geffen School 
of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects (TODPD) is an X-
linked dominant syndrome with distal limb anomalies and pigmentary 
skin defects. We have previously described this syndrome in several 
females from a large, four-generation pedigree. The presentation in 
the affected patients included multiple anomalies, hypertelorism, iris 
colobomas, punched-out pigmentary abnormalities over the face and 
scalp, brachydactyly, and digital fibromatosis. The phenotype was 
highly variable thus suggesting that X-inactivation plays an important 
role in the expression of the disease. Following our initial description 
of this condition there have been reports of more cases supporting the 
initial phenotypic description of this disease. We report the follow-up of 
this family at about 10 years from the first evaluation. A detailed clinical 
follow-up and a review of the skeletal surveys suggests that although 
the most striking features involves the hands and feet, the skeletal 
involvement is more generalized and affects many other areas.
Our previous linkage analysis has demonstrated mapping to Xq27.3-
Xq28. Using a 6,056 SNP array, we have further refined the critical 
region within the Xq28 region. We have also excluded two candidate 
genes ( FLNA  and FAM58A ) mapping in the critical region. The identifi -
cation of the gene responsible for this rare condition will shed light on 
the molecular pathways leading to the various congenital anomalies 
of TODPD and will allow a more accurate genetic counseling to the affected individuals.
P02.182  Tetraploid/diploid mosaicism - An easily overlooked 
cause of dysmorphism
S. Berland , G. Houge;  
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Chromosomal mosaicism not detectable in blood lymphocyte meta -
phases is an easily overlooked cause of dysmorphism. We present 
a boy with tetraploid/diploid mosaicism, a type of mosaicism that also 
remains undetectable upon DNA diagnostic screening on genomic mi -
croarrays. Clinical suspicion of the mosaicism is therefore essential.
The boy is mentally retarded (walked at age 2 years, no oral language 
at age 4,5 years, normal behaviour) with distinctive dysmorphic fea -
tures: Triangular face, marked hypertelorism, short/downslanting pal -
pebral fissures, posteriorly rotated simple ears with narrow auditory 
channels, short neck, asymmetric thorax and one café-au-lait spot. He 
also suffers from early loss of all deciduous incisors due to aggressive 
periodontitis. Height, weight and head circumference are in the low 
normal range (2.5-10 centile).
In this case, despite normal blood karyotype 46,XY and normal HR-
CGH, a chromosomal mosaicism was suspected because of a „chro -
mosomal appearance“ and slight asymmetry. Fibroblast culture from 
a skin biopsy revealed non-mosaic tetraploidy (92,XXYY) which was 
confirmed with interphase FISH. In contrast, FISH investigation of pe -
ripheral blood leukocytes and buccal cells did not show signs of tetra -
ploidy. As expected, a haplotype study of DNA from both parents and 
the boy’s fibroblasts indicated that the tetraploidy resulted from mitotic 
slippage or failed cytokinesis during early embryonic development.
P02.183  The simultaneous presence of α and β thalassaemia 
alleles: a pitfall for thalassaemia screening
A. Balassopoulou, E. Boutou , E. Delaki, K. Sinopoulou, M. Papadakis, E. 
Voskaridou;  
Thalassaemia Center, Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Haemoglobinopathies are a group of monogenic disorders character -
ized by reduction of one or more globin chain synthesis or a structur -
ally abnormal globin chain synthesis. Accurate determination of carrier 
haematological phenotype is quite useful in order to determine the 
underlying carrier genotype. Although haemoglobin disorders are the 
best studied (mainly for α- and β-thalassemias), autosomal genetic 
disorders and haematological phenotypes are not always well correlat -
ed with specific gene mutations. The co-existence of different types of 
mutations in thalassemia genes alter typical heamatological patterns 
and can lead to genotype / prenatal misdiagnosis, especially in cases 
of ‘silent’ carriers.
In this poster we present distinct combinations of co-inheritance of al -
pha, beta and delta thalassemias (alpha and beta, alpha and delta, 
beta and delta) and how these combinations alter the haematological 
data. Furthermore we suggest more extended genotype analysis ap -
proach especially for couples where prenatal diagnosis is needed. In 
countries like Greece, where α - and β - thalassemia traits are quite 
high, additional care must be given in β-thalasemia carriers who could 
possibly carry a ‘well hidden’ α-thalassemia severe mutation. Even in 
cases where amelioration of erythrocyte indices (MCV, MCH) is ob -
served, MCH is not always modified. In couples where one partner 
seems to be an α-thalassemia carrier and the other a β- thalassemia 
carrier, in the latter, HbA2 is not practically altered when an a-thal -
assaemia trait co-exists. In such cases, simultaneous analysis of both 
genes mutations should be carried out in order to achieve safer prena -
tal diagnosis and more effective/accurate genetic counselling.
P02.184  Townes-Brocks syndrome: report of a first case of 
townes-Brocks syndrome with congenital adrenal hyperplasia
B. Bozorgmehr , A. Kariminejad, F. Afroozan, M. Kariminejad, N. Faramarzi 
Garous;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Genetics Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) characterized by imperforated anus 
(82%), dysplastic ears (88%) (over folded superior helices and pre -
auricular tags) frequently associated with sensorineural and/or con -
ductive hearing impairment (65%), and thumb malformations (89%) 
(triphalangeal thumbs, duplication of the thumb, preaxial polydactyly 
and rarely hypoplasia of the thumb.
Renal impairment (27%), including end-stage renal disease (ESRD) Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology
(42%), may occur with or without structural abnormalities (mild mal -
rotation, ectopia, horseshoe kidney, renal hypoplasia, polycystic kid -
neys, vesicoutereral reflux). Congenital heart disease occurs in 25%, 
genitourinary malformations (36%). Mental retardation occurs in ap -
proximately 10% of cases. It is autosomal dominant disease with vari -
ability in the severity of expression.
We are reporting a 8 year girl with dysplastic ears, deafness, dysplas -
tic thumbs, small kidneys, history of repaired imperforated anus, and 
rectovaginal fistula. She is also diagnosed with congenital adrenal hy -
perplasia with congenital hyperplasia. We believe our patient is the 
first case of Townes-Brocks syndrome.
P02.185  Imperforate anus, ear and renal anomalies: is the 
townes-Brocks syndrome possible?
C. Daescu1,2, I. Maris1,2, I. Simedrea1,2, A. Craciun1,2, C. Duncescu2, M. Puiu1,2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 
2“Louis Turcanu“ Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction: Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) is characterized by the 
triad of imperforate anus (82%), dysplastic ears (88%) and thumb mal -
formations (89%). Renal impairment (27%) may occur with or without 
structural abnormalities. Material and method: The authors describe 
the case of a new-born male referred to our hospital for the proper 
surgical treatment of a life-threatening anomaly: imperforate anus. Re -
sults: The physical revealed right facial nerve paralysis, microtia, and 
preauricular pit, while the cerebral MRI concluded that the external au -
ditory canal and the middle ear were absent, but with preserved inner 
ear structures. We also performed several other imaging studies: the 
abdominal ultrasound suggested crossed fused renal ectopia and the 
abdominal MRI confirmed these findings; vesico-uretheral reflux and 
renal scaring on the ectopic kidney were found on voiding cystography 
and scintigraphy scan, respectively; the cardiac ultrasound revealed a 
ventricular septal defect. Corroborating the obtained data with and the 
international experience, we included our case in the TBS phenotype. 
Initially a left colostomy was performed immediately after birth, fol -
lowed at 8 months of age by a posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (Pena 
procedure) and the nephrectomy of the ectopic kidney. The latter was 
performed in an Austrian hospital. The patient had multiple urinary tract 
infections, which stopped after the second intervention. Conclusions: 
Genetic testing should be performed (muttation in the SALL1 gene) to 
avoid confusion due to the absence of thumb malformations.
P02.186  A report of a familial translocation with different clinical 
manifestaion
F. Mortezapour , M. Rahnama, F. Taleb Manochehri, F. Nasiri kenari, F. 
Razazian, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We are reporting a baby boy with abnormal phenotype who is a carrier 
of an apparently balanced translocation between chromosome 16 and 
20. He is the second child of an unrelated couple. The first child shortly 
after birth was dead due to respiratory infection and being premature. 
This proband was delivered at 32 weeks of gestation. His birth weight 
was 1/75 kg. He had low set ears, hydrocephaly, undetected testis, 
cleft plate, and abnormal hands and feet. He was also dead because 
of respiratory infection. The karyotype of the baby found to be 46, XY,tr
(16;20)(q11.2;p13)mat. Since there are 2 cases of still birth in this fam -
ily with familial translocation we think it is worth to report that.
Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 sup -
plemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding was 
Performed in all subject.
P02.187  A case of triploidy (69,XXX) with long survival time
J. Y. Kotalevskaya1, N. V. Oparina1,2, A. A. Medvedeva3, A. Y. Asanov4, N. S. 
Demikova5, V. G. Antonenko1;  
1Vladimirsky Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Scientific Center of Medical Genetics, Russian Federation, 
3Korolev Maternity Hospital, Korolev, Russian Federation, 4Moscow Medical 
Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Research Institute of Pediatrics and 
Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The liveborn infants with triploidy is a very rare event and death usu -
ally occurs within the first hours of life. Triploid cases with a survival 
of more than two months are infrequent. We report on a liveborn trip -
loid female, born after 36-37 weeks of gestation and who survived 67 
days. Chromosomal analysis demonstrated a 69,XXX karyotype with no evidence of mosaicism. The clinical features are growth retarda -
tion, prominent occiput, open anterior and posterior fontanelles, tele -
canthus, short and asymmetric palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, 
large nose, deep filter, high and narrow palate, microgenia, deformed 
low set ears, abnormal length all fingers, abnormal dermatoglyphics, 
long narrow feet, chest deformation, skin grooves in lumbar region, 
ventricular septum defect and open arterial duct. The placenta was 
small and noncystic. The proband died of cardiac arrest.
P02.188  Partial trisomy of chromosome 18q21 in a woman led to 
a full trisomy of chromosome 18 in a fatal embryo
S. N. Kokkinou , A. Lindou;  
Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Halandri, Greece.
Introduction: Trisomy18 syndrome,is one of the most common autoso -
mal anomalies.Different candidate critical regions have been proposed 
for Edwards syndrome extended from proximal 18q12 to distal 18q21.
Aim of the study: We report a woman with partial trisomy 18q21 who 
had 3 early abortions in embryos with full trisomy of #18.
Patients: In March 2008 a couple was transferred to Cytogenetic unit 
because of a history of 3 early abortions with the embryos having tri -
somy 18.The husband had a normal phenotype,while the woman 30yr 
old, had short neck,a finding that was also had her mother who refused 
a chromosomal analysis.
Methods: Peripheral blood lymphocytes were cultured using standard 
techniques.Thirty GTG banded metaphases were analyzed(ISCN2005). 
FISH was done with the 18SE centromeric probe(KREATECH) and 
LSI MALT1(18q21),which identifies #18 aneuploidy(VYSIS).
Cohybridization was done with Telvysion13q(so)/Telvysion 21q(sg).
Two hundred interface nuclei were counted for any single probe in 
both partners.
RESULTS: The husband had normal results (karyotype/FISH).
The wife had 2 abnormal karyotypic cells and with FISH 10% of her 
cells were trisomic for 18q21region.
Conclusion: Pure partial duplication of #18 is a very rare syndrome.
In our case it is important that a mother with a partial trisomy of 18q21 
critical region aborted 3 embryos with full trisomy #18.
Reports suggest that the critical regions 18q11 and 18q21 are impli -
cated in the etiology of the +18 syndrome and the risk of such interac -
tion errors increase with advance parental age and can happen during 
the division of reproductive cells in the carrier parent.
P02.189  TSC2-PKD1 gene deletion related to Tuberous Sclerosis and Polycystic Kidney Disease symptoms
C. Vidales1, I. Zubillaga1, R. Simon2, A. Jauch3, P. Kozlowski4, E. Dominguez5;  
1Molecular Genetic Unit, Policlinica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain, 2Servicio 
de Neurología, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Human 
Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Institute 
of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
5Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics and Biotechnology, Center for Biomedical 
Research (CIBIR), Logroño, Spain.
Tuberous Sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by 
mutations in TSC1/TSC2 genes. Both are tumour suppressor genes 
and encode the hamartin (TSC1) and tuberin (TSC2) proteins.
Variable penetrance and a wide clinical spectrum are hallmarks of TS. 
Genotype-phenotype correlation studies have shown that TSC2 muta -
tions are associated with a more severe phenotype than those found in 
TSC1. In some cases this affirmation is biased by the presence of al -
terations that compromise both TSC2 and PKD1. PKD1 is responsible 
for the Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) and 
is located adjacent to TSC2 in tail to tail orientation.
We present here two unrelated patients with no family history of TS and 
negative for small-mutation screening in TSC1/TSC2. Clinical criteria 
of patient 1 (3 years) are: Hypomelanotic macules, cardiac rhabdo -
myoma, renal cysts, cortical tubers and retinal hamartoma. Clinical cri -
teria of patient 2 (22 years) are: Angiofibromas, cardiac rhabdomyoma, 
renal cysts and cortical tubers.Using MLPA assays, we found a hetero -
zygous deletion encompassing both TSC2 and PKD1 genes in both 
patients. Patient 1: The deletion encompasses TSC2 E30-E41 and en -
tire PKD1; Patient 2: The deletion encompasses the entire TSC2 and 
PKD1. Both patients have major criteria of TS and renal cysts which is 
concordant with TSC2/PKD1 contiguous gene syndrome. We propose 
that MLPA analysis of the TSC2-PKD1 region should be considered as 
preliminary screening in patients with PKD and TS criteria.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology100
P02.190  Unusual presentation of tuberous sclerosis complex in 
neonatal period
E. Sukarova-Angelovska , M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, S. Krstevska;  
Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Tuberous sclerosis is severe autosomal dominant hamartosis that af -
fects various organs and systems, predominantly skin and CNS. Most 
of the symptoms appear later during infancy, such as seizures, skin 
and bone lesions, as well as mental retardation. Early diagnosis in 
neonatal period is difficult and can be established if variable dysmor -
phic features are present.
We report on a male newborn with major facial and body anomalies. 
It is the third child in a family without the history of chronic diseases. 
The pregnancy and delivery was normal, with high birthweight. The 
baby had hemihypertrophy of the whole left side - the body and face, 
especially the left arm which was immobile. The hands and feet were 
big, rough with loose redundant skin. The fingers especially on the 
left hand were large and inflexible. There is a vascular patchy skar-
like lesion on the left hemithorax. Ultrasonography of the heart con -
firmed rhabdomiomas.KTM of the brain was performed at the age of 
2.5 months when seizures started, showing existence of tumors inside 
the third ventricle and one in frontal lobe.
The phenotype of TS in early infancy is variable -from no sign to full 
blown clinical presentation with hemihypertrophy and skin lesions. 
The combination of signs of tuberous sclerosis with big rough hands 
is rather unusual, and can be confused with Proteus syndrome at early 
age. There are reports of enlargement of a single finger, however this 
patient have both hands and almost all fingers enlarged. Molecular 
diagnosis is needed to establish the diagnosis.
P02.191  Germinal Paternal Downstream of SHOX  
Deletion Associated with Post-zygotic mosaic maternal X-
chromosome Loss Leading to Nullizygote Langer mesomelic 
Dychondrogenesis: implications for Disease mechanisms and Genetic counseling
O. Reish1,2, C. Huber3, G. Altarescu4, D. Chapman-Shimshoni1, E. Levy-Lahad4, 
P. Renbaum4, M. Mashevich1, A. Munnich3, V. Cormier-Daire3;  
1Assaf Harofeh, Zerifin, Israel, 2The Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3INSERM U781 and Département de Génétique, 
Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 
4Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
Mutations or deletions in the SHOX gene lead to Langer mesomelic 
dysplasia (LMD) when present in homozygous form. A new class of 
deletions was defined recently 30-250 kb downstream of SHOX  and 
shown to display enhancer activity to the SHOX  promoter. In a female 
with LMD stigmata, monosomy for X-chromosome was estimated at 
31% of her lymphocytes. Further molecular studies included the segre -
gation of 17 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers and STRs flank -
ing and including the SHOX locus, spanning 328 kb of PAR1 region. A 
deletion up to 10 kb residing 197 kb downstream of SHOX  gene was 
detected, which was germinally transmitted from her clinically unaf -
fected father. This was associated with post-zygotic reduction to nul -
lizygosity of disease-causing region due to mosaic loss of the normal 
maternal X-chromosome, as shown by fluorescent fragment analysis. 
Since most cases of LMD with deleted downstream of SHOX gene 
are associated with double heterozygosity for SHOX  mutation, further 
studies are required to elucidate the role of the former region in dis -
ease etiology. Mutations should be sought in clinically non-affected 
family related members due to variable expressivity in hemizygous 
carriers, and cytogenetic evaluation should be considered to detect 
possible X-chromosome rearrangements underlying the haploinsuffi -
ciency for the PAR1, when deletion is detected by molecular analysis. 
Similarly, when LMD stigmata occur in a Turner‘s syndrome patient, 
the possibility of mutations in SHOX  and the downstream of SHOX  
gene should be explored.
P02.192  Further evidence of genetic homogeneity in Urofacial 
(Ochoa) syndrome 
M. Ercan1, E. Uz2, S. Akman3, S. Yücel4, N. A Akarsu2;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Akdeniz University 
School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Gene Mapping Laboratory, Department 
of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, 
3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, 
Antalya, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Urology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey.
The urofacial syndrome (OCHOA; OMIM 236730), is a rare autosomal 
recessive disease characterized by facial abnormalities, and uropathy. 
The patients with urofacial syndrome have paradoxical inversion of 
facial musculature during smile as crying facies and at the same time 
they present enuresis with neurogenic bladder. This disorder was previ -
ously mapped to 10q23-q24 region and no locus heterogeneity has yet 
been reported. In this study, we report genetic analysis results of a new 
consanguineous family with six offspring, four of whom were affected. 
The index case was a 16-year-old girl with an end-stage renal failure 
for the last three years. She was under continuous ambulatory periton 
dialysis. In the medical history, there was recurrent urinary infections, 
incontinence and enuresis. An appearance of crying face during smil -
ing was noticed. Voiding cystouretrogram of the index case showed a 
trabeculated, diverticuled and low capacity bladder and left high-grade 
vesicoureteral reflux. In addition, there was bilateral grade 4-5 hydro -
nephrosis in her renal ultrasound. She had five siblings. Three of them 
had similiar medical history and clinical findings. Their mental status 
and other examination findings were normal. Homozygosity analysis 
using 250K Affymetrix SNP array (NspI digestion) revealed a single 
long homozygote segment of 10Mb in size spanned between 94-104 
megabases on chromosome 10q23-q24. The results of this study fur -
ther support the hypothesis that the same gene on 10q was respon -
sible for all UFS patients from multiple ethnic groups.
P02.193  22q11 deletion screening in patients with palatal 
abnormalities and suspicion of Velocardiofacial syndrome: 
preliminary results.
T. P. Vieira, I. C. Sgardioli, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes ;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas, Campinas - SP, 
Brazil.
Velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) is the most common syndrome as -
sociated with cleft palate and occurs in approximately 1 in 4000 live 
births. It is caused by a sub-microscopic deletion at 22q11.2, and the 
main characteristics include congenital cardiac defects, characteristic 
facial dysmorphic features, hypocalcemia, learning disabilities, de -
velopmental delays and palatal abnormalities. The palatal abnormali -
ties occur in approximately 70% of the cases and include cleft palate, 
submucous cleft palate and velopharyngeal insufficiency. Delayed di -
agnosis of VCFS is a significant health problem and valid criteria for 
testing are needed. The aim of this study is to screen 22q11 deletion 
in patients with palatal abnormalities and clinical suspicion of VCFS. 
After specific evaluation by a clinical geneticist, 52 patients were se -
lected. We used the SALSA P250 MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent 
Probe Amplification) kit and followed the manufacturer’s instructions. 
The MLPA results have been confirmed by FISH. We detected 22q11 
deletion in 18 patients and a duplication 8p in one patient without 
22q11 deletion. Until now, we detected genomic imbalances in 19 of 
52 patients (37%). Previous studies that screened 22q11 deletion in 
patients with palatal abnormalities, without clinical genetics evaluation 
and specific criteria for patients’ selection, found a very low detection 
rate (0-5%) and concluded that a routine screening for individuals with 
an isolated palatal anomaly may not be required. Here we demon -
strated that the screening for 22q11 deletion in patients with palatal 
abnormalities, after specific evaluation by a clinical geneticist, could 
be more feasible, improving the detection rate. Financial support: 
Fapesp, cNPq, capes.
P02.194  Locus heterogeneity in hyperkeratosis-deafness 
syndrome
A. R. Janecke1, R. Strohal2, P. M. Kroisel3;  
1Department of Pediatrics II, and division of Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, 
Austria, 2Division of Dermatology, LKH Feldkirch, Feldkirch, Austria, 3Institute of 
Human Genetics, Graz, Austria.
Hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas (PPK) are a clinically and ge -
netically heterogeneous group of diseases, which share impaired epi -
dermal differentiation. A particular syndromic form of PPK, PPK with 
deafness, was first reported in a father and his daughter by Vohwinkel 
in 1929 (Vohwinkel syndrome). A small number of cases have been 
described subsequently and most molecularly studied patients were 
found to carry distinct, heterozygous missense mutation in the GJB2 
gene encoding connexin 26. We diagnosed severe PPK associated 
with congenital deafness in a male and a female patient, who were 4th Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology101
degree cousins from one family. GJB2 mutation analysis and haplo -
type analysis excluded disease-causing mutations in this gene. A SNP 
array-based genome scan identified a 4-Mb region on 15q26 segregat -
ing with the disease under the hypothesis of autosomal recessive in -
heritance. We are currently recruiting further patients and families with 
PPK associated with deafness without GJB2 gene mutations in order 
to identify a gene for this condition using linkage analysis and second 
generation sequencing of a minimal candidate region.
P02.195  A girl with growth retardation , mental deficiency and 
unusual face
R. Tincheva ;  
University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria.
We present a 5 year old girl from first uneventful pregnancy and de -
livery. She was born in 34 gw with birth weight 2000g and birth lenght 
40cm. The parents are young, without consanguinity. The child is men -
taly and physicaly retarded since early infancy. At the age of 5 her 
lenght is 96 cm ( SDS -2.9 ). The face is dysmorphic- dolichocephaly, 
short nose, high arched palate, long filtrum, hypertelorism, , short and 
downslanting palpebral fissures,epicantus, low placed ears, mild hy -
pertrichosis over the limbs and dorsum. Investigations including GH 
level, thyroid hormones, EMG, MRI and chromosomal analysis are 
normal.
Our patient has facial features similar with the children, described by 
Wiedemann(1989) and Steiner(2000).
P02.196  thorough evaluation of the cardiovascular system in a 
large cohort of patients with Williams syndrome
M. Del Campo1, I. Barber2, L. Lara Moctezuma3, P. Betrián4, C. Aso Puértolas2, 
G. Enríquez Cívicos2, J. Nieto Rey3, J. Cantos1, L. A. Pérez Jurado5;  
1Genetics, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Pediatric Radiology, 
Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Vall 
d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Pediatric Cardiology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain, 5Genetics, Department of Experimental Science, Universitat 
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Williams syndrome (WS) is a complex developmental disorder charac -
terized by congenital cardiovascular disease, dysmorphic facies, men -
tal retardation and infantile hypercalcemia. WS is due to microdeletion 
of chromosome 7q11.23 involving elastin gene and 25 others. Cardiac 
involvement with supravalvar aortic stenosis (SVAS) and supravalvar 
(SVPS) or peripheral pulmonic stenosis (PPS) and even mitral valve 
prolapse or incompetence (MVP or I) are well known complications 
that require intervention, often in childhood. However, and even in 
the absence of these lesions, high blood pressure (HBP) is seen in 
50% of patients, and often appears at a young age, and goes often 
underdiagnosed in our experience. The cause of the hypertension is 
largely unknown, “essential” in most cases, and renal artery stenoses 
are rare. The central vasculature, including the supraaortic, thoracic 
and abdominal branches of the aorta have not been extensively ex -
plored, and how the progressive thickening of the vessel walls and 
consequent stenoses of the lumens relate to the development of hy -
pertension is uncertain.
We have evaluated with 24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring a 
cohort of WS patients, and are currently examining the anatomy and 
function of the heart and vessels with several techniques. The follow -
ing table illustrates the great frequency of HBP, the variety and consis -
tency of the cardiovascular findings, and the need for monitoring and 
intervention in these patients.Normal Abnormal Major findings Observations
Blood pressure  
ABPm  
(41)12HBP 18  
BP>75% 11Loss of  
nocturnal dip 24  
Elevated systolic 
BP 25Most undiagnosed
Echocardiogram 
(44)13 31SVAS 19  
PPS 6  
MVP or I 10  
Surgery 4Coarctation of the 
aorta is seen in 4 
cases
Doppler 
ultrasound  
(27)13 14Aortic narrowing, 
accelerated flows 
in carotid, renal, 
abdominal branchesExcellent screening 
tool
Angio ct  
(15)1total 14  
thoracic 7  
abdominal 
13Midaortic diffuse 
narrowing  
Stenoses of the 
celiac and superior 
mesenteric  
No renal stenosesDefines the extent 
of the narrowings  
Diffuse involvement
P02.197  Phenotypic variability in children with Williams 
syndrome
M. Budisteanu1,2, S. Chirieac2, A. Arghir2, A. Tutulan-Cunita2, C. Burloiu1, C. 
Iliescu1, I. Minciu1, D. Craiu1, S. Magureanu1, A. Lungeanu2;  
1Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry „Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia“, Bucharest, Romania, 
2“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania.
Objective: We present our research regarding the variability of the 
clinical features of children with Williams syndrome (WS).
Material and methods: 10 patients with clinical suspicion of WS admit -
ted to our Department in the last 3 years were included in this study. 
All children were evaluated by clinical (dysmorphological, neurologi -
cal, psychological evaluations) and paraclinical (blood tests, echocar -
diography, neuroimaging studies) examinations. Cytogenetic studies 
- karyotype and FISH for 7q11.23 - were performed, confirming the 
diagnosis.
Results: Our patients (6 boys and 4 girls, age ranging from 6 months 
to 15 years) showed a clinical phenotype suggestive for WS: distinc -
tive facial dysmorphic features, motor developmental delay with an 
average walk age of 24 months, failure to thrive, hyperacusis. Nine 
children had moderate mental retardation, and one child had severe 
mental retardation associated with congenital cerebral malformation 
and infantile spams. Almost all children (8 out of 10) had speech delay, 
with first spoken words at a mean age of 36 months. Four patients pre -
sented cardiovascular problems, and one child had pyloric stenosis. 
Visuospacial disorientation was present in all tested children. Hyper -
calcaemia was noted in 4 children, all under the age of 3.
Conclusions: There was a phenotypic variability among our patients, 
especially regarding walk and speech age. Atypically, the majority of 
our patients had speech delay. Only 4 children had cardiovascular 
problems. A particular case was that of the child who associated cere -
bral malformation and infantile spasms.
Acknowledgements: CNCSIS project 1203, PN 09.33.02.03
P02.198  High frequency of autistic traits in Williams-Beuren 
patients.
C. A. Kim1, F. B. Assumpção Junior2, R. S. Honjo1, R. L. Dutra1, V. A. S. 
Amaral1, H. K. Oh3, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. Albano1, M. M. Nunes1;  
1Unidade de Genética, ICr/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Departamento de 
Psicologia,USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 3College of Alternative Medicine, Jeonju, 
Korea, Republic of.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is characterized by elfin facies, 
congenital heart disease (supravalvar aortic stenosis), mental retarda -
tion and peculiar hyper sociable behavior. It is caused by microdeletion 
of 1.5 to 1.8Mb in 7q.11.23 region.
We studied 31 WBS patients (20 M and 12 F) and their age ranged 
from 9 to 26 years (median 14y). The diagnosis of WBS was confirmed 
by FISH, MLPA or micro satellite markers analysis in all patients.
The objectives were to evaluate cognitive ability, the execution IQ, 
verbal and total, the frequency of visual-spatial deficits and autistic 
traits. The tests used were: WISC-III, WAIS-III, Rey Complex Figure 
and scale of autistic traits (ATA).
All patients had cognitive impairment in all tests, the total IQ ranged 
from 51 to 86 (median 63): 22 with mild mental retardation, 4 moder -Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology102
ate, 4 borderline and 1 on average lower. All patients had marked vi -
sual-spatial deficit. The frequency of autistic traits were found in 13/31 
patients (41.94%) with predominance in males (10M: 3F). No correla -
tion was found between the size of the deletion and the presence or 
absence of autism.
Our study reinforces the importance of the systematic assessment of 
the cognitive function in WBS patients and alert for the presence of a 
high frequency of autistic traits, opposite of overfriendliness personal -
ity typically found in WBS patients. These latter data are preliminary 
and further studies are necessary to confirm this specific finding in 
WBS. (FAPESP)
P02.199  Recurrent achalasia in a child with Williams-Beuren 
syndrome
N. Pereza1, I. Barbarić2, N. Čače3, S. Ostojić1, M. Kapović1, V. Ahel3;  
1Department of biology and medical genetics, School of medicine, University 
of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 2Department of Gastroenterology and nephrology, 
Clinics for children‘s diseases, Clinical hospital centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 
3Department of Cardiopulmology, Clinics for children‘s diseases, Clinical 
hospital centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
Williams syndrome is a multysistem genetic disorder caused by the 
1.6Mb hemizygous deletion involving the elastin gene in the region 
q11.23 of chromosome 7. The phenotype of Williams syndrome is ex -
tremelly variable but the most common findings include cardiovascu -
lar disease, distinctive facies, mental retardation, a specific congitive 
profile, endocrine abnormalities, growth retardation and connective 
tissue abnormalities. Although gastrointestinal difficulties are one of 
the most constant and prominent finding of the syndrome, including 
gastro-esophageal reflux (GER), poor suckling, vomiting, constipation, 
prolonged colic, rectal prolapse, inguinal, umbilical and hiatal hernia, 
there have been no reports of achalasia in association with Williams 
syndrome in the literature. We present the case of a boy with Williams 
syndrome, achalasia and
recurrent postoperative stenosis of the cardia. After Heller myotomy, 
the boy developed severe restenosis of the cardia with abundant ad -
hesions which repeated after every treatment, five times in periods 
shorter than one month. Eventually, he developed GER, errosive gas -
tritis and hiatal hernia which led to severe malnutrition and failure to 
thrive. Although the genetic defect causing Williams syndrome might 
not be the direct cause of achalasia we suggest that the frequent de -
velopment of severe restenosis of cardia due to tight adhesions could 
be the consequence of elastin gene haploinsufficiency and altered 
structure and function of elastic fibers in esophageal connective tissue. 
This case highlights the importance of early diagnosis of esophageal 
motor disorders in childhood which should be included in the differ -
ential diagnosis when a child with Williams syndrome presents with 
dysphagia and/or regurgitation.
P02.200  molecular analysis of Wt1 gene in patients with Frasier 
and Denys-Drash syndromes in Brazil
F. C. Soardi , M. S. Guaragna, J. G. R. de Andrade, V. M. S. Belangero, S. Z. P. 
Rigazzo, G. Guerra-Jr., A. T. Maciel-Guerra, M. P. de Mello;  
UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Mutations in WT1 gene have been identified in different syndromes, 
such as Denys-Drash (DDS) and Frasier (FS). Both DDS and FS are 
characterized by gonadal and renal abnormalities and predisposition 
to neoplasia associated with WT1 point mutations. In DDS, mutations 
act in a dominant negative way and often occur in the zinc finger region 
abolishing DNA-binding capacity and leading to sex ambiguity, diffuse 
mesangial sclerosis with chronic renal disease and high incidence of 
Wilms tumor (WT). The FS presents with dysgenic gonads, male-to-
female sex reversal in 46,XY subjects, pubertal delay in both sexes, 
nephrotic syndrome and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis leading 
to chronic renal disease and high incidence of gonadoblastoma, but 
without WT. We report the molecular investigation of WT1 gene in one 
patient with DDS and two patients with FS. Direct sequencing revealed 
the most frequent mutation in DDS, the R394W in exon 9. The two 
FS patients presented with the heterozygous mutations IVS9+4C>T 
and IVS9+5G>A, respectively. These mutations are known to affect 
the correct splicing of intron 9, causing different ratios from the normal 
2KTS(+):1KTS(-) ratio. Present results are in agreement with those 
that consider exon 8-9 as a hot spot for mutations in WT1 gene. In ad -
dition, the mutation IVS9+5G>A was identified in a female patient diag -nosed initially as having Nephrotic Syndrome. Frasier Syndrome was 
considered after finding the mutation and karyotyping as 46,XY. These 
data highlight the importance of molecular analysis as a complement 
for clinical diagnosis and genetic counseling in Nephrotic Syndrome 
associated with sexual disorders.
P02.201  A 130kb deletion in FmR2 may be the cause of 
developmental delay of one-year-old boy.
L. Samuelsson1, P. Almgren2, T. Zagoras1, E. Karrstedt1, J. Rundberg1, M. 
Stefanova1;  
1Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Krokslett Medical 
Service, Molndal, Sweden.
An unstable GCC triplet repeat responsible for folate sensitive fragile 
site FRAXE in the 5‘ untranslated region of FMR2 gene is known to 
cause X-linked mental retardation (XMR). To the best of our knowl -
edge no point mutations or deletions confined to the FMR2 gene has 
been associated with mental retardation so far as it could be expected 
in analogy to the FMR1 gene mutations.
Here we report clinical and molecular data of a one-year-old boy with a 
mild mental retardation and a de novo 130kb deletion of FMR2 gene. 
Additionally, he presented with minor dysmorphic features and anoma -
lies: up slant palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, small 
nose with a broad prominent base, long philtrum, high palate, crumpled 
ears helix, short neck, narrow shoulders, and one sided supernumer -
ary nipple. Cytogenetic analysis showed maternally inherited balanced 
Robertsonian translocation, t(13;14). Methylation studies did not find 
UPD 14. SNP array (Affymetrix 250k NspI, ) showed a 130 kb deletion 
which involves exons 2 and 3 of FMR2 gene and spans approximately 
between base pair X:147454718-147586323 (hg 18). The aberration 
and the de novo status were confirmed by MLPA analysis. The end of 
the deletion was predicted to cause a frame shift mutation, resulting 
in a premature stop-kodon and truncated protein. This suggested a 
disease-causing nature of the described FMR2 gene deletion. Future 
molecular screening studies of FMR2 gene on males with XRM may 
be appropriate and could confirm an alternative mechanism of FMR2 
associated mental retardation.
P02.202  Growth deficit and Xq chromosome deletion. Case 
report
B. M. Neamtu1,2, S. I. Iurian1,2, M. L. Neamtu1,2, B. I. Mehedintu1,2, M. Militaru3,4;  
1Lucian Blaga University, Sibiu, Romania, 2Pediatric Clinic, Sibiu, Romania, 
3Iuliu Hatieganu University, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 4Genetic Department, Cluj 
Napoca, Romania.
Aims. To present the diagnosis particularities in a child diagnosed 
with terminal deletion of Xq chromosome. The patient comes from an 
endemic area for hypothyroidism. Methods. The authors present a 3 
years old girl admitted for further investigations in context of growth 
impairment. The clinical exam has revealed: impaired nutritional sta -
tus (weight - 3 SD), short stature (-3 SD) with normal proportioned 
body, short neck, face dimorphism (elfin face, long philtrum), low in -
serted ears, legs edema, modified palmar creases, low posterior hair -
line, hypotonia, mental retardation, hyperactive behavior, motor skills 
delay and limited vocabulary. The girl was evaluated regarding feet 
lymphedema and growth impairment etiologies. We have performed 
laboratory / imagistic investigations and genetic tests. Results. The 
laboratory investigations have shown normal glucose and lipids me -
tabolism. From endocrinological point of view: normal levels for thyroid 
and adrenal gland function tests; the growth hormone and insulin-
growth factor-1 serum levels were also normal. The buccal smear for 
Barr bodies test was below normal range. The karyotype investiga -
tion has revealed Xq chromosome deletion (Xq26;qter). The parents’ 
karyotypes were normal so we consider ,,de novo” anomaly for patient. 
Conclusions. We should consider a karyotype performing for any girl 
with unexplained short stature correlated with mental disabilities. We 
should monitor the case regarding the osteoporosis evolution and the 
possibility of premature ovarian failure onset. It’s difficult to appreci -
ate the link between growth failure and mentioned genetic anomaly 
(SHOX genes responsible for growth retardation were identified on Xp 
chromosome).Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology10
P02.203  ZIC mutation analysis in five familial cases of 
heterotaxy: identification of a new mutation
E. Biamino1, E. Garelli1, N. Chiesa1, L. Sorasio1, E. F. Belligni1, A. Marinosci1, 
M. Seri2, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1;  
1University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
ZIC3 gene maps on Xq26 and encodes a zinc finger transcription 
factor involved in early stages of left-right body axis formation. Muta -
tions in this gene have been already proven to cause X-linked visceral 
heterotaxy (HTX), namely an abnormal arrangement of thoracic and 
abdominal organs often associated with complex cardiac malforma -
tions. We performed ZIC3 mutation analysis by direct sequencing in 
five familial cases of HTX. Interestingly, we identified a new mutation 
(c.1306delC) in exon 1, predicted to result in protein truncation. Spe -
cifically, the mutation was found in a male patient presenting with an 
apparently isolated complex cardiac malformation consisting in right 
atrial isomerism, single ventricle, pulmonary atresia and bilateral su -
perior vena cava. The sister and the mother of the proband, both ex -
periencing repetitive spontaneous abortions, resulted heterozygous 
for the mutation. Particularly, the autoptic examination of a 21 weeks 
male fetus conceived by the sister, revealed a right atrial isomerism, 
atrio-ventricular canal, double outlet right ventricle, severe hypopla -
sia and transposition of pulmonary artery, asplenia and dextrogastria. 
Our study further confirms the high variability of clinical phenotype in 
patients with ZIC3  mutations, varying from isolated complex cardiac 
defects to classic heterotaxy.
J02.1  Prevalence of the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes in 
Kirov area of the Russian Federation
V. V. Kadyshev , O. V. Khlebnikova, R. A. Zinchenko;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
According to the world statistics about 5 % of all newborns are born 
with those or other genetically caused defects from which on hereditary 
diseases of eyes 30 % are necessary approximately. For the purpose 
of studying of features of prevalence isolated hereditary ophthalmo -
pathology total inspection of the population of six districts of the Kirov 
region (Nemsky, Sunsky, Uninsky, Shabalinsky, Bogorodsky, Svechin -
sky). Size of the investigated population was 54607 persons. The eth -
nic structure of examined sample on 95 % was presented by Russian. 
94 patients with the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes were totally 
revealed. Research was lead according to elaborated in laboratory of 
genetic epidemiology of Research Centre for Medical Genetics of the 
Russian Academy of Medical Science the report, allowing to reveal 
and clinically to diagnose all spectrum hereditary ophthalmopatholo -
gies. Prevalence of the isolated hereditary pathology of eyes (auto -
somal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-links) in the surveyed 
districts of the Kirov region has made 1:581 the person (from 1:966 the 
person in Uninsky district to 1:273 the person in Svechinsky district). At 
inspection it has been diagnosed 26 diseases, including a isolated mi -
crophthalmia with coloboma, the ocular coloboma, a corneal endothe -
lial dystrophy, a microspherophakia, a congenital cataract, the bilateral 
optic nerve hypoplasia, a retinitis pigmentosa, Best vitelliform macular 
dystrophy, Wagner vitreoretinal degeneration , the choroideremia, a 
hereditary primary glaucoma. The etiology (DNA-analysis) and clinical 
polymorphism separate forms of a hereditary pathology of eyes were 
studied.
P03 cytogenetics
P03.001  10q24 duplication: 10 new cases identified on array-
cGH allow prenatal diagnosis and broadening the clinical 
spectrum
M. Holder-Espinasse1, J. Andrieux1, M. Gerard-Blanluet2, M. mathieu-
Dramard3, V. Cormier-daire4, A. Verloes2, A. Toutain5, G. plessis6, P. Jonveaux7, 
A. Valat1, A. Mezel1, P. Bourgeot1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1;  
1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2hôpital robert debré, Paris, France, 3hôpital 
nord, Amiens, France, 4Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 5CHU, Tours, France, 
6CHU, Caen, France, 7CHU, nancy, France.
Ectrodactyly or split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare 
condition that occurs in 1 in 8500-25000 newborns and accounts for 
around 15 % of all limb reduction defects. SHFM is clinically hetero -
geneous and can be either isolated, associated with other malforma -
tions or part of syndromic entities. This condition is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and several loci have been identi -
fied. Among them, SHFM3 has been located on 10q24 and the natu -
rally occurring Dactylaplasia  mouse is the animal model for SHFM3 in 
humans. Recently, 0.5 Mb tandem genomic duplications at chromo -
some 10q24 involving at least the DACTYLIN  gene have been found 
in SHFM3 patients. No point mutations in any of the genes residing 
within the duplicated region have been reported so far, and it is still not 
clear how this rearrangement leads to the SHFM3 phenotype. Indeed, 
complex alterations of gene regulation mechanisms that would impair 
limb morphogenesis are likely.
We report on one case of split hand-split foot malformation identified 
during pregnancy, 5 cases of typical SHFM, 3 monodactylies and 1 
femoral duplication for which array-CGH was performed on a research 
project basis on limb malformations. 10q24.31q24.32 duplication (321-
637 kb) was identified in all cases, comprising at least the DACTYLIN  
gene. All cases were isolated and non-syndromic.
To our knowledge, this is the first prenatal report of 10q24 duplication 
in SHFM, as well as the first cases of monodactylies or femoral dupli -
cation associated with this cytogenetic anomaly.
P03.002  First description of a patient with a 15q13.3 
homozygous microdeletion and epileptic encephalopathy, 
retinopathy and choreoathetosis
A. Masurel-Paulet1, J. Cuisset2, J. Andrieux2, L. Vallee2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, 
D. Sanlaville3, P. Callier1, L. Faivre1;  
1Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 2CHRU, Lille, France, 3Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, Lyon, France.
The increasing use of array-CGH allowed identification of novel micro -
deletional syndromes. Patients with 15 q13.3 microdeletions present 
with relatively consistent breakpoints at BP4 and BP5, including the 
CHRNA7  gene. The phenotypic spectrum is large, ranging from men -
tal retardation with dysmorphic features, epilepsy, neuropsychiatric 
disturbances, to absence of anomalies. We describe the first case of 
homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletion in a 6-year-old boy. Both parents 
carried heterozygous microdeletion and have mild mental retardation. 
Severe hypotonia were evidenced since birth and abnormal eye move -
ments at 3 months of life led to the diagnosis of rod-cone dystrophy. 
Pharmacoresistant epilepsy appeared at 3 years of age. At 6 years of 
age, he had mild dysmorphic features with normal OFC, poor head 
control, blindness, partial deafness, choreoathetosis responsive to 
Xenazine®, absent language and atonic seizures. Cerebral MRI only 
showed an arachnoid cyst. Metabolic screening and nerve conduc -
tion studies were normal. Although electroencephalography was not 
in favour of ceroid lipofuscinosis, a skin biopsy was performed and 
showed curvilinear-like cell inclusion bodies. Molecular and enzymatic 
assays ruled out CLN I and II. The 15q13.3 homozygous microdele -
tion was confirmed by quantitative PCR. The association of convulsive 
encephalopathy, retinopathy and choreoathetosis is unusual and sug -
gests array-CGH analysis in such cases. The severity of the reported 
clinical features argues in favour of the pathogenicity of the heterozy -
gous microdeletion.
P03.003  Further delineation of the 17p13.3 microdeletion distal 
to PAFAH1B1 : 4 additional patients
A. Delahaye1, M. Schiff2,3, J. Andrieux4, D. Sanlaville5,6, S. Passemard2,3,7, 
A. Labalme5, L. Perrin7, S. Bouquillon4, M. Elmaleh-Berges3,8, A. Aboura7, S. 
Drunat7, S. Manouvrier-Hanu9, B. Benzacken1,3,7, P. Edery5,6, A. Verloes3,7, C. 
Vincent-Delorme9;  
1Histology-Embryology & Cytogenetics Department, AP-HP - Jean Verdier 
Hospital, Paris 13 University, UFR SMBH, Bondy, France, 2Department of 
Pediatric Neurology , APHP – Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 
3Inserm, U676, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Centre 
Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille, France, 5Service de Génétique, 
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital de l’Hotel Dieu, Lyon, France, 6EA 4171, 
Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, France, 7Department of Genetics, APHP 
– Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 8Pediatric Imaging 
Department, AP-HP – Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 
9Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France.
Background: The Miller Dieker syndrome (MDS, MIM 247200) is char -
acterized by lissencephaly, mental retardation and facial dysmorphism. 
The phenotype is attributed to haploinsufficiency of two genes present 
in 17p13.3 region: PAFAH1B1  and YWHAE . Isolated PAFAH1B1  defect Cytogenetics10
causes lissencephaly. Small 17p13.3 deletions distal to PAFAH1B1  but 
including YWHAE  result in facial dysmorphisms, growth retardation, 
cognitive impairment, and variable structural abnormalities of the brain 
without lissencephaly.
Objective: We describe clinical, neuroradiological and molecular data 
on four patients with a 17p13.3 deletion distal to PAFAH1B1  involving 
YWHAE .
Results: All patients presented with mild or moderate developmental 
disorder and pre and/or post-natal growth retardation. Patients A and C 
had macrocephaly and leucoencephalopathy with Chiari type 1 malfor -
mation for patient A and with paraventricular cysts for patient C. Patient 
B had patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Patient C had unilateral club foot. Patient D had enlarged Virchow 
Robin spaces, microcornea and chorioretinal and lens coloboma. Ar -
ray-CGH revealed de novo  terminal 17p13.3 deletions for patient A 
and B, and showed interstitial 17p13.3 deletions of 1.4 Mb for patient 
C and of 0.5 Mb for patient D.
Conclusion: Our patients confirm that 17p deletion distal to PAFAH1B1  
have a distinctive phenotype: mild mental retardation, moderate to 
severe growth retardation, white matter anomalies and developmen -
tal defects including Chiari type 1 malformation and coloboma. Our 
patients contribute to the delineation and clinical characterization of 
17p13.3 deletion distal to PAFAH1B1 and highlight the role of the re -
gion containing YWHAE  in brain and eye development and in somatic 
growth.
P03.004  Genotype-phenotype delineation of terminal deletions 
18q demonstrating high phenotypic variability.
L. D. Kulikowski1,2, M. Yoshimoto3, C. M. Monma1, F. T. S. Bellucco1, S. I. N. 
Belangero1, D. M. Christofolini1, A. N. X. Pacanaro1, T. P. Vieira4, V. L. Gil-da-
Silva-Lopes5, C. A. Kim6, J. Squire3, M. A. C. Smith1, M. I. Melaragno1;  
1Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Pathology, Medical School, LIM 03, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Department of Pathology and 
Molecular Medicine, Queen‘s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 4Department 
of Medical Genetics, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil, 
5Department of Medical Genetics, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, São 
Paulo, Brazil, 6Genetics Unit, Instituto da Criança, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
Constitutive heterozygous 18q deletion is one of the most common 
segmental aneusomies compatible with life and usually leads to vari -
able phenotypes. We reevaluated ten patients with 18q deletion and 
clinical features of different degrees of severity, using molecular cyto -
genetic techniques in order to better define the genotype-phenotype 
correlations. FISH with bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) re -
vealed three different breakpoints: at 18q21.31 (3 cases), 18q21.33 (5 
cases) and 18q22.2 (2 cases), showing genomic losses of 11.3, 17.6 
and 21.7 Mb, respectively. In one of the patients, the location of the 
breakpoint was refined by array-CGH, showing absence of associated 
genomic abnormalities. Genotype-phenotype correlation demonstrat -
ed high phenotypic variability and no evidence that the severity of the 
phenotype was associated only with the size of the deletion. Genomic 
analysis showed that the deleted region of 21.7 Mb encompasses sev -
eral diploid and non-diploid genes that may be associated with differ -
ent degrees of clinical manifestations. However, the role that each of 
these genes plays in producing the specific phenotype features is still 
unknown. Molecular identification of these deleted regions and candi -
date genes may contribute to establish a predictive phenotype map, 
as well as a better understanding of the genomic complexity of 18q 
deletions. (Financial support: FAPESP, Brazil).
P03.005  De novo  deletion of 1q24.3-q31.2 in a patient with 
severe growth retardation
N. Matsumoto1, A. Nishimura1, Y. Hiraki1,2;  
1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Hiroshima Municipal Center for 
Child Health and Development, Hiroshima, Japan.
Interstitial 1q deletions have been classified into three groups: proxi -
mal deletion (1q21-22q25), intermediate (1q24-25q32), and distal 
(1q42-43qter). To our knowledge, only seven deletions have been 
characterized by molecular methods. We report a patient with 1q24.3-
q31.2 deletion, which was thoroughly analyzed by high density SNP 
array as well as junctional cloning. The proband is a 3 1/3 year-old 
boy. He was born at 35 weeks of gestation by cesarean section due to fetal distress between nonconsanguineous 39-year-old mother and 
37-year-old father. Intrauterine growth retardation was suspected at 
27 weeks of gestation. Birth length was 36 cm (-3.7SD), weight 1324 g 
(-3.8SD), and head circumference (OFC) 29 cm (-1.5SD). At age of 3 
1/3 years, his length is 65 cm (-8.5 SD), weight 5890 g (-4.5 SD), and 
OFC 41.6 cm (-5.5 SD), indicating obvious pre- and postnatal growth 
retardation. Multiple anomalies were recognized. Serum TSH, fT3, 
and fT4 were normal. IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 were low and GH stimu -
lation test by clonidine and L-DOPA indicated GH deficiency. Serum 
antithrombin III (AT III) was also at a low level. GTG-binding chromo -
some analysis of the patient’s blood lymphocytes demonstrated 46,XY, 
del(1)(q23q25),t(4;11)(q31.3;q21). Parental karyotype was all normal. 
Affymetrix GeneChip Human SNP array 6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, 
CA) clearly demonstrated 1q24.3-q31.2 deletion. Deletion junction was 
determined at nucleotide level. The translocation, t(4;11)(q31.3;q21) 
was also carefully analyzed. Genotype-phenotype correlations will be 
discussed.
P03.006  A new case of 21q interstitial deletion detected by array 
cGH.
A. Valetto1, V. Bertini1, A. Bonuccelli2, M. Taddeucci2, B. Toschi3, P. Simi1;  
1Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetic Unit, Pisa, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurology Unit, 
Pisa, Italy, 3Medical Genetic Unit, Pisa, Italy.
We describe a 9-year-old boy with proportionate short stature, micro -
cephaly and profound developmental delay. Since 1 year of age he 
presented with seizures and hearing loss. He has peculiar morpho -
logic facial features: long palpebral fissures, prominent and convex 
nasal bridge with underdeveloped alae nasi; short philtrum with thin 
upper lip and long ears. He has intermittent exotropia, no speech and 
frequent falls during walking.
We performed array CGH (Comparative Genomic Hybridization) which 
showed an interstitial deletion of chromosome 21q, encompassing 
bands 21q22.13 and 21q22.2.
This deletion was confirmed by FISH analysis.
The deletion extent is about 5 Mb, and in this region several genes 
are harboured.
The role of the potential genes in relation to the patient’s phenotype 
is discussed.
P03.007  Variable phenotype in familiar unbalanced subtelomeric 
translocation 46,XX.mlpa 17psubtel (P070)x3, 22qsubtel (P070)x1
G. Kronberger , G. Sander, O. Rittinger;  
Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Salzburg, Austria.
Background.  Screening for rearrangements of the subtelomeric region 
remains to be a valuable tool for research in idiopathic mental retarda -
tion. About 50% of unbalanced translocations are parentally inherited. 
Some subtelomeric abnormalities are not believed to be associated 
with a discernible phenotype, including dup(17p) and del(21q). We re -
port on a familiar double imbalance of these particular subtelomeric 
regions.
Case report . B.M. is the child of a couple with the history of special 
educational needs in the mother and her younger sister, and dyslexia 
in the child’s father. Her neonatal period was uneventful. Later on mo -
tor and particularly speech development were markedly delayed. At 
30 months the girl showed normal seize, brachycephaly with normal 
OFC and midface dysmorphism with square nasal tip. She was able to 
speak single words. Neuroimaging was normal.
Lab investigation . The patient and her parents underwent standard 
karyotyping and subtelomer screening using MLPA and FISH. An 
unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangement involving 17p and 21q was 
found in the patient and her mother.
Discussion.  Identification of subtelomeric imbalances is an important 
contribution in diagnosing patients with mental retardation and thereby 
enabling proper genetic counselling. In unbalanced translocations, the 
derivative chromosome most often shows both a duplication and a de -
letion. While several conditions eg monosomy 1p36 lead to a straight -
forward clinical diagnosis other chromosomal imbalances remain are 
found in which causality of the aneusomy remains questionable. Iso -
lated subtelomeric 21q deletion was reported only exceptionally, but 
subtelomer 17p duplication never before. Investigation of other family 
members might certify the genotype-phenotype association.Cytogenetics10
P03.008**  Tetralogy of Fallot due to 22q11.2 deletion not 
including TBX1
K. E. M. Diderich1, J. M. A. Verhagen1, A. C. Verkleij-Hagoort2, P. J. Poddighe1, 
L. Dubbel-Hulsman1, M. W. Wessels1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Gynaecology, Erasmus Medical 
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Conotruncal heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome are thought to 
be due to TBX1  haploinsufficiency.
We present a patient with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), bilateral embryo -
toxon posterior and learning problems, but no other features of 22q11.2 
deletion syndrome. MLPA analysis showed a small 22q11.2 distal de -
letion between Mb position 19.266-20.130, including the SNAP29 , 
CRKL , and LZTR1  genes, but not TBX1. Haploinsufficiency  of Crkl 
in mice  can cause defects of the cardiac outflow tract, whereas com -
pound heterozygosity for null mutations of the Crkl and Tbx1  genes 
results in a much greater frequency of cardiovascular defects than that 
generated by heterozygosity of Crkl or Tbx1  alone1.
This suggests that conotruncal heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion syn -
drome might be due to epistatic effects of genes in the proximal dele -
tion region ( TBX1 ) with genes in the distal deletion region ( CRKL ?). 
Furthermore, intragenic mutations in CRKL might cause conotruncal 
heart defects.
1 D. Guris et al., Dev. Cell. 10:81-92, 2006
P03.009  A unique case of three presumably unrelated 
chromosome abnormalities (47,XXY, 1p36 deletion and mosaic 
tetrasomy 12p) in a child with severe malformations showing 
necessity of several molecular cytogenetic techniques per 
diagnosis
O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, V. Y. Voinova1, Y. B. Yurov1,2, I. Y. 
Iourov1,2;  
1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, 
Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Multiple constitutional chromosome abnormalities are extremely rare 
in newborns and generally manifest either as co-occurrence of gono -
somal and autosomal aneuploidy or aneuploidy and a structural re -
arrangement. Here, we report on a unique case of a child with se -
vere malformations with three presumably unrelated chromosomal 
imbalances. After standard karyotyping by GTG banding, non-mosaic 
47,XXY karyotype (Klinefelter syndrome) was established. Since phe -
notypic manifestations were far from those of Klinefelter syndrome, we 
performed high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). 
Metaphase CGH has identified a microdeletion of 1p36.22p36.23 and 
confirmed the presence of additional chromosome X. The confirmation 
of 1p36 microdeletion was further made by 1Mb-array-CGH. In addi -
tion to deletion spanning 1p36.22p36.23 region and additional chro -
mosome X, array CGH detected partial aneuploidy involving the whole 
short arm of chromosome 12 in 24% of cells. After FISH with DNA 
probes for chromosome 12, we were able to demonstrate that it was a 
mosaic tetrasomy 12p present in 12% of cells. The boy presented with 
increased height (a feature of Klinefelter syndrome), severe mental 
retardation, developmental delay and hypotonia as well as dysmorphic 
features characteristic for both 1p36 deletion syndrome and Pallister-
Killian syndrome (mosaic isochromosome 12p). Looking through the 
available literature, we have not found cases with up to three simul -
taneous and unrelated constitutional chromosome imbalances. It is 
noteworthy that each technique applied revealed each “new” abnor -
mality. Therefore, to provide correct diagnosis, one molecular cyto -
genetic method is not enough, even though some of them (i.e. array 
CGH) provide for high-resolution genome screen.
P03.010  49,XXXXY and abnormalities in brain white matter
I. Arroyo Carrera1,2, A. López-Lafuente1, C. E. Cimadevilla Sánchez1, Y. 
Castaño Muñoz1, M. L. Martínez Fernández2,3;  
1Department of Pediatrics, San Pedro de Alcántara Hospital, Cáceres, Spain, 
2Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 
3Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations (ECEMC), Institute 
of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: 49,XXXXY is a rare sex chromosomal aneuploidy with a 
distinct phenotype and mental retardation. We present a patient with 
this karyotype and abnormalities in brain white matter.Clinical case: Male, born at term to a 38-year-old gravida 4, healthy 
and nonconsanguineous mother. No family history. Normal pregnancy 
and delivery. Apgar 8/9. Birth weight 3750 g (90th centile), length 51 cm 
(75th-90th centile), head circumference 34.5 cm (75th centile). Physical 
examination at birth: hypertelorism, flat nasal bridge, upslanting palpe -
bral fissures, low-set ears with prominent auricles, cleft palate, small 
penis and testicles inside hypoplastic scrotum. Other findings: patent 
ductus arteriosus and atrial septal defect, hypotonia, lax joints, pes ca -
vus. Outcome: developmental delay specially speech, febrile seizures, 
asthma, pneumonia, shy and friendly personality, microcephaly (head 
circumference <3rd centile at 6 ½-year-old), no short stature (length 
at 90th-97th centile at 6 ½-year-old), weight at 50th centile. Karyotype: 
49,XXXXY. Brain magnetic resonance imaging at 2 ½-year-old: multi -
ple extensive bilateral foci of hyperintensity signal in the periventricular 
and subcortical white matter, mainly in the left parietal and frontal lobes 
(T2 and Flair), enlargement of the ventricular system, asymmetrical 
brain volume loss.
Discussion: We think that our patient confirms data of the few cases 
reported in the literature with brain magnetic resonance imaging, and 
we must consider changes in cerebral white matter a specific finding 
in 49,XXXXY patients.
P03.011  7q36.1 monosomy as a result of the intrachromosomal 
rearrangement
S. Midyan1, A. Hovhannisyan1, L. Nazaryan2, C. Halgren2, N. Tommerup2;  
1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 
2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
The patient is a 1,3year-old boy with developmental delay and distinc -
tive facial features. He is the only child of healthy non-consanguineous 
parents, born at term by normal delivery after an uneventful pregnancy 
at term by normal delivery with a 2400g birth weight and length of 
45cm. The child suffered from intrauterine infection, poor feeding, al -
lergy, dermatosis and constipation. Clinical examination revealed mi -
crocephaly, flat occiput, right eye diminishing and ptosis, strabismus, 
hypospady, hollow breast, dental (incisor) anomaly, muscular hypoto -
nia, intestinal motility disorders and possible cardiac defect (suspected 
due to muffled heart sounds and systolic murmur). The patient showed 
profound psychomotor developmental delay with IQ 47.
Standard karyotype of the proband revealed a de novo intrachromo -
somal insertion in chromosome 7. Peripheral blood DNA from the pro -
band and both parents were analysed using the Affymetrix Genome-
Wide SNP Array 6.0 platform. Copy Number and Loss of Heterozy -
gosity data were generated using the Affymetrix Genotyping Consol 
4.0 software and showed a 9,8Mb deletion in 7q36 (chr7:149026058-
158812470) in the proband’s genome. This deleted region includes 
a number of genes (e.g. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), KCNH2 and NOS3 
genes) which can be involved in causing the patient’s phenotype. Par -
ticularly, minimal manifestation of the SHH gene are microcephaly, pto -
sis, sacral agenesis, tethered cord. Our patient shares some of these 
characteristics. The SNP microarray shows chromosomal imbalances 
at a high resolution; this makes it possible to pinpoint the genes af -
fected by the rearrangement and thereby link these genes to the clini -
cal manifestations in the patient.
P03.012  Association of genetic variants of ABcA1 gene with 
ciii and total cholestrol level in t ehranians with or without 
combined HDL/LDL-cholesterol Phenotype
M. Zarkesh , B. Faam, M. Daneshpour, M. Hedayati, A. Mesbah, S. Halalkhor, 
F. Azizi;  
Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for endocrine sciences Shaheed 
Beheshti University of Me, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Studies showed that plasma LDL- and HDL-cholesterol 
taken jointly provide a suitable phenotype because they comprise a 
complex trait, reliably measurable, and of considerable epidemiological 
and clinical interest. In the present study, we investigated the effects of 
the ABCA1 polymorphism on lipid related variables in Tehranian indi -
viduals with or without Combined HDL/LDL-Cholesterol Phenotype.
Method: Independent samples of normolipemic subjects from Tehran 
lipid and glucose study populations (78 male and 121 female) were se -
lected for a case-control-study (high LDL/low HDL versus low LDL/high 
HDL) with Apo B genotypes as independent factors. Total cholesterol, Cytogenetics10
triglyceride, HDL-C, LDL-C, Apo AI, Apo B, Apo AIV, Apo CIII and CRP 
concentration were measured. A segment of the mentioned gene with 
PCR was amplified and the polymorphism with RFLP (XagI) revealed.
Result: In two groups of Combined HDL/LDL-Cholesterol Phenotype 
the presence of R phenotype increase the Apo CIII concentration (R= 
159 ± 73 mg/ml vs. K = 123±44 mg/ml, P<0.042) and CRP concentra -
tion (R: 707 (1.2, 2.2) vs. K: 1070(1.9, 2.1), P<0.048) in low HDL-C 
and high LDL-C group. Also the R phenotype increase total cholesterol 
concentration (R: 174±37 mg/ml vs. K: 156±26 mg/ml P<0.042) in high 
HDL-C and low LDL-C group
Conclusion: Two groups of combined HDL/LDL-cholesterol phenotype 
can be a good predictive for analysis the interaction between theAB -
CA1 polymorphism with lipid and related variables such as apoCIII, 
CRP and cholesterol level in normolipemic subjects.
P03.013  Validation analysis of a 60K customized high resolution 
cGH-array reveal new genomic imbalances associated with well-
defined disorders
E. Vallespin , M. Palomares, P. Lapunzina, M. Mori, A. Delicado, S. Garcia-
Miñaur, E. Mansilla, F. Santiago, F. Santos, L. Fernandez, M. de Torres, J. 
Nevado;  
INGEMM-IDIPAZ-CIBERER Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Background: Submicroscopic genomic imbalances underlie well-de -
fined microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and contributes 
to general developmental disorders. Array Comparative Genomic Hy -
bridization (a-CGH) is a powerful molecular cytogenetic tool to detect 
genomic imbalances and study disease mechanism and pathogen -
esis. We report the design and validation of a focused high-resolution 
oligonucleotide-array CGH assay for clinical laboratory diagnosis of 
genomic rearrangements, referred to as KaryoArrayTM. 
Methods: We selected 60-mer oligonucleotide features from Agilent’s 
eArray_v4.0 probe library in a custom high resolution format of 8x60K. 
The average density of pathogenic regions is 7 Kb. KaryoArrayTM cov-
ers more than 350 clinically relevant regions.
Results: To evaluate the array, we blindly tested 102 samples. Ge -
nomic imbalances had previously been detected in 52 of the 102 sam -
ples by karyotyping, FISH or MLPA. The remaining 50 samples were 
sex-matched samples from healthy individuals as negative controls for 
validation. Focused array CGH detected all known abnormal regions in 
52 validation samples with more than 99% concordance and yielding 
most precise breakpoint boundaries. Interestingly, KaryoarrayTM was 
able to detect new rearrangements in 5/52 cases (9.62%) associated 
with known genetic disorders.
Discussion: This focused aCGH assay is a flexible, and robust method 
to diagnose genetic disorders associated with genomic imbalances. 
KaryoarrayTM offers advantages over currently available platforms in 
the clinical diagnostic laboratory, overcoming many of the limitations 
of conventional gold standard routine techniques for the analysis of 
genomic rearrangements. In addition, it was able to identify cryptic 
submicroscopic imbalances not previously detected with the standard 
routine techniques in 9.62% of the patients.
P03.014  Detection of pathogenic copy number variation in 
an adult population with intellectual disability and psychiatric 
disorders.
N. Baena1, M. Guitart1, E. Gabau1, A. Veraguas1, M. Viñas1, L. Armengol2, S. 
Esteba3, N. Ribas3, R. Novell3;  
1Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, SABADELL, Spain, 2Quantitative Genomic 
Medicine Laboratories, BARCELONA, Spain, 3Parc Hospitalari Martí i Julià, 
GIRONA, Spain.
Adults with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) have not been sys -
tematically addressed for genetic study. We report our experience test -
ing 94 adult patients affected by mild intellectual disability associated 
with psychiatric disorders and minor dysmorphic features, recruited as 
outpatients from Psychiatric services and referred to a clinical geneti -
cist for their evaluation. Patients had never undergone previous ge -
netic evaluation. Genetic analysis included karyotype (800 G-bands), 
specific molecular analysis to confirm the suspicion of a syndrome, 
and subtelomeric MLPA (P036 and P070 kits from MRC Holland) and 
high-resolution aCGH (Agilent 400K).
A genetic imbalance was detected in 25 cases (27%). A chromosome 
abnormality was observed in 6 cases (two deletions, two balanced 
reciprocal translocation and two derivatives). Specific analysis re -vealed five cases of fragile-X syndrome and eight cases with a mi -
crodeletion syndrome. Subtelomeric MLPA detected one case with 
del(10q)+dup(15q) and one case with del(21q)mat. aCGH helped 
further identifying pathogenic genomic imbalances in three cases 
(dup(Xp), dup(15q) and del(15q)). Additionally, aCGH identify cryp -
tic rearrangements in two cases with a chromosome abnormality: a 
dup(Yq) in a male with severe ID and an X chromosome complex rear -
rangement combined to other abnormalities in a women with moder -
ate DI. Among these patients we found impulse control disorder and 
schizophrenia as the relevant psychiatric illness. No malformations 
and medical problems but craniofacial dysmorphism were diagnosed. 
Our preliminary results show a very high prevalence of genomic imbal -
ances amongst adults with intellectual disability, psychiatric problems 
and dysmorphia.
This work was supported by a grant of FIS (PI080778).
P03.015  increased aneuploidy and abortive DNA replication 
associate with neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease
Y. B. Yurov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2;  
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
It has been repeatedly debated whether abortive DNA replication lead -
ing to gross genomic imbalances (i.e. aneuploidy or tetraploidy) is as -
sociated abnormal aging in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). This suggests 
that a relationship, if exists, between genetic or genomic instability, 
abnormal aging and neuronal death in the AD brain requires additional 
investigations. Recently, chromosome missegregation producing mo -
saic aneuploidy of whole chromosomes 21 has been discovered to 
play a role in the AD brain pathology. To get further insights into this 
phenomena in the AD brain, we have analyzed aneuploidy and abor -
tive DNA replication in neuronal cells of postmortem AD brain samples 
using molecular neurocytogenetic approaches (interphase MFISH, 
quantitative FISH, interphase MCB FISH, and FISH-based DNA repli -
cation assays). Aneuploidy was observed in 2-15% of neural cells and 
replicating DNA signals (singlet/duplet) were present in 0.4-3.7% of 
neural cells of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of the AD brain. The 
frequency of abnormal neural cells (aneuploid and abnormally replicat -
ed) affecting different chromosomes was higher in the hippocampus 
and prefrontal cortex (brain areas which are affected by the neuro -
degeneration) as to the cerebellum (brain area which is less affected 
by the neurodegeneration). According to our data, genetically instable 
and aneuploid neurons may demonstrate abortive cell cycle re-entry 
and DNA replication stress the diseased brain. These data indicate 
that somatic genome instability may be considered as the main genetic 
mechanism of neuronal death and contributes to the pathogenesis of 
AD. Supported by Philip Morris USA, Inc.
P03.016  A paternity testing showing two related females with XY 
at the amelogenin locus
N. Fathallah, M. Gribaa , D. H’mida, I. Ben Charfeddine, O. Mamaï, A. Amara, 
S. Trabelsi, I. Fkih M’hamed, A. Saad;  
Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la 
Reproduction Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia.
Amelogenin genes called AMEX and AMEY are located in chromo -
somes X (Xp22.1-Xp22.3) and Y (Yp11.2) respectively. They show a 
big homologous regions allowing simultaneous amplification with a 
same couple of primers. However, they have some differences in size 
and sequence permitting their use as a sex-typing marker, especially 
with paternity tests to define female and male samples.
We identified during a routine parentage testing two females; mother 
and daughter carrying the male and female variants of the amelogenin 
gene. This is in favor of mendelian inheritance of Y chromosome in 
the context of female persons. Haplotype analysis of X chromosome 
showed the presence of two alleles in each locus. The mechanism of 
this outcome stills unclear. One possible explication could be a gene 
conversion event occurred in the male germ line from whom the mother 
is descended. It may be also possible that an umbalanced recombina -
tion event has occurred. So that, the obtained proband’s X carries both 
X and Y chromosome copy of the amelogenin locus. More molecular 
and cytogenetics investigations should clarify this situation.Cytogenetics107
P03.017  Universal reference samples for diagnostic copy 
number variation analysis
D. E. Barton1,2, J. de Ligt3, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa3, C. Brady1,2, J. A. Veltman3;  
1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2EuroGentest Network, 
School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, University College Dublin, Dublin, 
Ireland, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, 6500HB Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Genomic microarrays are widely used in clinical laboratories to identify 
copy number variants (CNVs) throughout the human genome. CNVs 
are identified by comparing hybridization signals; sample over refer -
ence. The results are therefore affected by the choice and quality of 
the reference material (RM) used. As yet, no approved CNV RM is 
available for clinical use. Furthermore, there is a need for RMs in which 
the CNV profile has been established by several methods, to assist in 
the evaluation of existing CNV technologies and the development of 
new ones. We surveyed clinical array CGH labs and found that they 
use RMs which do not meet the criteria required for clinical diagnos -
tics. We investigated the suitability of existing FDA-approved genomic 
DNA RMs for pharmacogenetic tests, supplied by ParagonDx, for this 
purpose. Three male and three female DNAs, plus pools of male and 
female DNAs were analysed using four microarray platforms (Affyme -
trix, Agilent, Perkin Elmer and Roche Nimblegen). The performance 
of these samples was compared to pooled DNAs available from Pro -
mega, commonly used in aCGH. The use of ParagonDx DNAs as RMs 
yielded improved results compared to the Promega DNAs, based on a 
range of quality measures, for example Nexus QC (measure of noise); 
ParagonDx DNAs had an average QC of 0.022 vs. Promega 0.057. We 
conclude that the widespread use of ParagonDx DNAs may improve 
the consistency of results in clinical applications of aCGH testing. Fur -
thermore this reference set provides well-characterised samples for 
the evaluation of new CNV detection platforms and technologies.
P03.018  New tools in the cost-efficient detection of pathogenic 
chromosomal aberrations in patients with mR/mcA by array-cGH.
K. Kok , G. B. Van der Vries, M. Burger, C. M. A. Ravenswaaij-Arts, T. 
Dijkhuizen, Y. Swart, H. Zorgdrager, R. J. Sinke, B. Sikkema-Raddatz;  
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands.
Array-based comparative genomic hybridization has become an indis -
pensable tool in the hunt for submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations 
in patients with MCA/MR. The interpretation of array results is compli -
cated by the discovery of neutral copy number variants (CNVs), that 
constitute some 5 % of the genome. Thus, there is a need for proce -
dures that (cost-) efficiently distinguish pathogenic from neutral CNVs. 
An important step in this process is distinguishing common (inherited) 
CNVs, which are more likely to be neutral, from de novo  CNVs, which 
are more likely to be pathogenic. We have implemented an oligo-array 
platform (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA) for the screening of patients with 
MR/MCA. For an efficient interpretation of the data, we initially per -
formed trio analyses in which the parents of the patient are hybridized 
with opposite dyes on one array. To facilitate the individual analysis 
of each parent, separate 2logR files for the parents are subsequently 
generated using a home made software package that creates export 
files that can be uploaded into several commercial software platforms. 
This approach constitutes a fast way to determine the de novo  nature 
of the aberrations that are seen in the patient. An adaptation of this 
software has also enabled us to analyse six patients on one 4-plex 
180K array slide, making our diagnostic tests even more cost-efficient. 
A database of local CNVs, created with the data of 800 healthy par -
ents, has proven to be of high value in the analysis of patients for 
whom parents were not available.
P03.019  Array-cGH characterization of three patients with 
deletion 22q13
E. Zrnová1,2, V. Vranová1,2, I. Slámová1,2, A. Oltová1, R. Gaillyová1, P. Kuglík1,2;  
1The University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Faculty of 
Science, Brno, Czech Republic.
Subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements are believed to be a com -
mon cause of mental retardation. Their prevalence is about 5-7%. Be -
cause of their small size (under 5Mb) these subtelomeric aberrations 
are undetectable by conventional G-banding method. New molecular 
technologies such as MLPA, FISH and array-CGH have been adapted 
for subtelomeric or genomic screening in patients with idiopathic men -tal retardation. In surveys of subtelomeric screening, deletion of 22q13 
is the second most common subtelomeric deletion, after deletion 1p36. 
The prevalence of 22q13 deletion hasn’t still determinated.
The 22q13 Phelan-McDermid deletion syndrome is characterized by 
mild-to-moderate range of mental retardation, global developmental 
delay, absent or severely delayed speech, decreased perception of 
pain and autistic-like affect. Approximately 75% of deletions are simple 
(terminal or interstitial), about 25% are complex (as a result an unbal -
anced translocation).
We describe 3 patients including into subtelomeric screening using 
MLPA technique. In all cases the subtelomeric screening detected the 
deletion 22q13. In patients 1 and 2, both with normal karyotype, simple 
terminal deletion was found at 22q13. In patient 3 with no cytogenetic 
finding, deletion 22q13 and additional duplication of terminal part of 
17p were revealed. The size of every pathogenic microdeletion was 
determined by means of a high-resolution oligonucleotide-based ar -
ray-CGH. Our study has not shown significant relationship between 
the clinical features and the deletion size.
This study was supported by VZ MSM0021622415.
P03.020  Array-cGH characterization of a constitutional complex 
rearrangement with two 4q and one 1q interstitial deletions in a 
child with multiples congenital anomalies.
M. Mori1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, S. Garcia-Miñaur1,2, R. Rodríguez3, J. Nevado1,2, J. 
Perez4, F. Garcia1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, M. de Torres1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2;  
1INGEMM-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Fetal Medicine 
Unit-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 4Neonatology Unit-HULP, Madrid, Spain.
Constitutional complex rearrangements (CCRs) are considered to be 
very rare, but the use of molecular techniques like array-CGH is dis -
closing an increasing amount of CCRs, because they allow a more 
accurate characterization of the chromosomal rearrangements.
We report the molecular characterization of a female newborn with 
intrauterine growth retardation and multiple congenital anomalies, 
including unusual craniofacial features (wide anterior fontanelle 6x3 
cm., bitemporal narrowing, hypertelorism with narrow palpebral fis -
sures, dysplastic ears, cleft lip and palate, and micrognathia), congeni -
tal heart disease (VSD and ASD), laryngeal stenosis, and a sacral S2 
hemivertebra. She developed respiratory distress that progressively 
deteriorated over the first few days of life, eventually leading to her de -
mise on day three. The post-mortem examination revealed agenesis of 
the gall bladder in addition to the previous findings.
Pre- and postnatal karyotype were both normal. A standard 44K oligo 
array-CCH (Agilent Technologies) showed three deletions:
1- a 1q23.1q23.3 4Mb deletion
2- a 4q21.22q21.3 3.2Mb deletion
3- a 4q22.3q23 5.8Mb deletion
Both deletions on chromosome 4 were separated by a 9.4Mb normal 
region.
Parents´ karyotypes and arrays-CGH were strictly normal without any 
evidence of the previously mentioned findings in their baby.
The molecular mechanisms predisposing to genomic instability and 
leading to CCRs remain unknown. These mechanisms could involve 
multiple double strand breaks (DSB) followed by non-homologous end 
joining (NHEJ). Detailed studies at the molecular level of these CCRs 
will contribute to the identification of structural DNA elements which 
might predispose to such complex rearrangements.
P03.021  A duplication of the chromosomal region 7p14.1 involving the GLi3 gene is associated with mental retardation
F. Forzano1, M. Malacarne2, F. Faravelli1, C. Marciano1, E. Di Maria1,3, L. Perro -
ni2, M. Pierluigi2, S. Cavani2;  
1Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Geneti -
cs, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3University of Genova, Dept of Neuroscien -
ce, Ophtalmology and Genetics, Genova, Italy.
We report a 60 years old male affected by severe mental retardation 
who is carrier of a 1 Mb duplication within the region 7p14.1 (from 
41.246.668 to 42.408.368) detected through array-CGH (Human Ge -
nome CGH Microarray Kit 4 x 44K, Agilent). The duplicated regione 
involves the genes INHBA and GLI3. As far as we know, duplications 
of GLI3 have never been previously reported. The haploinsufficiency 
of GLI3 is related to well known conditions, like Grieg cephalopolysyn -
dactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall syndrome and Acrocallosal syndrome, 
and this clearly suggest the gene is sensitive to dosage. It would be Cytogenetics10
therefore reasonable to speculate that duplications as well as dele -
tions of this gene can be involved in human disease.
The patient never developed speech and always had a significant gait 
impairment. No malformation, sensory impairment, seizure or medical 
problem have been reported. He developed Myeloid Chronic Leuke -
mia 2 years ago.
He has a positive family history for mental retardation. One of his first 
cousins is affected by mild mental retardation: interestingly he carries 
a 14 Mb duplication of the region 2p16.2p22.1 (from 40.885.368 to 
54.807.891). The parents of the patients are dead, the siblings have 
normal chromosomes and the FISH analysis didn’t show any subtle 
imbalance within those regions.
P03.022  the role of array-cGH in syndromic microdeletion 
identification: case report of a 22q11.2 deletion
A. C. Tutulan-Cunita1, A. Arghir1, M. Budisteanu2,1, S. Chirieac1, A. Lungeanu1;  
1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical 
Hospital of Psyhiatry, Bucharest, Romania.
Herein, we present the case of a 16 years old girl with dysmorphic fea -
tures and severe mental retardation referred for cytogenetic investiga -
tion as a consequence of difficulties in establishing a diagnosis.
The patient was the first child of healthy, nonconsanguinous parents, 
born after an uneventful pregnancy - though with polyhydramnios-, by 
normal delivery, with a small for date birth weight (2000 g), nourishing 
difficulties in the first year of life, failure to thrive, and retarded neu -
ropsychomotor development. The clinical evaluation showed: short 
stature, dysmorphic features (small malformed ears, microphtalmia, 
prominent nasal bridge, prominent mandible, microstomia, thick lips, 
long fingers, bilateral camptodactilia of the 5th finger, bilateral covering 
of the 2nd toe by the 3rd toe), dorsal kyphosis, severe mental retarda -
tion, speech delay, hyperkinesia. The cerebral CT scan was normal.
Classical cytogenetic and molecular investigations were carried out 
using peripheral blood lymphocytes. The GTG-banded karyotype was 
normal, unevocative of any genetic syndrome. However, array-CGH 
(44K, Agilent) indicated a 2.3 Mb deletion on 22q11.21, subsequently 
confirmed by FISH with T-Box1 probe (Kreatech).
The above described region is characteristically deleted in the velocar -
diofacial syndrome (VCFS) that covers a wide spectrum of more than 
200 physical manifestations, including palate and cardiac anomalies. 
Our patient’s phenotype, with prominent nasal bridge, prominent man -
dible, camptodactilia, dorsal kyphosis, sever mental retardation was 
not particularly suggestive for VCFS, therefore no specific investiga -
tions were performed at diagnosis. Ultimately, the array-CGH was de -
cisive in unravelling the underlying genetic abnormalities.
Acknowledgements: CNCSIS project 1203, PN 09.33.02.03. Technical 
assistance: M.Cristea, I.Borcan, L.Dita
P03.023  cytogenetic abnormalities found among the autism 
patients in south india
M. Arun , V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi, A. Karthick kumar, P. Manikantan, 
S. Suresh kumar, K. Sasikala;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by clinical, 
etiologic and genetic heterogeneity. It is often associated with other 
conditions, such as disorders of the CNS (tuberous sclerosis), devel -
opmental delay, attention deficit, epilepsy, and anxiety and mood dis -
orders. The prime aim of the present study was to identify the chromo -
somal alterations found among autism patients in Coimbatore region. 
In order to investigate the possible cytogenetic damage to the autism 
patients, a G-banding method was carried out on the lymphocytes of 
26 experimental samples and equal number of controls. In the present 
study, Experimentals and controls were selected based on the detailed 
questionnaire. volunteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish 
cell cultures at 72 h. For karyotyping, 40 complete metaphase cells 
from each subject were evaluated. The detection of an increasing 
number of recognizable syndromes such as fragile X syndrome and 
Down syndrome were observed. Also major and minor Chromosomal 
aberrations such as deletions, inversion, gaps and breaks were found 
among the autism patients. The present study exhibits higher degree 
of chromosomal aberrations in experimentals compared to controls 
(P<0.001).
In conclusion, to point out that, the systematic study of autism is very 
rewarding with an accurate diagnosis in the proband and with proper genetic counseling, one can alleviate the misery of many parent and 
also can reduce the birth of defected offsprings in the family subse -
quently. This study emphasizes the potential of analysing chromosom -
al rearrangements as a means to rapidly define candidate disease loci 
for further investigation.
P03.024  carrier-fetus of balanced translocation t(5;20)(q34;p12)
S. Teofilova1, T. Ostojic1, O. Miljanovic1,2;  
1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology- Clinical Center of Montenegro, 
Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for Children`s Diseases - Clinical Center of 
Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro.
Translocations are considered the most frequent chromosomal chang -
es in the human species. In genetics, a chromosome translocation is 
a chromosome abnormality caused by rearrangment of parts between 
chromosomes. Such balanced translocation are usually harmless 
to carriers and may be found through prenatal diagnosis. However, 
carriers of balanced reciprocal translocations have increased risk of 
creating gametes with unbalanced chromosome translocations lead -
ing to repeated miscarriages or delivery of chromosomaly abnormal 
offspring. Genetic counseling and genetic testing is often offered to 
families that may carry a translocation.
Individuals who are carriers at balanced translocation usually appear 
completely normal and healthy but with reproductive problems. We 
found a carrier of balanced translocation t(5;20)(q34;p12) . We per -
formed a cytogenetic analysis chromosomes of a fetus, after amnio -
centesis of 36 years old woman with history of 7 spontaneous abortions 
( each in the first trimester of pregnancy ). Karyotype analysis revealed 
translocation between chromosomes 5 and 20. After cytogenetic study 
of both parents, mother was found to be a carrier of the same 5;20 
translocation. The segments interchainged between chromosomes 5 
and 20 were of almost the same size, and the arrangament of G-band 
was not significantly different.
Couples in wich one partner is a carrier of a balanced translocation 
have in increased risk of infertility, repeated miscarriages and delivery 
of chromosomaly abnormal offspring.
P03.025  Balanced and unbalanced forms of transmission of a 
complex chromosomal rearrangement involving chromosomes 
3, 8 and 10 in two generations
Z. Zmitkova1, M. Simandlova1, A. Baxova2, M. Vlckova1, J. Drabova1, D. 
Novotna1, Z. Vlckova1, Z. Zemanova3, E. Kocarek1, Z. Sedlacek1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical genetics,Charles University, 2nd 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Department of Biology and Medical genetics,Charles University, 1st Faculty 
of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 
3Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory 
Diagnostics, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University 
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
We report a familial apparently balanced complex chromosomal re -
arrangement (BCCR) involving chromosomes 3, 8 and 10. The pro -
band is the fourth child from the eighth pregnancy of an unaffected 
mother whose karyotype was determined as 46,XX,t(8;10)(q13;q24),i
ns(3;8)(q26.2;q22q23). Standard chromosome analysis of amniocytes 
revealed apparently the same balanced karyotype in the proband. 
However, at the age of three years the boy was referred for genetic 
analysis because of psychomotor delay, speech problems, autistic fea -
tures, teeth irregularity and dysplastic ears. Array CGH and SNP array 
analysis were performed but yielded no clues, including no evidence 
for uniparental disomy. Proband‘s elder brother was born prematurely 
and died perinatally due to multiple severe malformations including 
bilateral cleft lip and palate, protruding premaxilla, right microtia with 
the absence of ear canal, deformation of legs, hypospadia and hypo -
genitalism. Chromosome analysis showed an unbalanced transloca -
tion t(8;10)(q13;q24) which led to partial monosomy of 8q. Proband‘s 
unaffected stepbrother has normal karyotype. Proband‘s unaffected 
stepsister has karyotype 46,XX,t(8;10)(q13;q24). In her case a recom -
bination replaced the deletion in the translocated part of chromosome 
8 with a segment of the normal chromosome 8. This, in combination 
with chromosome 3 lacking the insertion, led to a balanced karyotype 
with a simple reciprocal translocation. All findings were validated using 
FISH with chromosome paints. BCCRs are very rare in population. 
Our case illustrates multiple complex scenarios how the chromosomes 
affected by the rearrangements can be distributed to gametes and de -Cytogenetics10
scendants of BBCR carriers.
Supported by INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHERISH (EC FP7 223692) 
and MZOFNM2005.
P03.026  Deletion 3q26-28 in a patient with blepharophimosis-
ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPEs)
M. A. Faiq1, M. Kumar1, M. Tanwar1, P. Gupta2, N. Pushkar2, R. Dada1;  
1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic 
Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
BPES is a rare genetic disorder with autosomal dominant pattern of in -
heritance. The frequency of BPES has been estimated to be 1:50,000. 
Patients with BPES have a combination of congenital anomalies as 
small palpebral fissures, epicanthus inversus, low nasal bridge and 
congenital ptosis. BPES has been categorized into two types: type I 
with infertility in females and type II involves eye malformation in both 
males and females. From the review of reported cases, it has been 
concluded that a locus for eyelid development is situated at the inter -
face of long arm of chromosome 3. Since blepharophimosis, ptosis and 
microphthalmia are consistent features in Patients with BPES an inter -
stitial deletion of band 3q2, the location of BPES gene at this position 
seems highly likely. Various reports linked the deletion in 3q21, 3q22, 
3q23, 3q24, 3q25 and translocations t(3:7)(q26-qter:q+), t(X:3)(p22:
q21), t(3:8)(q23:p22.1) to the BPES. Thus cytogenetically different de -
letions and translocations of chromosome 3 have been described in 
patients with BPES. We report a sporadic case of BPES. We have 
done the Cytogenetic analysis of the patient. Standard GTG banding 
showed a novel deletion of band 3q26-28. This is the first report of 
deletion in this region. We also found deletion in the 3qter region which 
has been already linked to the BPES. This finding may represent a 
severe manifestation of the disease. BPES is a heterogeneous entity, 
and evaluation and counseling of affected individuals should be under -
taken with caution.
P03.027  complex rearrangement involving 3 breakpoints in a 
t(3;22;11) translocation
S. Kaltenbach , A. Aboura, J. Rousseau, A. Tabet, C. Dupont, B. Benzacken, A. 
Verloes, S. Drunat;  
Département de génétique. Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) are defined as struc -
tural chromosomal rearrangements with at least three breakpoints and 
exchange of genetic material between two or more chromosomes. 
We report a de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement involving 
chromosomes 3, 11, and 22 in a 9 year-old boy with mental retarda -
tion and dysmorphic traits (bushy eyebrows, frontal hirsutism, tented 
upper lip, downturned corner of the mouth). Using CGH microarray 
(Agilent®) and FISH controls, we evidenced a 21 Mb duplication of 
3q, a 2.8Mb deletion in 11q, and 121 kb deletion in 22q. Chromosomal 
formula was
46,XY,der(22)t(3;22)(q26;q13),der(11)t(11;22)(q25;q13).
arr 3q26.3q29(177663316-199329792)x3,(11q25)(131617566-13443
2465)x1,(22q13.3)(43683481-43804487)x1 dn (reference : hg18).
The cryptic deletion on 22q breakpoint is underway by quantitative 
PCR. The parental karyotypes were normal. CCRs are extremely rare 
but often associated with mental retardation, congenital abnormalities 
and recurrent abortions. Dup(3q) syndrome is characterized by typical 
facial features, mental and growth retardation, often with congenital 
heart defects and a clinical overlap with Cornelia de Lange syndrome 
(CDLS). Del(11q) is known to be responsible of Jacobsen syndrome.
P03.028  Titin or a titin-like protein as a human centriolar protein ?
A. Mikelsaar1,2, A. Sünter1, P. Toomik1,3, R. Mikelsaar1, E. Juronen1;  
1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2LabAs Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian 
University of Life Sciences, Estonia.
Recently, the striated-muscle protein titin has been observed in non-
muscle cells, and has been proposed to have a nuclear function as a 
chromosomal component. In this study, we further analyze this phe -
nomenon. Different human cell-lines were used to characterize the 
immunolocation of titin with different commercial titin-specific mono -
clonal antibodies: 9D10 (DSHB), 9B9 (Chemicon), 2Q1063 (USBio -
logicals), and T11(Abcam). These antibodies showed a varied location 
and expression characteristics of titin in the nucleus and cytoplasm 
but reacted not with condensed chromosomes. Here we report on the development of a new mouse anti-titin monoclonal antibody, using the 
synthetic peptide corresponding to an amino acid sequence in the A-
band of the titin molecule as immunogen. In the human skeletal mus -
cle this MAb reveals a clear striated staining pattern, reacting with the 
A-band of the sarcomere. Electrophoretic, immunoblotting, and amino 
acid sequence analyses with ESI-MS/MS proved the target antigen of 
the MAb to be titin. The antibody reacts with titin also in non-muscle 
cells, giving a punctate pattern in cytoplasm and the nucleus. Howev -
er, the most striking finding was a clear reaction also with centrioles in 
all cell types investigated so far. We suggest that this MAb detects titin 
or a titin-like protein in centrioles. The investigation of the association 
of the MAb target antigen in centrioles with other centriolar proteins 
is in progress. This work was partly supported by target financing SF 
0188096s08 of the Estonian. Ministry of Science and Education and 
Estonian Science Foundation (Grant No.6581).
P03.029  combine analysis of chromosomal abnormalities in 
plutonium production workers: aneugenic and clastogenic 
aspects of the influence
V. A. Timoshevskiy , S. A. Vasilyev, I. N. Lebedev, N. N. Sukhanova, Y. S. 
Yakovleva, N. B. Torkhova;  
Institute of medical genetics, Russian academy of medical sciences, Tomsk, 
Russian Federation.
Combine analysis of clastogenic/aneugenic effects of plutonium pro -
duction factors has been performed using conventional and interphase 
molecular cytogenetic methods. Frequencies of aberrations of routine 
stained and G-banded chromosomes, micronuclei and non-disjunction/
lagging level in cytokinesis-blocked binucleated lymphocytes were es -
timated in lymphocytes of nuclear-chemical plant workers (66 males) 
and controls (25 males). The main contributing factors to increase of 
aberrations in plutonium workers were chromosome type aberrations 
(CTA), especially deletions (G-banding) and pair fragments (routine 
stain). Double-color FISH with centromero-specific DNA probes for 
chromosomes 2, 7, 8, 12, X and Y was used for the analysis of the 
chromosomal non-disjunction and lagging. The significant increase of 
the non-disjunction frequency has been found for all investigated chro -
mosomes in the exposed group, except X-chromosome. The micronu -
clei (MN) frequency was also significantly higher in binucleated cells 
of nuclear industry workers (p= 0.009). Correlations between markers 
of metaphase and interphase-FISH analyses have additionally been 
estimated. The results obtained by using different approaches have 
shown significant relationship. It figures that pair fragment frequency 
correlated with micronuclei level (Spearman rank (Sr) = 0.40). More -
over, CTA were connected with MN (Sr = 0.50) and non-disjunction (Sr 
= 0.45), deletions correlated with MN (Sr=0.46), non-disjunction (Sr = 
0.36), and lagging (Sr = 0.34). In general, the significant correlations 
have been found for basic characteristics of cytome abnormalities and 
different types of chromosomal aberrations. This observation points 
out that aneugenic and clastogenic events are related phenomena of 
plutonium mutagenic influence. This study was supported by Federal 
Agency of Education (P1707, P1748).
P03.030  cytogenetic analysis in 550 couples with history of 
spontaneous abortions
R. Talwar , S. K. S. Vats, M. K. Verma, A. Singh, C. Singh;  
Super Religare Laboratories (SRL), Gurgaon, India.
Chromosomal imbalance has been identified as a major cause for 
spontaneous pregnancy loss, infertility and childhood disability thereby, 
contributing significantly to the genetic burden on society. The diagno -
sis of chromosomal anomalies in couples with history of spontaneous 
abortions can be made by conventional cytogenetics which involves 
karyotyping of GTG banded chromosome preparations obtained from 
whole blood. In the present study, conventional cytogenetic analysis 
was used to analyze peripheral blood samples from 550 couples with 
history of spontaneous abortions, mainly in the first trimester. Cyto -
genetic analysis revealed chromosomal abnormalities in 110 cases. 
Balanced reciprocal translocations were observed in 47 cases while 
Robertsonian translocations were observed in 6 cases. Novel cytoge -
netic anomalies like t(7;17), t(9;20) and t(17;20) were also observed 
that have not yet been reported in literature, to the best of our knowl -
edge.. Some cases revealed heteromorphic variants in chromosome 1 
(n=46) and 9 (n=50). Six cases revealed addition of genetic material in 
the short arm of chromosome 22. The detection of these chromosomal Cytogenetics110
anomalies, few of which are novel, in couples reiterates that cytoge -
netic analysis is a ‘gold standard’ for screening couples with history of 
spontaneous abortions where structural anomalies are observed more 
frequently than aneuploidies.
P03.031  Molecular studies on a supposed “satellited 8q” 
chromosome.
L. Rodríguez1, L. Golmayo2, M. Bonaglia3, A. Delicado4, J. Nevado4, E. 
Abarca5;  
1Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética. Grupo Hospital de Madrid., Madrid, Spain, 
2Servicio de Endocrinología-Pediátrica del Grupo Hospital de Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain, 3Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Scientific Institute E. Medea, Bosisio Parini 
(LC), Italy, 4INGEMM-Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular-IDIPAZ-HULP, 
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética., 
Madrid, Spain.
One of the most common polymorphisms in a cytogenetic laboratory, 
is the presence of a satellite (NOR: nucleolus organizer regions) on 
a non-acrocentric chromosome. These extra NOR regions are easily 
confirmed by NOR-bands in the cytogenetic laboratory. They generally 
result from a translocation between a NOR region of an acrocentric 
chromosome and a non-acrocentric chromosome. These transloca -
tions are usually terminal and have been described in the literature 
on multiple chromosomes, the most frequent of which involving the Y 
chromosome (Yqs).
In most cases these polymorphisms are inherited without clinical re -
percussion, so when they are found in a karyotype usually any addi -
tional studies are not carry out. In fact, sometime not even NOR-bands 
techniques are performed and the final diagnosis is done with only 
G-bands.
However, with the presentation of this case we want to show how 
important are such studies in order to properly define the “supposed 
satellited chromosome” and to exclude any other chromosome abnor -
malities.
Here we present a case of a 15-month-old girl who came to our labora -
tory with a karyotype in which a satellite in a chromosome 8 long arm 
(8qs) was described. The reason for the cytogenetic studies was a 
postnatal growth retardation, with all measures deeply below the 3rd 
percentile. In addition, the patient had mild dysmorphic features and 
slight motor delay.
FISH analysis with 8q subtelomeric probes (Cytocell) together with 
MLPA and Array-CGH analyses, showed a very complex 8q chromo -
some abnormality.
P03.032  chromosomal radiation sensitivity in lymphocytes of 
breast cancer patients.
N. M. Ryabchenko1, V. M. Mikhailenko1, M. F. Anikusko2, G. P. Oliynichenko2;  
1Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology of NAS of 
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Kyiv Municipal Oncological Hospital, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Cytogenetic markers of intrinsic radiation sensitivity are seemed to 
predict genomic instability that correlates with the risk of cancerogen -
esis in healthy population and response to radiotherapy among cancer 
patients. Chromosomal G2-test makes it possible to estimate inter-in -
dividual difference in levels of DNA breaks and efficiency of DNA dam -
age repair. Purpose of the presented study was comparative estima -
tion of chromosomal radiosensitivity of lymphocytes in healthy donors 
and breast cancer patients
Lymphocytes cultures were set up for 47 primary breast cancer pa -
tients and 44 healthy women. To examine chromosomal radiosensi -
tivity cultures were irradiated with 0,5 Gy of X-rays on 48 hour (cor -
responds G2/M1). Metaphase preparations were made according to 
standard procedures. 100 well spread metaphases were analyzed for 
chromatid type aberrations.
It was shown that G2 phase is characterized by high chromosomal 
radiosensitivity and inter-individual variations in the levels of radiation 
induced chromosomal breaks in both groups of examined donors. Co -
efficient of variation in group of patients was 32% and 26% in controls. 
The mean overall G2 score for breast cancer patients was higher than 
that for the controls (86,6±10,4 and 67,8±14,0 respectively). Using the 
90th percentile as the cut-off point, the proportion of breast cancer 
patients with high G2 sensitivity was 38 % compared to 12 % for the 
controls. There was no correlation between G2 sensitivity and sponta -
neous level of chromosome aberrations and age of donors. The results 
obtained support the concept of association between elevated chro -mosomal radiosensitivity and genetic predisposition to breast cancer.
P03.033  Phenotypic Genotypic correlation of Egyptian Patients 
with chromosome 5 Aberrations
S. Hammad , H. Bassyouni, M. Shehab, L. Hosny;  
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: An increasing number of human diseases are recognized 
to result from structural variations - segments where DNA is deleted, 
duplicated or rearranged in which the clinical phenotype is a conse -
quence of abnormal dosage of gene(s) located within the rearranged 
genomic fragments. Different chromosome 5 aberrations do occur in -
cluding deletions, duplications, translocations, inversions and others.
Aim: This study aimed to analyze the phenotypic features of different 
chromosome 5 aberrations and to correlate tem with the type of aber -
ration.
Subject and Methods: We were able to acertain 12 cases with chromo -
some 5 aberrations. Cases included 6 children with mental subnormal -
ity and 6 couples seeking premarital genetic counseling and intraueter -
ine fetal deaths. All the patients are subject to history taking, pedigree 
analysis, clinical examination and anthrompometric measurements of 
the children. Chromosomal study of the couples, children and their 
parents was carried out using G-banding technique. FISH was per -
formed using whole chromosome painting probes for confirmation.
Results: Our results showed different chromosomal 5 aberrations in 
the form of: del(5) (p14 - term), 5 p+, inv(5)(P13;q13), balanced trans -
locations: t(3;5), t(5;7), t(5;11) and t(5;22).
Conclusion: Cases with larger deletions of chromosome 5 had greater 
degree of microcephaly. There may be a locus of Goldenhar syndrome 
on chromosome 5 extending from 5p14 to 5p15.2. The impact that 
these correlation have on understanding of copy number variations in 
the human genome will help clinicians not only for diagnosing genetic 
disorders in individuals with dysmorphism and developmental delay 
but also for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling.
P03.034  chomosomes involment in to chromosomal structure 
rearrangemens frequency in Lithuania
V. Šliužas1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, 
Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital 
Santariskiu klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Various congenital malformations, mental retardation as well as fertility 
problems could be determined by chromosomal structure rearrange -
ments (CSR). Frequency of chromosomes participating in CSR does 
not correlate with chromosome length.
Assessment of the frequencies of the chromosomes involved in to 
CSR in Lithuania patients referring for genetic counseling was carried 
out. Karyotypes of 2729 persons from Lithuanian population were ana -
lysed using conventional G-banded chromosome karyotyping, some 
CSR were verified with FISH and CGH methods. 106 chromosomal 
structure rearrangements (3.88% of all analysed cases) were de -
tected. CSR were detected in chromosome X most frequently (8.5%), 
chromosomes 14 and 18 were most common autosomes with CSR, 
excluding Robertsonian translocations since only acrocentric chromo -
somes are involved into this type of CSR. No CSRs have been identi -
fied in chromosomes 19 and Y in the analysed group.
According to the origin of rearrangements formation detected rear -
rangements were classified into 9 groups. Reciprocal translocation 
was the most common type (29.25% of all detected cases) among 
balanced CSR while deletion dominated among unbalanced CSR 
(16.04%). Altered chromosome regions were located in chromosome 
regions with lower than genome average gene density, but that was 
not the only factor contributing to survival of foetuses with unbalanced 
CSR till birth. Pericentric inversion chromosome 9 has not been in -
volved into the research as it is construed as heteromorphic chromo -
some variant. Only one more chromosome heteromorphic variant has 
been identified in the research - pericentric inversion chromosome 2 
inv(2)(p11.2q12), although several different heteromorphisms are de -
scribed in literature.Cytogenetics111
P03.035  A combination of molecular and conventional 
karyotyping to unravel a complex karyotype
K. Hansson1, A. Gijsbers1, C. Ruivenkamp1, A. Derksen-Lubsen2, I. Snoeck-
Streef2, E. Aanhane1, W. vd Ende1, M. Hoogenboom1, E. den Ouden1, A. van 
Haeringen1,2;  
1Clinical genetics LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2HAGA Teaching Hospital JKZ, 
the Hague, Netherlands.
The use of high-resolution genome-wide array techniques as the first 
method of choice in the clinical diagnostic setting has been shown 
to considerably increase the diagnostic yield in patients with mental 
retardation with or without multiple congenital abnormalities. However, 
this technique is not able to elucidate more complex chromosomal re -
arrangements. We present a patient who was referred to the mental 
retardation clinic because of psychomotor retardation and non-specific 
behavioral problems. The 7-year old girl showed mild ptosis, retrogna -
thia and strabismus and was therefore defined as only slightly dysmor -
phic. High-resolution genome-wide array analysis with a 250K SNP-
array demonstrated four de novo interstitial deletions in three different 
chromosomes. Conventional karyotyping and FISH analyses revealed 
a complex chromosome rearrangement including both a reciprocal 
translocation and an insertion/deletion. This case demonstrates the 
necessity of using a combination of different techniques to unravel the 
nature of complex structural rearrangements.
P03.036  cryptic genomic imbalances in two patients with de 
novo  complex chromosome Rearrangements and abnormal 
phenotype.
M. Palomares Bralo1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, M. L. de Torres1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2, 
E. Vallespin1,2, J. Nevado1,2, V. E. Fernández1, S. Martín1, B. Martínez1, A. 
Delicado1,2;  
1INGEMM-IdiPAZ. Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, 
Spain.
Introduction: 
Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are structural chromo -
some anomalies involving more than 2 chromosomes or more than 2 
breakpoints. Phenotypic abnormalities are found in about 50% of pa -
tients with de novo  CCRs, suggesting that cryptic genetic imbalances, 
not detectable with conventional cytogenetics techniques, may be a 
common finding.
Here we report genomic imbalances detected in two patients with 
abnormal phenotype and CCRs using a high-resolution array for ge -
nome-wide DNA.
Patient’s one conventional karyotype showed an apparently balanced 
translocation, t(4;8;7)(q13;q13;q11.2) dn. He presented with facial dys -
morphism, psychomotor retardation and congenital malformations.
Patient two carried an apparently balanced translocation, 
t(3;5;16)(q25;q13.1;q13) dn. He also presented with facial dysmor -
phism, psychomotor retardation, congenital malformations and sei -
zures.
Methods:
Array CGH experiments were carried out using  Agilent Human Ge -
nome CGH Microarray (105K), with an average resolution of ~100Kb.
Results:
Array-CGH revealed cryptic genomic imbalances in both patients. 
Summarized results of all the aberrations are shown in table 1.
Patient Karyotype ChromosomeImba  
lanceStart (pb)  
NCBI Built 
36End (pb)Size 
(Mb)OMIM 
genes
1t(4;8;7)
(q13;q13;q11.2) dn8q21.11-
8q21.13loss 75079417 84816508 9.74GDAP1,
PXMP3,
ZFHX4
8q21.2-8q21.3 loss 86739116 88087692 1.35 CNGB3
12q24.13 loss 112105455 112219269 0.11
2t(3;5;16)
(q25;q13.1;q13) dn5q15 loss 95457318 97818374 2.36 PCSK1
5q23.2 loss 123137045 124391381 1.25
5q33.3-5q34 loss 158629823 160676698 2.04 IL12B
5q34 loss 161228316 161537826 0.30GABRA1, 
GABRG2
Conclusion: 
This study provides further evidence that cryptic genomic imbalances 
are common in patients with abnormal phenotype and “apparently balanced” chromosome rearrangements. Furthermore, it reveals the 
complexity of chromosome rearrangements that is of great interest for 
the clinical diagnosis of these patients.
P03.037  Duplications 20p and 3q as a consequence of familial 
complex chromosomal rearrangement
J. Drabova , A. Puchmajerova, D. Novotna, Z. Vlckova, Z. Zmitkova, Z. 
Sedlacek;  
Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine and Universit, Prague, Czech Republic.
Balanced complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are extreme -
ly rare. Their carriers have a high risk of primary infertility, spontane -
ous abortions or children with unbalanced karyotypes. We report an 
unusual case of a familial CCR involving three chromosomes.
An 8-year-old girl was referred for chromosome analysis because of 
heart defect, dysmorphic facial features, mild mental retardation and 
autistic features including a delay of speech development. Karyotyping 
revealed derivative chromosomes 20 and 22. For further clarification of 
the rearrangement, FISH was performed using 20p and 20q subtelo -
meric probes. It showed that material from 20p was translocated onto 
22p. Array CGH was essential for the identification of the suspected 
third partner in this CCR: It showed a 3q duplication of about 16.5 Mb, 
and the CCR thus involved chromosomes 3, 20 and 22.
Karyotyping and FISH analysis of other relatives indicated that four 
members of this family are carriers of a balanced form of this CCR. 
These individuals are asymptomatic. Four of their descendants have 
two types of unbalanced CCRs. The proband and her maternal aunt 
have partial duplications of chromosome 3. Both have similar dysmor -
phic facial features and mental retardation, but the aunt is lacking the 
heart defect and autism. Two other individuals have partial duplica -
tions of chromosome 20. These children are currently very young. 
Their mental functioning seems to be normal, but the motor develop -
ment is delayed and macrosomia is present in both cases.
This work was supported by grants INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHER -
ISH (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005.
P03.038  Some cytochemical peculiarities of constitutive 
heterochromatin in cytotrophoblast chromosomes from human 
chorionic villi.
I. Trofimova1,2, M. Lyapunova1, E. Zolnerovich1, T. Kuznetzova2, V. Baranov1,2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Ott’s Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Constitutive heterochromatin regions (CHRs) in chromosomes from 
chorion villi cytotrophoblast are characterized by decondensation, 
early replication, hypomethylation and DNAse 1 hypersensitivity. After 
standard AO staining of untreated direct chromosomal preparations 
CHRs manifests unusually bright red fluorescence in 1qh, 9qh, 16qh, 
Yqh, 15cenh, 22cenh as typical for single-stranded DNA and RNA.
The nature of this fluorescence was studied on direct chromosomal 
preparations pretreated with different enzymes (RNase A, RNase H, 
DNase I, DNA ligase T4) followed by AO staining. CVS from legal and 
missed abortions at 5-10 week of pregnancy were used. Separate and 
combined pre-treatment of slides with RNase A and DNase I resulted 
in decrease of red fluorescence of CHRs in most metaphase plates. 
It was especially evident in 1qh. All chromosome arms were uniformly 
yellow-green or banded similar to RFA pattern in some metaphases. 
DNA ligase T4 or RNase H treatment resulted in total absence of fluo -
rescence („black holes“) in CHRs, especially in 1qh, and uniform green 
fluorescence along chromosome arms. Staining patterns of chromo -
somes after treatment with corresponding buffer solutions only were 
identical to these one of untreated control slides.
These results could be attributed to conformational packaging of CHRs 
and thus might be treated as an evidence of obvious transcriptional 
activity of pericentromeric satDNA of 1qh in cytotrophoblast cells from 
chorionic villi during early embryogenesis.Cytogenetics112
P03.039  cytochemical characteristics of constitutive 
heterochromatin regions from cytotrophoblast from human 
chorionic villi
M. S. Lyapunova1, I. L. Trofimova1, E. V. Zolnerovich1, T. V. Kuznetzova2;  
1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s 
Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Although the biological significance of heterochromatin remained ob -
scure for many years, it is now apparent that heterochromatin plays 
a number of roles in the organization and function of the genome. 
Numerous characteristics (especially proliferation and migration cells, 
invasive growth hormone-dependent, degree of methylation of DNA) 
cells of cytotrophoblast reveals a striking similarity to tumor cells there -
fore feasible functional active of constitutive heterochromatin regions 
(CHRs) of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 in cytotrophoblast cells of cytotro -
phoblast human chorionic villi is suggested.
The aim of investigation was comparative analysis of CHRs of chro -
mosomes 1, 9, 16 stained by acridine orange of direct chromosomal 
preparations from cytotrophoblast human chorionic villi (from legal and 
missed abortions at 5-10 week of pregnancy) and peripheral blood 
lymphocytes from adult person.
As fluorescent dye AO is discriminated single-stranded nucleic acids 
from double stranded forms as orange-red and yellow-green fluores -
cence, respectively.
CHRs of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 after pre-treatment with RNase A re -
vealed red fluorescence of undifferentiated cells cytotrophoblast, but 
these regions stained green in terminally differentiated culture lym -
phocytes. Absence of fluorescence in CHRs, especially 1gh, was ob -
served after pre-treatment with RNase H.
These results confirm unusual conformation packaging of CHRs of 1, 
9, 16 chromosomes in cytotrophoblast compared lymphocytes and 
might be treated as an evidence of obvious transcriptional activity DNA 
of CHRs of 1qh in cytotrophoblast cells from chorionic villi during early 
embryogenesis.
P03.040  cytogenetic investigations in individuals residing near 
the Jagatjit industries at Hamira, Punjab, india
K. Kaur , G. Kaur, G. Gandhi;  
Department of Human Genetics; Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India.
Distillery effluents can affect the air, water and soil quality and hence, 
the ecosystem. Exposure from polluted surrounding near the Jagatjit 
Distillery may also be harmful to the residents of the area in terms of 
their genetic health and pose threat to their genetic make-up. In the 
present study, individuals residing near distillery unit were investigated 
for any chromosomal damage in their peripheral blood lymphocytes. 
The Cytokinesis block micronucleus assay was performed on 55 indi -
viduals: 20 males and 20 females residing near the distillery from birth/
working in the distillery for 20-40y and 15 healthy controls matched 
for age (20-40 years), sex and socio-economic status. From each in -
dividual, 2000 binucleated (BN) cells were scored for the presence of 
micronuclei. Preliminary scoring has revealed percent frequency of mi -
cronucleated cells, nuclear buds and bridges to be higher in males in 
comparison to the values in females residing near/working in distillery 
indicating that these individuals have more chromosomal damage as 
compared to controls.
P03.041  characterization by FisH and cGH-array of a partial 
monosomy 17 (p13.3, pter) and 21(q11.2q21.3) encompassing 
the 21q “critical region” in a patient presenting azoospermia and 
minor cerebral malformations.
H. Hannechi1, S. Mougou-Zerelli1, I. benabdallah1, s. Dimassi1, H. Issam2, A. 
Labalme3, D. Sanlaville3, A. Saad1, H. Elghezal1;  
1Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology Department, Farhat Hached University 
Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Radiology department Farhat Hached 
University Teaching Hospital,, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Lyon, France.
So far, only a small number of monosomy 21(q11.2-q21.3) cases 
have been reported. They displayed a very heterogeneous phenotype 
where most clinical features have been attributed to the deletion of 
the critical region 21q : APP- SOD1 resulting in the “arthrogriposis like 
syndrome” . Here we report the case of a 26 years old patient referred 
for azoospermia. Clinical findings showed a moderate mental delay 
and facial dysmorphism. Cerebral MRI revealed an agenesis of the 
corpus callosum splenum and a cortico-sub-cortical atrophy. R banded analysis revealed 17p13.3 monosomy associated to a 21 (pter,q21) 
monosomy as a result of unbalanced segregation of a reciprocal ma -
ternal translocation (45, XY,der17 t(17; 21)mat,-der 21). FISH studies 
on the proposita lymphocytes confirmed the terminal deletion 17p and 
the deletion of the 21(pter,q21) region. CGH-array analysis estimated 
the size of the 17p telomere loss to 681 kb and the deletion of the 
chromosome 21q to 16,15Mb. The study showed that the breakpoint in 
chromosome 21 is proximal to the gene APP, the proximal boundary of 
the “monosomy 21” critical region and the breakpoint in chromosome 
17p is telomeric to LIS1 gene. Azoospepmia could be explained by 
the unbalanced translocation since that this chromosome anomaly is 
known to block meiosis during spermatogenesis. On the other hand, it 
is often reported, in 17p terminal deletion cases with retention of gene 
LIS1, a severe mental delay in association with hypotonia and cerebral 
malformations suggesting the involvement of other genes other than 
LISI in brain development and neuronal migration.
P03.042  interstitial deletion 11q13.1-q13.3 in a boy 
with developmental delay, prenatal short stature, facial 
dysmorphisms and malformations of the hands and feet
D. Niedrist , M. Riegel, A. Schinzel;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, 
Switzerland.
We report on a 3 year-old boy with mental retardation, prenatal short 
stature, microcephaly, split hand and facial dysmorphisms in associa -
tion with an interstitial 11q13 microdeletion. On the patient’s left hand, 
the second finger was missing, there was total osseous syndactyly 
of the phalanges III/IV and flexion contraction in the metacarpo-pha -
langeal joint of the thumb. On the right hand, the distal phalanx of 
the second finger was hypoplastic with missing nail, there were com -
plete cutaneous syndactyly III/IV and a finger-like thumb. There was 
syndactyly I/II and III/IV on the right foot. On the left foot there was 
shortening of the third toe, and lateral deviation of the distal phalanx 
of the second toe but no syndactyly. The babygram showed 11 ribs 
and a rather plump sacrum. Brain ultrasound revealed a single plexus 
choroideus cyst.
HR-CGH showed an interstitial deletion of 11q13. Array-based CGH 
(44K array, Agilent Technologies) confirmed the deletion and revealed 
a proximal breakpoint between positions 66.58 Mb and 66.64 Mb and 
a distal breakpoint between 71.43 Mb and 71.46 Mb, thus a deletion 
size of 4.73 Mb [46,XY,del(11)(q13.1q13.3)].
This is the first report about a patient with this particular aberration. 
There are interesting candidate genes within the deleted region: such 
as TBX10 (malformation of the ears, mental retardation, missing rib 
and plump sacrum), FGF19 (malformation of the ears, mental retarda -
tion, sparse subcutaneous adipous tissue) FGF3 (malformation of the 
ears, microdontia) FGF4 (malformation of the limbs), SHANK2 (men -
tal retardation) and others associated with eye-disease and deafness 
(CABP4, TCIRG1, LRP5).
P03.043  interstitial chromosome 6q23 deletion characterized by cGH in a patient with two 
de novo  apparently balanced 
translocations, t(6;10) and t(7;11), and a paternal t(2;13)
N. Oliva Teles1, B. Marques2, J. Aguiar1, M. R. Pinto1, H. Correia2, A. Fortuna1;  
1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, INSA I.P., Porto, Portugal, 
2INSA I.P., Lisboa, Portugal.
We report on a female with a rare complex chromosomal abnormal -
ity involving three translocations, which were characterized by GTG 
banding: two de novo  apparently balanced t(6;10) and t(7;11) trans -
locations, and a paternal t(2;13). To define the three translocations 
breakpoints and possible imbalances, comparative genomic hybridiza -
tion (CGH) techniques were now used, which allowed us to detect an 
interstitial 6q23.1-6q23.3 deletion.
The genetic investigation of this patient started when she was 14. Her 
clinical features are: mild to moderate mental retardation (the neu -
ropsychological profile showed global IQ of 58), dysmorphic facial 
features with microcephaly, strabism and microftalmia, sensorineuro-
deafness, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, immunodeficiency and 
hemolitic anaemia. The diagnosis of Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome 
(NBS) was suspected and both cytogenetics (chromosome breaks) 
and molecular (nibrin gene) studies were performed 11 years ago, 
but these results were negative. Despite these results, we cannot ex -
clude this clinical diagnosis. The patient is currently 27-year-old and Cytogenetics11
has been doing follow-up studies regarding her imuno-hematological 
problems.The authors enhance the importance of using molecular cy -
togenetic techniques for detecting subtle chromosome imbalances in 
patients with atypical phenotypic characteristics, especially with com -
plex de novo  rearrangements and compare the present case findings 
with previously published similar data.
P03.044  Clinical findings of 32 individuals with deletions of 18p
C. D. Sebold , A. Hill, B. Soileau, M. Hasi, P. Heard, E. Carter, D. Hale, J. Cody;  
Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States.
One of the primary goals of the Chromosome 18 Clinical Research 
Center is to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. An important 
part of this process is an extensive and accurate phenotypic descrip -
tion. As a part of this process, we are conducting a thorough review of 
the phenotype of individuals with 18p-. Here, we report the first part of 
this project: the phenotypic characterization of study patients with a 
centromeric breakpoint. In addition to reviewing the medical records of 
32 study participants, we have interviewed the parents of 28 of these 
individuals. Neonatal complications (jaundice, feeding problems, or re -
spiratory distress) were present in 20 individuals. Hypertonia or hypo -
tonia were reported in 28 participants. Holoprosencephaly or findings 
frequently associated with holoprosencephaly (such as single central 
incisor or caudal regression) were identified in nine patients. Four had 
seizure disorders. Hearing and vision problems were common, oc -
curring in seven and 24 patients respectively. Eighteen patients had 
chronic otitis media. Of the thirteen that had undergone echocardio -
grams, eight had a heart anomaly. Gastrointestinal anomalies were 
fairly common. Ten had chronic constipation; five had reflux. Herni -
as were present in six patients, and volvulus in one patient. Six had 
scoliosis; five had pectus excavatum. Foot anomalies were present 
in six individuals. Endocrine problems were also fairly common. Two 
had panhypopituitarism, while seven had isolated growth hormone 
deficiency. Four patients had hypothyroidism. As we continue to col -
lect phenotypic data on patients with non-centromeric breakpoints, we 
hope to narrow critical regions for features of 18p deletions.
P03.045  A new case of deletion 18p syndrome
S. Ahmadpour , C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, B. Ferizadeh;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18 is a well established chro -
mosomal aberration. In patients, there is a broad variability of pheno -
typic features. Facial dysmorphism, short stature, skeletal anomalies, 
and more or less severe psychomotor retardation are commonly seen. 
We report a patient with a del 18p, who was referred to our depart -
ment. Our propositus is 12 years old and the last child born to healthy, 
non-consanguineous parents. At birth, his father and his mother were 
43 and 42 years old, respectively. He has two sisters and one brother, 
all are healthy. He was delivered full-term with a normal delivery, and 
a birth weight of 3150 g. He had developmental delay, in all aspects 
specially walking. He lost all his child teeth by the age of 3, due to poor 
quality and extended caries.
His phenotypic manifestations are flattened nasal bridge, unilateral 
strabismus,large mouth, broad philtrum, low-set and rotated ears, very 
large and detached pinnae, and brittle nails.
His mental status is in agreement with moderate mental retardation, 
and according to Weschler intelligence scale for children, his IQ was 
77. He performed in non-verbal functions better than verbal ones. He 
showed delayed in learning at school, abnormal behaviour, agitation 
and aggressivity. He has seizures and his thyroid hormones showed 
high level of TSH.
Cytogenetic studies from peripheral blood lymphocytes was carried 
out using G-banding technique on the propositus and his parents.
The karyotype of the propositus revealed a de novo of 
46,XY,del(18)(p11.3) and his parents showed normal karyotypes.
P03.046  Report of a patient with a 46, XY, 9p- constitution due to 
a paternal t(5;9) translocation
L. Cimbalistienė , V. Šliužas, V. Kučinskas;  
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background. Deletion 9p syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome. It is 
characterized by mental retardation, trigonocephaly and other dysmor -
phic features. We report of a patient with a 46, XY, del(9p) constitution due to a paternal translocation t(5;9), diagnosed in Lithuania.
Case report. The parents of the proband had two healthy children from 
their first marriages. This boy was delivered at 32 weeks of gestation 
by a caesarean section due complicated pregnancy, breech presenta -
tion. At birth his weight was 1980g, length 44cm and head circumfer -
ence 27cm. Clinical examination revealed trigonocephaly, upslanding 
palpebral fissures, epicanthus, hypertelorism, flat nasal ridge, ante -
verted nostrils, long philtrum, cleft palate, micrognathia, low set ears, 
widely spaced nipples, corrected hernia umbilicalis, micropenis, partly 
descended testis, underdeveloped scrotum. A large hemangioma on 
the abdomen and occiput regions was observed. Cardiac evaluation 
revealed a ventricular septal defect. Gastrostoma was performed due 
to swallow difficulties. The chromosome analysis of peripheral blood 
lymphocytes revealed 46,XY, del(9) (p22.3) karyotype. Cytogenetic 
analysis was performed from cultivated peripheral blood lympho -
cytes, the resolution level was over 550 bands. Karyotype analysis 
of both parents revealed normal mother karyotype and a balanced 
t(5;9)(p15.3;p22.3) translocation in the father, which has been con -
firmed using subtelomeric FISH analysis.
Conclusion. The present case illustrates that balanced translocation 
carrier parents have high probability of having baby with 9p- syn -
drome.
P03.047  supernumerary minute chromosome 17 in a boy 
with severe developmental delay: molecular breakpoint in the 
unstable proximal 17p region.
E. Manolakos1, L. Thomaidis2, M. Lagou1, R. Neroutsou1, K. Kefalas1, E. 
Louizou1, M. Rapti1, M. Kontodiou3, N. Triga1, P. Tsoplou1, T. Liehr4, M. B. 
Petersen3, A. Metaxotou1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Bioiatriki S.A, Athens, Greece, 
2Developmental Assessment Unit, 2nd Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Athens, “P. & A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of 
Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 4Jena University Hospital, 
Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany.
Introduction: Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMCs) are 
structurally abnormal chromosomes that cannot be identified or char -
acterized unambiguously by conventional cytogenetics alone. Particu -
larly, chromosome imbalances involving the short arm of chromosome 
17 result in various distinct clinical conditions.
Clinical Report: We describe a 5 years 6 months old boy with micro -
cephaly, mild dysmorphic features and severe global developmental 
delay.
Methods: Chromosome analysis was performed using conventional 
GTG-banding techniques. To identify the origin of the de novo sSMC, 
FISH analysis was performed using centromere-specific multicolor 
FISH. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) Oligonucleotide Micro -
array Analysis was also carried out.
Results: A very small supernumerary marker chromosome was identi -
fied in 85% of blood lymphocytes and FISH studies showed that the 
marker was derived from chromosome 17. Several unique sequence 
probes mapping to the SMS (17p11.2) and CMT1A (17p12) critical re -
gions were applied to assign the distal breakpoint on the der(17) chro -
mosome, which was mapped at 17p12 adjacent to a low-copy repeat 
(LCR) sequence, while the proximal breakpoint mapped within the 
centromere. The karyotype was 47,XY,+mar[51]/46,XY[9].ish der(17).
Conclusions: This represent the first case of a marker chromosome 
17 to be characterized at the molecular level. It is important that more 
cases of sSMC are described using high resolution molecular tech -
niques in order to elucidate a detailed genotype-phenotype correlation. 
Furthermore, a precise determination of the chromosomal breakpoints 
will enable the description of the mechanisms of origin of recurrent 
chromosomal rearrangements like the genomic disorders of the un -
stable proximal 17p region.
P03.048  DiGeorge critical region 2 deletion in a patient with 
delayed psychomotor development and bilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss
R. Genesio1, D. Melis2, P. Boemio2, A. Mormile1, V. Ronga1, V. Gaudieri2, A. 
Conti1, M. Cozzolino2, G. Cappuccio2, F. Vitiello2, L. Nitsch1, G. Andria2;  
1Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology „Federico II“ 
University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics „ Federico II“ University, Cytogenetics11
Naples, Italy.
Partial monosomy 10p is a rare chromosomal aberration (approximate -
ly 50 cases in the literature); it is considered a contiguos gene syn -
drome. Two distinct critical regions have been described, one named 
HDR1, responsible for hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, 
and renal anomalies (HDR-syndrome) and one named DiGeorge criti -
cal region 2 (DGCR2), associated with congenital heart defects and 
thymus hypoplasia/aplasia or T cell defect, respectively.
We report the case of a 4-year-old boy presenting with facial dysmor -
phisms, delayed psychomotor development and bilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 10 short arm 
(10p13-10p14), the smallest deletion found in the literature so far.
Our patient, carrying a deletion of the entire DGCR2 region and a par -
tial deletion of the HDR1 region, showed, unexpectedly, only few minor 
clinical features of DiGeorge 2 syndrome (psychomotor retardation, 
palpebral ptosis, epicanthic folds, anteverted nares, cryptorchidism, 
hand/foot abnormalities ) and did not show typical signs, such as car -
diac defect, cleft palate and reduced T cell population. Furthermore he 
had sensorineural deafness which is one of the characteristic features 
of the HDR syndrome. Our data support the hypothesis that DGS2 
syndrome is associated to locus heterogeneity. We hypothesized that 
the genes responsible for deafness in HDR syndrome or regulatory 
elements of these genes map in the region between the two critical 
regions, namely HDR1 and DGCR2 (Lichtner et al., J Med Genet 
2000).
P03.049  Duplication 8q12: a recognisable phenotype with Duane 
anomaly.
P. Blanchet1, J. Puechberty1,2, A. Schneider1,2, M. Girard2, M. Tournaire2, G. 
Lefort1,2, P. Sarda1, D. Geneviève1,3;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale et chromosomique, Centre de Référence 
Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-
Languedoc Roussillon, CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Faculté 
de Médecine de Montpellier-Nîmes, Montpellier, France, 2Plateforme puce à 
ADN, Service de Génétique Médicale et chromosomique, CHRU Montpellier, 
Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, 3Unité Inserm U844, Institut des 
neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Duane anomaly is a frequent ophthalmologic feature observed in sev -
eral genetic disorders such as Okihiro syndrome (acro-renal-ocular 
syndrome) or Wildervanck syndrome. Here we report on a patient with 
a small duplication of the long arm of the chromosome 8 (8q12, found 
with SNP-array) presenting with duane anomaly, moderate mental re -
tardation and facial features namely horizontal eyebrows with proximal 
flaring of eyebrows, long palpebral fissures, and full cheek and lips. 
We found two other patients in the literature with a 8q12 duplication 
and a similar phenotype. The minimum critical size of the 8q12 dupli -
cation was approximately 1.2 Mb and encompassed 4 genes namely 
the CA8, RAB2 , RLBP1L 1, and CHD7  genes.
The observation of a duplication of the these genes questioned us 
on the potential effects of gene dosage in the phenotype observed in 
patients with 8q12 duplication. To our knowledge, no information is 
available in the literature regarding pathological effects secondary to 
overexpression of the CA8, RAB2 , RLBP1L1 , or CHD7  genes. How -
ever, CA8 loss of function mutations have been recently demonstrated 
to be responsible for ataxia and mild mental retardation, the RAB2  
gene is involved in neuronal adhesion, and neurite growth in vitro  and 
hemizygous loss of function of the CHD7  gene lead to CHARGE syn -
drome suggesting a role of these genes in the phenotype observed in 
8q12 duplicated patients. We believed that patients with 8q12 duplica -
tion share a common recognizable phenotype and we propose that 
8q12 duplication should be considered in patients presenting with a 
syndromic form of Duane anomaly.
P03.050  Results from CEQA 2009, the European Cytogenetic 
External Quality Assessment Scheme
R. T. Howell , B. Quellhorst-Pawley, R. J. Hastings;  
CEQA, Oxford, United Kingdom.
CEQA undertakes annual external assessment of laboratory perfor -
mance by provision of cytogenetic images and case details for analy -
sis through its online website. For 2009, two cases each of postnatal 
blood, prenatal amniotic fluid, haemato-oncology, and pre-implantation 
blastomeres were given, with 71, 72, 46, and 30 laboratories respec -
tively submitting returns. Also, a new pilot EQA scheme for array-CGH using distribution of a DNA sample, open to 30 participants, was run in 
collaboration with the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network 
(EMQN).
The poster outlines details of the cases provided, including images 
and exemplary reports. The marking criteria are explained, whereby 
the specialist groups of assessors assigned a score for each submis -
sion based on the criteria of analytical accuracy, interpretation of the 
significance of the result, and content of the report. Results from all the 
EQAs are summarised and examples of “Critical Error” are included, 
defined as an error that would result in inappropriate clinical interven -
tion. Such errors were found in 27 of the 438 (6%) overall case submis -
sions for the established (non-pilot) schemes.
P03.051  Fanconi anemia: t elomere and t elomerase genes 
evaluation using FisH technique.
M. I. Shehab , A. M. Mohamed, M. M. Eid, H. K. Fayek, G. El Kamah, S. A. 
Temtamy;  
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) an autosomal recessive and X-linked 
disease which belongs to the group of chromosome instability with high 
risk of malignancies. Because telomeres are involved in chromosomal 
stability and cell proliferation , telomeric shortening and deletion will ac -
celerate cell apoptosis and the development of anemia.
Aim: The study aimed to assess the telomeric deletion and the telom -
erase genes (TERC and TERT ) copy number in patients with FA and 
aplastic anemia, compared to controls.
Subjects and methods: The study included 10 patients with aplastic 
anemia (7 FA and 3 non FA) and 5 healthy individuals (control group). 
DEB, All Human Telomeres, TERC, and TERT Gene FISH probes, 
were applied for peripheral blood lymphocytes culture.
Results: There was statistically significant difference (p<0.05; unpaired 
Student’s t-test) in the telomeric deletion of FA patients in relation to 
controls (P< 0.0003), and a significant telomeric deletion in aplastic 
anemia patients (non FA) in relation to controls (P<0.016), but no sig -
nificant difference in the deletion between FA and non FA(P< 0.16). 
The extra- telomeric signals (intrachromosomal and extrachromosom -
al) were increased in FA and non FA patients. No amplification was 
detected for telomerase genes in all patients.
Conclusion: Marked increase in the deletion of telomeric ends was 
detected in all patients. Although in the literature telomerase enzyme 
reactivation was reported, no amplification of telomerase genes were 
detected in our patients. Therefore we suggest that the increase in 
the telomerase enzyme level can be due to other factors than gene 
amplification.
P03.052  chromosomal alterations and sister chromatid 
exchange due to fluoride effects in and around the Dharmapuri 
districts of t amil Nadu
A. Karthick kumar , V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi, M. Arun, B. 
Balamuralikrishnan, P. Manikantan, S. Mustaq Ahammed, K. Sasikala;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Fluorides are organic and inorganic compounds containing the ele -
ment fluorine. Fluorides are generally colorless and they are more or 
less soluble in water and can take the form of a solid, liquid or gas. 
Fluorides are important industrial chemicals with a number of uses but 
the largest uses are for aluminum productions, drinking water fluori -
dation, and the manufacture of fluoridated dental preparations. Water 
with underground sources is more likely to have higher levels of fluo -
ride. Hence the present investigation has been carried out in the Dhar -
mapuri districts to analyse the fluoride effects due to water. The objec -
tive of the present study is to investigate the cytogenetic effects due to 
fluorides among the population in Dharmapuri district, South India. In 
the present study totally 50 samples 25 experimentals and 25 controls 
were selected. All the experimentals were subjected to chromosomal 
alterations (CA), Sister Chromatid Exchange (SCE) and Micronucleus 
(MN). Higher degree of CA like deletions, translocations, dicentrics, 
chromatid gaps, breaks and satellite formation were observed. SCE 
and fewer MN formation were also observed in experimentals when 
compared to their respective controls. In conclusion, the people re -
siding in the Dharmapuri district were found to have a higher level 
of genetic damage and the fluoride effect is hall marked by specific 
behaviors of gene environment relationship which probably defines the 
cellular pathabiology of these fluorides diseases.Cytogenetics11
P03.053  Analysis of factors associated with the cGG expansion 
of the FmR1 gene in a Basque sample: Use of single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (sNPs)
M. Barasoain1, I. Huerta1, M. Télez1, P. Flores2, J. Ramírez1, M. Hernández1, E. 
Ortiz-Lastra3, A. González3, B. Criado4, I. Arrieta1;  
1Department of Genetic, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Faculty 
of science and Technology. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 
2Department of Nursery. School of Nursing. University of the Basque Country, 
Bilbao, Spain, 3Department of Internal Medicine.Faculty of Medicine. University 
of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 4Department of Genetics. Cooperativa de 
Ensino Superior Politecnico e Universitario (CESPU), Porto, Portugal.
The expansion of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’untranslated re -
gion in the first exon of the FMR1 gene is the main cause of the fragile 
X syndrome. This gene maps to Xq27.3 and coincides with the fragile 
site FRAXA. There are some important factors that influence the in -
stability of the repeat. These factors include the length of the repeat, 
the AGG interspersion pattern and the DXS548-FRAXAC1 microsatel -
lite markers associated haplotypes. It has been suggested that the 
use of more stable polymorphisms, like Single Nucleotide Polymor -
phisms (SNPs) could provide new advances in the study of the CGG 
repeat instability. In previous investigations based on the structure of 
the CGG repeat and linked microsatellite markers we showed differ -
ences among the Basque populations analyzed. In the present report, 
in order to complete the investigation about the CGG repeat instability, 
we have studied seven SNPs in the vicinity of the FRAXA repeat (DX -
S548P, WEX28, WEX1, ATL1, FMRb, WEX17 and WEX10) in Markina 
and Arratia, two isolated Basque Valleys of the Biscay province. Our 
preliminary results suggest that there is a preferential association be -
tween DXS548-FRAXAC1 haplotypes and the SNPs ATL1*G, FMRb*A 
and WEX28*G in both valleys. On the other hand, our data indicate 
that several of the analyzed SNPs predispose to the instability of the 
CGG repeat.
P03.054  cytogenetic techniques in management of 
haematological malignancies: Degenerating or gold standard?
B. B. Ganguly ;  
Genetics Center, Navi Mumbai, India.
Conventional cytogenetic techniques played an important role in diag -
nosis and monitoring of CML by characterizing Philadelphia chromo -
some, which has heralded the development of gleevac. Subsequent 
development of FISH technique has enabled faster and sensitive de -
tection of onco-/anti-oncogenes. Nevertheless introduction of PCR and 
microarray techniques has revolutionised the management of haema -
tologic malignancies and development of molecular and individualized 
medicines. PCR based studies require stringent lab-environment and 
validation of quantification of transcript ratio failing which a false posi -
tive result may create confusion among clinicians and patients. Large 
scale clinical trials are being conducted for standardizing real time 
PCR techniques for monitoring MRD condition.
FISH technique, though generate false positive signals and is specific, 
is reliable and getting refined with advancement of probe-design and 
combinatorial application with simultaneous detection of surface anti -
gens (FICTION). Clonal evolution or multilineage condition can only be 
detected by conventional G-banding technique and molecular screen -
ing. The whole genome screening, though possible by SKY or CGH 
techniques, requires validation and refinement in disease manage -
ment. Limitation of resolution of conventional cytogenetic technique 
many times reproduces a normal karyotype and that indicates the 
need for employment of PCR technique especially for JAK2, NPM1, 
etc. Therefore, it is clear that every technology has some merits and 
demerits where G-banding technique is still being considered as pri -
mary step for diagnosis and relapse-evaluation. In known cases, FISH 
could be a better choice. Thus, with the present day technologies 
available, conventional cytogenetic technique cannot be replaced and 
be considered as the gold standard in clinical management.
P03.055  Complex glycerol kinase deficiency in a patient with 
psychomotor retardation: molecular analysis and comparison to 
published data.
M. Hančárová1, M. Vlčková1, P. Hedvičáková1, D. Novotná1, Z. Vlčková1, Š. 
Vejvalková1, F. Fencl2, Z. Sedláček1;  
1Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty 
of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Clinic, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
Glycerol kinase deficiency (GKD) is a rare X-linked recessive disorder 
occurring in two forms, isolated and complex. Isolated GKD is caused 
by point mutations in the glycerol kinase gene ( GK). Complex GKD 
is a contiguous gene syndrome involving the GK locus together with 
other Xp21 sequences including e.g. the adrenal hypoplasia congenita 
(NR0B1  gene) and/or the Duchenne muscular dystrophy ( DMD ) loci.
We present an infant hospitalized at the age of 6 weeks with ionic im -
balance, renal failure, and elevated creatin kinase and liver markers. 
The child suffered from hyponatremia, dehydratation, proteinuria, high 
level of glycerol in urine and weak spontaneous mobility. Today, at the 
age of 2 years, he also shows mild psychomotor retardation.
MLPA analysis of the DMD  gene revealed a deletion of all exons. PCR 
analysis confirmed a deletion of GK, NR0B1  and IL1RAPL1  genes. 
Karyotype analysis showed 46,XY,del(X)(p21.2p21.3), which was also 
confirmed using FISH. These analyses confirmed suspected diagnosis 
of complex GKD. Array CGH analysis showed an 8.7 Mb deletion con -
taining approximately 20 protein-coding genes. The distal breakpoint 
was located between DCAF8L1  and IL1RAPL1 , and the proximal one 
was located in the PRRG1  gene.
About 100 patients with complex GKD and phenotypes reflecting the 
variable size of their deletions have been reported. Characterisation of 
the deletions is therefore an important prognostic factor. Our patient 
carried a rather large deletion including also the IL1RAPL1 gene as -
sociated with X-linked mental retardation and autism.
This work was supported by grants INCORE (EC FP6 043318), CHER -
ISH (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005.
P03.056  comparative analysis of acetylated histone H3 
and methylated DNA distribution along human lymphocyte 
chromosomes
J. Lezhnina1, O. Efimova2, A. Pendina2, T. Kuznetsova2, V. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Peterburg State Universuty, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott‘s 
Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
At the first step of our research we have studied how chromatin regions, 
enriched in acetylated H3 (AcH3K9), are distributed along human 
metaphase chromosomes. Metaphase chromosomes were obtained 
from PHA-stimulated human lymphocytes, fixed with 2% glacial ace -
tic acid in ethanol. 60 metaphases (~400 bands per haploid genome) 
from 5 individuals were studied. Analysis with monoclonal antibodies 
against AcH3K9 (Abcam,USA) revealed clearly distinguishable regions 
with high, medium, weak or absent fluorescence on metaphase chro -
mosomes. Combined DAPI and immunofluorescent staining allowed 
co-localtion the regions enriched/depleted in AcH3K9 with Q-negative/
positive bands (R/G-bands). AcH3K9-richest regions corresponded to 
32 R-bands. Medium to weak AcH3K9-signals were detected in 86 R-
bands. All G-bands demonstrated weak fluorescence. In heterochro -
matic blocks of chromosomes 1,9,16 and Y immunofluorescent signal 
was absent indicating no acetylation of H3K9 in these regions.
At the second step we have compared H3K9 acetylation with DNA 
methylation status, described in our previous study (Pendina et al., 
2005). Non-acetylated heterochromatic regions were hypermethyl -
ated. Among R-bands with medium to weak acetylation 6 bands dem -
onstrated weak, 48 - medium and 32 - high DNA methylation level. 32 
AcH3K9-richest R-bands showed variable DNA methylation level: from 
high in 17 bands and medium in 12 bands to low in 3 bands - 1p13, 
2q31, 2q33. Low level of DNA methylation in highly acetylated bands 
favors their specific function in lymphocytes.
Thus, the co-location of acetylated and methylated chromatin regions 
suggests that active and inactivated chromatin is band-specifically dis -
tributed along chromosome arms.
Supported by Carl Zeiss and Administration of Saint-Petersburg.
P03.057  Identification of recurrent cytegenetic aberrations in hepatoma patients in southern india
S. Mohana Devi1, V. Balachandar1, K. Sasikala1, R. Sangeetha1, P. 
Manikantan1, A. Karthick kumar1, S. Suresh kumar1, L. Venkatakrishnan2, S. 
Dharwatkar3;  
1Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, 2PSG Medical College and Hospital, 
Coimbatore, India, 3KLE Medical University, Bangalore, India.
Hepatoma (Primary liver cancer) is the cancer of the hepatocytes. It 
usually grows in the liver as a ball-like tumor, invading the normal tis -Cytogenetics11
sue surrounding it. The aim of the present study was to identify the 
Chromosomal aberrations in hepatoma patients to assess whether pe -
ripheral blood had non-random cytogenetic aberrations as observed in 
tumor samples. The study was conducted on the peripheral blood of 
67 hepatoma patients (aged 30 to 85 years male) undergoing hepatic 
resection of liver tumour with curative intent. In the present study all 
the experimentals and controls were analysed chromosomal altera -
tions using conventional G-banging.
In the present investigation cancer patients had significantly increased 
aberrant metaphases compared to controls. Hepatoma samples re -
vealed frequent aberrations in 1q, 8q, 17q, 20q, 4q , 8p, 13q, and 16q. 
Our finding of a high incidence of 1q gain and frequent deletion in the 
short arm of chromosome 8 strongly suggested this aberration was as -
sociated with the development of this disease. Chromatid breaks were 
seen on chromosomes 1p, 2p, 2q and 4q while chromatid gaps were 
on chromosomes 1p, 2p, 3p, and 3q.  
The results of this study might help in providing important clues and 
to add better knowledge in the location of relevant genes on specific 
altered regions of chromosomes. Comprehensive elucidation of the 
specific genes and molecular pathways involved in progression from 
pre neoplastic lesion to frank neoplastic in the protracted process of 
hepatocarcinogenesis will facilitate development of new strategies for 
prevention and therapy.
P03.058  New chromosome aberrations in male hypogonadism
R. Mikelsaar1, J. Lissitsina1, K. Ausmees2, M. Punab2, P. Korrovits2;  
1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia, 2Centre of Andrology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
Hypogonadism is a lack of testosterone in male patients and can be 
of central (hypothalamic or pituitary) or testicular origin. The molecular 
basis of hypogonadism has been identified for only 25%-30% of pa -
tients, with mutations mostly in the KAL1, FGFR1 and GnRHR genes. 
Although the systematic chromosome study of patients is a powerful 
approach in the search for new loci associated with diseases, there is 
little data, other than isolated case reports, documenting the karyotype 
of a more larger sample of hypogonadotropic patients.
In this context we have studied cytogenetically 51 patients with pri -
mary hypogonadism (n=28) and secondary hypogonadism (n=23) 
classified by the gonadotropins level. Chromosome analyses were 
performed from peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures using GTG, C-
banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) methods. Of 51 
patients studied, 34 were normal. However, 17 males (33.3%) had ma -
jor chromosome abnormalities with sex chromosome abnormalities in 
14 (27.5%) cases and autosome abnormalities in 3 (5.9%) patients. 
All three males were with secondary hypogonadism. They had chro -
mosome abnormalities, previously not described in the patients with 
secondary hypogonadism, such as supernumerary inv dup(22)(q11.1); 
45,XY,t(13;14)(q10;q10), and 46,XY,t(5;13), all confirmed by FISH 
method.
The revealed new cases, particularly translocations with new break-
events provide valuable information for positional cloning of new sec -
ondary hypogonadism genes, which might be involved in the patho -
genesis of male secondary hypogonadism. Supported partly by target 
financing SF 0180096s08 of the Estonian Ministry of Science and 
Education.
P03.059  X chromosome monosomy restricted to the left 
ventricle is not a major cause of isolated hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome (HLHs)
L. Bernardini1, M. Giuffrida1, P. Francalanci2, A. Capalbo1, A. Novelli1, F. 
Callea2, B. Dallapiccola2;  
1IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza” Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Bambino Gesù 
Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) has an incidence of 0.016-
0.036% live births. HLHS encompasses a spectrum of heart anomalies 
characterized by obstructive lesions of the left side of the heart accom -
panied by varying degrees of underdevelopment of the aorta, aortic 
valve, left ventricle, mitral valve, as well as mitral atresia or stenosis. 
The aetiology of HLHS is heterogeneous and can be observed as an 
isolated defect or in association with different chromosome abnormali -
ties. In particular, HLHS has been reported in about 20% of patients 
with 45,X karyotype, suggesting that monosomy X is a cause of this 
developmental heart defect.The aim of this study was to evaluate if X chromosome monosomy re -
stricted to the left ventricle was associated to isolated HLHS. Formalin-
fixed, paraffin-embedded cardiac tissue of 19 patients, 10 males and 9 
females, affected by HLHS without extracardiac congenital anomalies 
and with a euploid karyotype, were investigated. For each sample 50 
consecutive nuclei isolated from both ventricles were analysed in a 
blind fashion by interphase FISH with X/Y/18 centromeric probes. The 
same analysis was performed on a group of 15 chromosomally normal 
pediatric patients affected by either restrictive or dilated cardiomyopa -
thy, as negative controls. Mosaic monosomy X was detected in the 
cardiac tissue nuclei of both groups, with similar frequencies (6-16% 
and 12-16%, respectively). In conclusion, this study has excluded that 
X chromosome monosomy confined to the left heart is a major case of 
HLHS, arguing that different pathogenic mechanisms are responsible 
for syndromic and isolated HLHS.
P03.060  Prenatal detection and follow-up of a mosaic i(18p) 
case. A complex case for genetic counseling.
K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, P. Tammur1, T. Ilus1, M. Jürgenson1, T. Reimand1,2, M. 
Sitska1;  
1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, 
Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
Prenatally detected mosaic aneuploidy leads to problems in genetic 
counseling. The risk for an abnormal clinical outcome varies accord -
ing to the chromosomes and tissues involved and to the persentage 
of cells with unbalanced karyotype. We present a prenatal finding of 
mosaic tetrasomy 18p detected at amniocentesis, not confirmed after 
birth in cord blood and skin, but present in placental tissue, buccal 
smear and cells from urine of the baby.
Case report: Amniocentesis was done to 42-year-old woman due to 
positive serum-screening for Down syndrome, normal ultrasound. Two 
cultures were set up, chromosomes analysed by G-banding and FISH. 
Unbalanced mosaic karyotype with tetrasomy 18p in 17% of cells was 
found: 46,XY[47]/47,XY,+i(18)(p10)[18].ish i(18)(p10)(pter+,D18Z1+,p
ter+).
Parents opted to continue pregnancy. Apparently normal male baby 
was delivered prematurely (31wp, preeclampsy).
Postnatal chromosomal analysis of cord blood (22 mitoses, 70 nuclei 
analysed) and skin fibroblasts (17 mitoses, 100 nuclei) showed normal 
male karyotype. Unbalanced mosaic karyotype +i(18p) was confirmed 
in ~20% of cells in placental tissue (35 metaphases, 55 nuclei) thus 
suggesting to the diagnosis of confined placental mosaicism.
Subsequent FISH analysis of buccal smear (100 nuclei) and urine 
sediment cells (50 nuclei) confirmed the presence of +i(18p) in mosaic 
form in the tissues of baby as well (17% and 24% respectively). In this 
case the final diagnosis of true mosaicism (involvement of entodermal 
and ectodermal tissues) was made thus giving the prognosis of facing 
developmental problems in near future.
Clinical data of our patient at birth and at 7 months of age will be pre -
sented.
P03.061  A liability to malignancy, immunodeficiency, facial 
abnormalities and chromosomal instability without mutation 
in DNMTB  gene in two siblings: new chromatin disorder 
delineation?
A. Polityko1, N. Kosyakova2, H. Tönnies3, K. Sperling3, O. Khurs1, N. 
Rumyantseva1, I. Naumchik1, H. Neitzel3, A. Weise2, T. Liehr2;  
1National Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Jena University 
Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 
3Institute of Human Genetics, Charité, Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany.
Several human diseases which are characterized by alterations or 
modification of chromatin structure caused by changes of methylation 
pattern are considered as so-called ‘chromatin disorders’. ICF syn -
drome (OMIM #242860) belongs to the aforementioned disorders and 
is a very rare recessive disease caused by mutations of the gene DN-
MT3B  that encodes the ‘de novo DNA-methyltransferase 3B’. We re -
port on a family with ICF-like symptoms but without DNMT3B  mutation 
and with a rather atypical pattern of heterochromatin abnormalities.
Methods. Chromosomal stability of both sisters and their parents using 
GTG-banded or standard solid-stained chromosomes of 48, 72 and 96 
h blood lymphocyte cultures and karyotypes investigation performed 
on the base of c onventional cytogenetics . Molecular cytogenetics  Cytogenetics117
approaches were performed for further investigation of specificity of 
cytogenetic instability in this family. Two-color interphase FISH using 
centromeric probes for X/Y-chromosomes (Abbott/Vysis) and multi -
plex-fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) analysis was applied 
to clarify the composition of complex aberrations, irresolvable by con -
ventional methods. The analysis of chromosomes most frequently in -
volved in aberrations was performed. 100 metaphases were analyzed 
per individual. Epstein Barr virus based immortalization of the family 
blood was done.
Results. Karyotypes of both sibs and their parents were normal. Evi -
dent specificity of chromosome instability was presented by high fre -
quency of juxtacentromeric heterochromatin rearrangements, chromo -
somal fragments and despiralization or pulverization. However, muta -
tions in DNMT3B  could not be detected.
Conclusion. Clinical, molecular genetic and cytogenetic findings will 
be presented. The discovery of a new so-called ‘chromatin disorder’ 
is suggested.
P03.062  the results of cytogenetic analyses in 407 infertile 
women in Prešov region, slovakia
I. Boroňová , I. Bernasovský, J. Bernasovská, E. Petrejčíková, A. Bôžiková, S. 
Mačeková, D. Gabriková, M. Soták, A. Sovičová;  
Excellence Centre of Animal and Human Ecology, Faculty of Humanities and 
Natural Sciences, University of Prešov, Prešov, Slovakia.
The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of chromosome 
anomalies in infertile women from Prešov region (Slovakia) in 1998-
2009. We analyzed the karyotypes of 407 individuals with clinical diag -
nosis of infertility included primary sterility, secondary sterility and re -
peated abortions using cytogenetic banding techniques. We detected 
fifteen aberrant karyotypes that corresponds to chromosome aberra -
tions frequency of 3.7%. Chromosomal polymorphism was detected 
in 17.7% of individuals. The most frequent heterochromatin variant 
detected in 4.7% of women of study survey was 15s+. Increased 
length of heterochromatin and satellites in autosomal chromosomes 
were present in 9.2% of women. The results of our study confirmed the 
higher occurrence of chromosome anomalies in infertile women that 
absolutely reasons indication of cytogenetic examination.
P03.063  chromosomal instability in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes and risk of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in south indian population
V. Balachandar , S. Mohana Devi, K. Sasikala, P. Manikantan, M. Arun, B. 
Balamuralikrishnan, S. Mustaq Ahammed, S. Dharwatkar;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is a chronic idiopathic inflamma -
tion of gastrointestinal tract. The two main forms of IBD are Crohn’s 
Disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). In the present study about 43 
patients were investigated and they were analysed for different chro -
mosomal alterations using standard protocol. Hence blood samples 
were collected from various hospitals of Coimbatore district after ob -
taining the consent of patients. Then the patients were divided into 
four groups along with suitable age matched normal healthy controls 
for each group. In the present study, all the patients and controls were 
subjected to chromosomal analysis using the standard protocol. 14 of 
the 43 (32.5%) patients and 2 controls of the 43 (4.65%) were found to 
have different chromosomal aberrations. Group I patients were found 
to have the maximum number of chromosomal aberrations with 8 pa -
tients (18.6%) of the 43 patients displaying aberrations like deletion, 
translocations, mosaic and satellite. In group II, four patients (9.3%) 
were found to have different chromosomal aberrations like transloca -
tion and deletion. In group III, two patients (4.6%) were found to have 
aberration of deletion type. None of the group IV patients displayed 
chromosomal aberrations of any type. Two of the controls in group 
I showed minor aberrations (4.65%).This study in its own small way 
might contribute valuable nuggets that could aid in solving the complex 
clues underlying this multifactorial disease and which are on the rise 
in Indian population.P03.064**  Parental insertional balanced translocations are an 
important cause of apparently de novo cNVs in patients with 
developmental anomalies.
B. A. Nowakowska1, N. de Leeuw2, R. Thoelen1, R. Pfundt2, H. Mieloo2, B. de 
Vries2, J. P. Fryns1, J. R. Vermeesch1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 
2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Array CGH screening is becoming a first tier diagnostic test for the 
identification of copy number changes in patients with mental retar -
dation and/or congenital anomalies. The identification of a causative 
CNV is not only important to make a proper diagnosis but also to en -
able the accurate estimation of the recurrence risk to family members. 
The recurrence risk for de novo CNVs is considered very low, espe -
cially for de novo  interstitial submicroscopic CNVs. At the macroscopic 
level insertional translocations occur only in approximately 1:80000 
live births. However, despite of a substantial number of sporadic re -
ports, the frequency of submicroscopic insertional translocations re -
mains unknown.
To determine the frequency by which insertional translocations occur, 
we investigated the potential presence of an insertional translocation 
in a consecutive series of 326 de novo CNVs, including both dele -
tions and duplications. For deletion, FISH with a probe within the CNV 
was performed on metaphase from both parents to determine whether 
one of the parents is carrier of an insertional translocation. For dupli -
cations, FISH was on metaphases of the index patient to determine 
whether the duplication was in tandem or on another chromosome. In 
the latter case, both parents were tested for the presence of an IT. In 
three (0.9%) parents a balanced, cryptic interchromosomal insertional 
translocation was detected.
This study shows that submicroscopic insertional translocations are 
much more frequent than microscopicly visible ITs. This knowledge 
should be taken into account during counselling family members and 
might trigger follow up diagnostic tests in the parents.
P03.065  t wo girls with mental retardation and behavioural 
abnormalities: is the deletion of the A tXN1 gene on 6p22.3 a 
major factor in causing the phenotype?
T. Barøy1,2, D. Misceo1,2, M. Fannemel2, A. Stormyr2, O. K. Rødningen2, 
J. R. Helle2, Ø. Braaten2, C. F. Rustad2, B. E. Kristiansen2, H. S. Sorte2, P. 
Strømme3,4, E. Frengen1,2;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway, 
2Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Norway, 
3Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Norway, 4Faculty 
Division Ullevål University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Norway.
6p22 interstitial deletions are relatively rare, with only eight patients 
described so far. The clinical phenotype in these patients includes 
developmental delay/mental retardation, defects of brain, heart and 
kidney, craniofacial malformations and dysmorphic features. The com -
mon deleted region, 2.2 Mb, harbouring 12 genes, has been defined 
as critical for this syndrome. ATXN1 , located within this interval, has 
been suggested as a candidate gene for the mental retardation based 
on its expression in CNS and the cognitive impairments manifested in 
knock out mice. We report on two patients carrying partly overlapping 
de novo deletions within 6p22.3, which are smaller than the ones pre -
viously reported. Patient 1 displays mild mental retardation and behav -
ioural problems; her 115 kb deletion (chr6:16215803-16332297, hg19) 
encompasses only GMPR  and ATXN1 . Patient 2 has severe mental 
retardation, autistic features and hyperactivity. Her deletion spans 2.3 
Mb (chr6:14545576-16846846, hg19) and includes JARID2 , DTNBP1  
and MYLIP , in addition to GMPR  and ATXN1 . Because the GMP re -
ductases encoded by GMPR and GMPR2  have redundant functions, 
haploinsufficiency of GMPR  is not likely causing the cognitive impair -
ments in our patients. We therefore suggest that ATXN1 hemizygosity 
is sufficient to cause the mental retardation in patient 1. Furthermore, 
additional genes such as MYLIP , which is expressed in brain and has 
been shown to have a role in regulating neurite outgrowth, is expected 
to contribute to the significantly more severe phenotype of patient 2.Cytogenetics11
P03.066**  inverted duplication associated with an uncommon 
1p36 interstitial deletion: description and mecanism
A. Coussement , J. Milosevic, F. Baverel, D. Le Tessier, G. Quenum, A. 
Ménard, J. Dupont;  
Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, APHP - Groupe hospitalier Cochin – Saint 
Vincent de Paul ; Université, Paris, France.
Inverted duplications with terminal deletion are rare chromosomal 
rearrangement. They have been described for a greater number of 
chromosomal ends since the development of molecular techniques. 
We report the first case of an inverted duplication associated with an 
interstitiel deletion of chromosome 1 in a 23 years old woman with 
mental retardation, dysmophic features and epilepsy. The cytogenetic 
analysis shows a normal female karyotype. The analysis with BAC ar -
ray-CGH shows a chromosomal rearrangement consisting of a dele -
tion and a duplication of the short arm of chromosome 1.The analysis 
with oligonucleotide array-CGH led us to the delineation of a 5 Mb du -
plication and 3.2 Mb deletion. A two color in situ hybridization allowed 
us to demonstrate for the first time an inverted duplication with an in -
terstitial deletion. An Affymetrix SNP array discovered an uniparental 
disomy distal to the rearrangement. Two mechanisms were suggested 
to explain these chromosomal rearrangements:
- non allelic homologous recombination, the main mechanism in the 
inverted duplication with terminal deletion of the 8p. This abnormality is 
characterised by a single copy region in between the deletion and the 
duplication and by an inverted LCR or a micro paracentric inversion 8p 
in one of the parent.
- U-type exchange, characterised by the absence of a disomic region.
Neither of these mechanisms can explain the formation of the inverted 
duplication with a interstitial deletion witch leads us to expose a third 
possibility: a replication abnormality like FoSTeS (Fork stalling and 
template switching).
P03.067  A case with t urner-like phenotype carrying iso(Y)/
monosomy X mosaicism
O. Cetin1, V. Okur1, M. Erdogan1,2, T. Kalkan1, F. Duzcan1;  
1pamukkale university school of medicine dept. of medical genetics, denizli, 
Turkey, 2Ministry of Health Etlik Zubeyde Hanim Obstetric&Gynecology Training 
and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Sexual disorders are associated with various numerical and structural 
aberrations of sex chromosomes. As for Y chromosome, isochromo -
somes are the most commonly reported abnormalities. Here we report 
a 14-year-old girl with short stature, Turner-like phenotype and amen -
orrhea. Her medical history was not remarkable. She was the second 
child of healthy non-consanguineous parents and had two healthy 
sisters. Her physchomotor development was normal while height and 
weight were below 3rd centile. Physical examination showed no axil -
lary hairs and her breast development was TANNER Stage 1. Plasma 
levels of estradiol, FSH and LH indicated hypergonadotrophic hypogo -
nadism. Her bone age was 2 years below the chronological age. Ab -
dominal MRI for uterus and ovaries showed that uterus was hypoplastic 
but no ovaries were visualized. Karyotyping with standard GTG band -
ing revealed mos46,X,iso(Y)(qter--> p11.1::p11.1-->qter)[20]/45,X[11]. 
C banding and subsequent FISH analysis with X and Y centromeric 
probes supported karyotyping. SRY analysis and laparoscopic explo -
ration for redundant testicular tissue are planned.
P03.068**  Chromosomal imbalances are an infrequent cause of 
non-syndromic sporadic congenital heart defects
J. Breckpot1, S. Jackmaert1, T. Voet1, J. R. Vermeesch1, M. Gewillig2, K. 
Devriendt1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization leads to an increased de -
tection of causal chromosomal imbalances in individuals with syn -
dromic congenital heart defects (CHD) (Thienpont et al.,  2007). This 
study explores the incidence of causal imbalances involved in non-
syndromic sporadic CHD. High resolution SNP array was performed in 
44 sporadic patients with an isolated and complex CHD (univentricular 
heart or atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)). SNP array experiments 
were conducted, as described (Korn et al., 2008). Genotypes were 
compared to a home-made reference model. Variants <10kb or with 
a >90% CNP overlap were not further investigated. CNVs which com -prise chromosomal regions or genes known for causing CHD, were 
considered causal. The remainder were regarded as unclassified vari -
ants (UCV) with variable degree of causality based on gene-content 
and inheritance (Breckpot et al., 2010).
101 rare variants were detected in 37 out of 44 patients. A de novo 
22q11.21 duplication in one patient with AVSD was considered causal. 
We detected on average 2 UCVs per patient. Mean size of the detect -
ed UCVs was 83kb (median 31kb), comprising a mean of 52 markers 
per UCV (median 19).
Unlike previous studies (>10%, Greenway et al.,  2009), we demon -
strate that chromosomal imbalances are an infrequent cause of spo -
radic, non-syndromic CHD. The 22q11.21 duplication was considered 
causal, since several independent studies showed an association with 
various developmental disorders including isolated CHD. Additionally, 
we detected a large number of UCVs in this patient cohort. Further 
studies are ongoing to assess the relevance of these unique variants 
in the pathogenesis of CHD.
P03.069  Phenotype-genotype correlation in a t atar ethnic child 
with Kabuki-like features
V. Plaiasu1, D. Ochiana1, G. Motei1, A. Costin2, E. Neagu3, B. Iancu3;  
1IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2District Hospital Ilfov ”Sf.
Imparati Constantin si Elena”, Bucharest, Romania, 3National Institute of Legal 
Medicine „Mina Minovici”, Bucharest, Romania.
We report a 1-year-and 4 months-old girl, Tatar ethnic child, originat -
ing from South-Eastern region of Romania, with a phenotype reminis -
cent of Kabuki syndrome, mild developmental delay, long palpebral 
fissures, short stature. In 14 of 50 GTG-banded metaphases obtained 
from peripheral blood lymphocytes, a marker chromosome smaller 
than a G group chromosome was found. Fluorescence in situ  hybrid -
izations (FISH) showed the marker to be of X-chromosome origin. 
Also molecular analysis of the patient’s genetic material confirmed 
the absence of the SRY gene. Proband‘s karyotype was described as 
mos45,X[36]/46,X,mar(X)[14]. Karotypes of the parents were normal. 
Other molecular studies will be performed. We present our case com -
paratively with another published Kabuki-like cases with sex chromo -
some abnormalities.
P03.070  simultaneous copy number and loss of heterozygosity 
detection using Agilent’s cGH+sNP platform
P. Costa , B. Curry, B. Peter, P. Anderson, N. Sampas, S. Giles, A. Ashutosh, J. 
Ghosh, D. Roberts, A. De Witte;  
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
In the past few years, genome-wide studies have broadened the need 
for simultaneous detection of genomic variations and allelic imbalanc -
es. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) measurements can com -
plement DNA copy number (CN) measurements to enable detection of 
allelic gains and copy-neutral changes such as loss of heterozygosity 
(LOH) and uniparental disomy (UPD).
The current SurePrint G3 Human CGH platform was extended to in -
clude a set of SNP probes on the same microarray, allowing simul -
taneous DNA Copy Number (CN) and Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) 
detection. Using the standard enzymatic labeling protocol, we evalu -
ated the CN and LOH state in a set of cytogenetic samples with previ -
ously characterized disorders. The genomic DNA was restriction di -
gested with AluI and RsaI, allowing detection of SNPs located in the 
enzyme recognition sites. Following hybridization of the labeled gDNA 
to CGH+SNP microarrays, the data were analyzed using Agilent’s Ge -
nomic Workbench software.
Several LOH regions, as small as 5.8 Mb, were detected in different 
samples. A trisomy of chromosome 21 and a duplicated region on 
chromosome X were identified in two samples. The assay correctly 
assigned known partial and complete UPDs. In one case, extended 
segments of homozygosity were found throughout the genome as a 
consequence of parental consanguinity. In two additional cases, UPD 
was associated with individuals known to have Angelman and Prader-
Willi syndromes, respectively. Our CGH+SNP platform confidently and 
accurately identified and mapped allelic gains, LOH and UPD aberra -
tions, previously reported as associated with the samples studied.Cytogenetics11
P03.071  molecular and clinical characterization of 6q16 
deletions encompassing MCHR2 , SIM1  and GRIK2  genes in 
3 patients with mental retardation +/- high weight and small 
extremities
C. DUBOURG1,2, S. JAILLARD3,2, C. HENRY3, O. RAOUL4, J. LUCAS3, J. 
MOSSER2,5, V. DAVID1,2, H. JOURNEL6, S. ODENT7,2;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, RENNES, France, 2UMR 6061 
CNRS, IGDR, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 
3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU, RENNES, France, 4Laboratoire de 
Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 5Plateforme 
Transcriptome Biogenouest IBiSa, Rennes, France, 6Service de Génétique 
Médicale, CHBA, Vannes, France, 7Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU, 
CLAD-Ouest, RENNES, France.
Deletions of the chromosomal segment 6q16 have been reported in 
association with a Prader-Willi like phenotype. Array comparative ge -
nomic hybridization enables to accurately define the region of interest 
and five cases have recently been reported by Bonaglia et al (2008), 
allowing them to narrow the minimal critical region to a 4,1-Mb seg -
ment.
Here we describe three more cases of overlapping 6q16 deletions. By 
comparing these deletions with the previously reported 4,1-Mb region, 
we define a new minimal deleted fragment of 2,2 Mb (100,489,030 
->102,689,000)(hg18-build36) involving four genes: MCHR2  encodes 
a receptor for melanin-concentrating hormone which is involved in the 
control of feeding behaviour and energy metabolism; SIM1  (candidate 
gene for obesity), a transcription factor that plays an important role in 
the development of the paraventricular neurones; ACSS3 , an helicase; 
and GRIK2 , a glutamate receptor which could be involved in autistic-
like behaviour.
The three patients reported here present a moderate developmental 
delay with language retardation.
Two of them have also a high weight and even obesity in accordance 
with haploinsufficiency of the SIM1 gene, as well as a rounded face 
and small extremities. On the contrary, the third patient has an average 
weight and normal extremities, but he presents a complex chromosom -
al rearrangement with two deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6, 
in 6q16.1 and 6q16.2q16.3. Moreover, the deleted chromosome 6 is 
involved in a balanced translocation (6 ;13)(q16.1q21).
The phenotypic difference could be explained by expression altera -
tion of another gene, alteration which would offset haploinsufficiency 
of SIM1 .
P03.072  mental retardation in a patient with 14q32.33 and 
19p13.3 microdeletions characterized using array-based cGH
E. Preikšaitienė1, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, P. Magini3, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 
2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 
3Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
A 17-year-old boy was referred to the Centre for Medical Genetics be -
cause of abnormal gait and distinctive phenotype. It consists of mod -
erate mental retardation and dysmorphic features including narrow 
palate, sparse eyebrows, scoliosis and broad feet. The conventional 
cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal 46,XY karyotype. Array-based 
comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) analysis demonstrated 
the presence of a 0,4 Mb deletion in 14q32.33 and 0,4 Mb deletion in 
19p13.3. The deleted regions encompass 26 genes, among which at 
least 3 candidate genes for genotype-phenotype correlation could be 
delineated. The products of TMEM121, GPR54 and KISS1R genes 
are expressed in the developing brain and could possibly be related 
to mental retardation. Additional patients with well-characterized de -
letions within these regions will be needed to determine the role of 
individual genes for the clinical manifestations.
The research leading to these results is funded by the European Com -
munity‘s Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under 
grant agreement n° 223692, CHERISH project.
P03.073  Report of two dysmorphic and mentally retarded 
cousins with identical inherited derivative chromosome 1 with 
different degrees of clinical severity
E. Bagherizadeh1, Y. Shafeghati1, F. Hadipour1, H. Hekmat1, T. Naieb Bagher1, 
F. Behjati1,2;  
1Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of 
Social Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, Genetics Research Center, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Two paternal cousins were referred for genetic counseling due to 
abnormal clinical features and mental retardation. The first was a 3 
year old female from a consanguineous marriage and the other was 
a 4 year old male and result of a non-consanguineous marriage. Both 
mothers had a history of miscarriages. Cytogenetic studies revealed 
an abnormal karyotype, described as der(1)t(1;9)(q42;q32). In the first 
patient, the abnormal chromosome was inherited from her father and 
the other from his mother. Both these parents had the same balanced 
reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1 and 9, described as 
t(1;9)(q42;q32).
The two patients had similar clinical features including mental retarda -
tion, microcephaly , speech and developmental delay, aracnodactly, 
asymmetric face, asymmetric skull, short filtrum and high arched pal -
ate and female patient had a history of seizure up to1.5 years. How -
ever, the clinical features in the male patient were more severe than 
the female patient. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case.
P03.074   
Structural rearrangements of chromosome 8p23.1-p23.3 related 
to mental retardation
V. Dirsė1, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, K. Männik3, A. Kurg3, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University 
Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Mental retardation (MR) which occurs in about 1-3 % of population is 
etiologically very heterogeneous and unexplained in more than a half 
of all cases. Rearrangements in 8p are frequent and associated with 
MR. A unique feature of the chromosome 8 is a vast region of 15 Mb 
on distal 8p that appears to have a strikingly high mutation rate. Three 
major factors have been associated with high mutation rates: proximity 
to telomeres, high recombination rate and high A+T content.
We identified one duplication and five deletions in 8p23.1-p23.3 region 
using Infinium-2 whole-genome genotyping HumanCytoSNP-12 Bead -
Chips (Illumina) and arrayCGH (Agilent 105K) in 38 patients with MR. 
Rearrangements size varies from 500 Kb to 6.7 Mb. 6.7 Mb 8p23.1-
23.3 duplication was identified in 11 years old boy with MR, develop -
mental delay, macrocephaly, speech disorders. Region of 8p23.1-23.3 
contains genes which may be related to neurological abnormalities: 
CLN8 , DLGAP2 , MCPH1 . Gene CLN8  encodes a transmembrane 
protein which is postulated to function in lipid synthesis, transport, or 
sensing. Mutations in CLN8  gene have altered levels of sphingolipids 
and phospholipids in the brain and are associated with progressive 
epilepsy with MR which is a subtype of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. 
DLGAP2  gene encodes a membrane-associated guanylate kinase 
that is localized at postsynaptically density in neuronal cells and may 
play a role in the molecular organization of synapses and in neuronal 
cell signaling. Additional copies of MCPH1  gene have been associated 
with macrocephaly.
P03.075  sNPs-array analysis in 100 patients with mental 
retardation
V. Pecile1, P. D‘Adamo1, L. Esposito2, P. Gasparini1,3, M. S. Rocca1;  
1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2CBM SCRL, Area Science Park, Trieste, 
Italy, 3Department of Reproduction and Development Science, Trieste, Italy.
The underlying genetic defect remains difficult to diagnose in the major -
ity of patients suffering from mental retardation Recent developments 
in genomic microarray technology now allow for the genomewide de -
tection of submicroscopic chromosomal alterations. The SNPs array 
currently represents the technique with the highest resolution power, 
since they allow to identify chromosomal abnormality as for example 
variations in the number of copies (CNV) as duplications or deletions 
and uniparental disomy (UPD). We have collected 100 samples from 
patients with normal karyotypes and some samples from their unaf -
fected family members. The patients presented moderate or severe 
MR, associated with at least one of the following clinical features: 
one major malformation and/or dysmorphism and/or multiple minor 
anomalies. We have applied Infinium-2 genotyping assay with Hu -
man370CNV-Duo or Quad BeadChips (Illumina Inc.) to detect CNVs 
and copy-neutral LOHs.
The data was analyzed with GenomeStudio 2009. We developed an 
ad hoc database to maintain all relevant information .Cytogenetics120
The Illumina SNP platform detected CNVs most of which have already 
been reported in the Database of Genomic Variants or recurrently 
present in our samples. We shall discuss unique CNVs and their as -
sociated phenotype.
Patients with CNVs, who weren’t identified in the database or recur -
rent in our cases, have been submitted to further investigation (FISH 
or SNPs array on their parents). The results show that SNPs array can 
be used to reliably detect and characterize subtelomeric and interstitial 
CNVs which are the cause of the pathological phenotype.
P03.076  Novel cryptic genomic aberration associated with 
mental retardation
K. Männik1, S. Parkel1, O. Žilina1, M. Nõukas1, P. Palta1, T. Esko1, H. 
Puusepp1,2, M. Remm1, K. Õunap2,3, A. Kurg1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Genetics, United 
Laboratories, Tartu, Estonia.
Expanding usage of whole-genome genotyping arrays in molecular cy -
togenetics has given a new quality to molecular karyotyping of patients 
with developmental abnormalities e.g. mental retardation (MR). In ad -
dition to high resolution of SNP-CGH arrays, the possibility to combine 
copy-number variation (CNV) data with genotyping information pro -
vides an advantage to use array data for more widespread analysis. It 
allows to detect uniparental disomy and copy-number neutral loss of 
heterozygosity tracks on genome-wide level as well as to character -
ize allelic composition and inheritance pattern of found aberrations or 
to use the same information in whole-genome association studies for 
relating smaller rare CNVs with phenotypic features in patients.
Here we report a cohort of Estonian patients with idiopathic mental 
retardation screened for genomic structural aberrations - CNVs, incon -
sistencies of mendelian inheritance as indicative for potential unipa -
rental disomy (UDP) and rare extended runs of homozygosity (ROH) 
- by Infinium whole-genome genotyping assay with HumanCNV370 ar -
rays (Illumina Inc.). We found structural aberrations with potential clini -
cal significance in 23% of investigated families, including seven cases 
with recurrent microdeletion or -duplication syndromes and eight fami -
lies with imbalances overlapping with previous similar reports. Four 
novel aberrations with probable clinical significance were identified in 
chromosome regions 2p25.1-p24.3, 3p12.1-p11.2, 7p21.1-p21.1 and 
Xq28. Additional four CNVs less than 200kb in size and two extended 
ROHs with potential, yet uncertain role in the pathogenesis of MR were 
detected.
P03.077  Xp22.3 interstitial deletion: a clinically recognisable 
genetic condition identified by array comparative genomic 
hybridisation
H. Ben khelifa, I. Ben Abdallah, S. Dimassi, S. Mougou, A. Saad , H. Elghezal;  
laboratory of cytogenetics,molecular genetics and reproductive biology - Farhat 
Hached hospital, sousse, Tunisia.
X linked ichthyosis is a genetic disorder affecting the skin and is caused 
by a deficit in the steroid sulfatase enzyme (STS). This syndrome is 
often associated with a recurrent microdeletion at Xp22.31.
Most of the STS deleted patients have X linked ichthyosis as the only 
clinical feature and it is believed that patients with more complex dis -
order, including mental retardation are the result of contiguous gene 
deletion .
This lead to the hypothesis that mental retardation gene should be 
present within this microdeletion. It was previously proposed the VCX-
A,a member of the VCX (variably charged X-chromosome mRNA) 
gene family, as the candidate gene for X-linked non-specific mental 
retardation in patients with X linked ichthyosis.
Using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH array) on a 44K 
resolution, we identified an interstitial deletion of Xp22.3 of 1, 32 Mb 
(oligonucleotide position: from A-14-P139110 to A-14-P125042), in -
cluding the STS,VCX (A, B, 3A and 3B) and HDHD1A genes.
The phenotype observed in our male patient had X linked ichthyosis, 
moderate mental retardation, facial dysmorphic features and epilepsy.
Many previous results, suggest that VCX-A gene is sufficient to main -
tain normal mental development. Thus, our findings support a causal 
role for
VCX-A dysfunction in X linked ichthyosis patients who manifest mental 
retardation.P03.079  Use of the Affymetrix cytogenetics Whole-Genome 
2.7M Array in routine molecular karyotyping: first experiences 
and results
S. Spengler1, M. Begemann1, B. Denecke2, T. Eggermann1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany, 2IZKF „BIOMAT“, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany.
Microarray analysis has become an increasingly powerful tool for the 
detection of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. Previously, we 
used the Affymetrix 500K and the Genome-Wide 6.0 SNP arrays for 
research purposes and now established the Cytogenetics Whole-Ge -
nome 2,7M Array for routine molecular karyotyping. This array con -
tains 2,3 million copy number and 400.000 SNP markers allowing the 
detection of copy number alterations, the loss of heterozygosity and 
uniparental disomy in a single run.
So far, we analysed 24 patients with this array: in 5 patients chro -
mosomal aberrations previously detected with the 6.0 array, aCGH or 
conventional karyotyping were confirmed. Another 19 patients showed 
no chromosomal aberrations.
The cytogenetics array offers several advantages in comparison to 
other array techniques: in contrast to aCGH a control DNA for each 
sample is not necessary. Instead, a reference of 450 pre-analysed 
HapMap samples can be used for computation. Compared to the 6.0 
array the workflow is much faster with less hands-on- and total time. 
The Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software provided by Affyme -
trix is easy to use, results are clearly arranged and aberrations are 
directly linked to databases e.g. UCSC genome browser and Ensem -
ble. Nevertheless there are some disadvantages, too. The software 
sometimes shows computation biases: results may be false positive 
due to the use of different annotation files especially regarding the 
sex chromosomes and due to poor marker-coverage in some regions.
Nevertheless, the cytogenetics array is a powerful, fast and reliable 
tool and suitable for routine molecular karyotyping.
P03.080  A boy with mental retardation, obesity, dysmorphism 
and hypertrichosis caused by a microdeletion of 19p13.12.
N. F. Van der Aa1,2, G. Vandeweyer2, F. Kooy2;  
1Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium.
We present a moderately mentally retarded boy with obesity, short 
stature, hypertrichosis and facial dysmorphism.
Using the Illumina Bead Array platform a de novo  deletion of chromo -
some 19p13.12 was identified in DNA from our patient. Aberrations of 
the gene-rich chromosome 19 have rarely been reported. The dele -
tion in our patient is approximately 1.2Mb in size, with breakpoints at 
14.2Mb and 15.4Mb, and encompasses 30 genes (10 OMIM-listed).
It includes NOTCH3 (MIM600276), causative of the vascular neuro -
degenerative disorder CADASIL. In CADASIL, pathogenic mutations 
alter the number of cysteine residues in the extracellular domain of 
NOTCH3, which accumulates in small arteries of affected individuals. 
It has recently been suggested that CADASIL mutations act through 
gain of function mechanisms. As mutations in NOTCH3 play a role in 
neurodegeneration, it is tempting to speculate that haploinsufficciency 
of this gene might contribute to the cognitive impairment in our patient. 
Another gene potentially related to the phenotype in the deleted region 
is the CASP14 gene (MIM 605848), playing a central role in apoptosis. 
It is highly expressed in the inner root sheath of the hair follicle and 
haploinsufficiency of this gene may well contribute to the hypertricho -
sis in our patient.
P03.081  Patient with minor dysmorphism and microdeletion/
microduplication confirmed by aCGH due to the presence of a 
double translocation
V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcas1, C. Popa1, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1, D. Amzar2, 
E. Ormerod3, B. E. Kristiansen3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Ulleval 
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
ArrayCGH is the technique that, day by day adds new syndromes of 
microduplication or microdeletion in situations of mental retardation 
and/or congenital anomalies. We report a new syndrome with a dou -
ble chromosomal aberration: microdeletion and microduplication in a Cytogenetics121
case investigated for mental retardation, growth retardation and minor 
dysmorphic features (microcephaly, downwards slanting palpebral fis -
sures, retrognathia, 2nd and 5th finger clinodactyly of both hands and 
umbilical hernia). A double chromosomal translocation, one involving 
chromosomes 1 and 13, and the other involving chromosomes 5 and 
11 was revealed by the conventional cytogenetic analysis performed 
from peripheral blood lymphocytes with GTG banding. For establishing 
the origin of the translocation, chromosomal analysis was performed 
for both parents, but their karyotypes was normal and we concluded 
that is a de novo translocation. Due to the presence of phenotypic 
manifestations and the presence of mental retardation we suspected a 
possible genomic imbalance. ArrayCGH using 105A Oligo Microarray 
kit was performed for our patient and revealed a 2,3Mb deletion on 
13q31.3 and 1Mb duplication on 2q14.3. Application of genome wide 
array for detection of chromosomal aberration is mandatory in clini -
cal practice because it allows the correct characterisation of genomic 
imbalance. Other literature reports stated that when performing aCGH 
for patients with translocations, genomic imbalance of other chromo -
somes than the ones involved in translocation might be revealed. This 
applies to our case, as a microduplication was found on chromosome 
2 that is not involved in translocation.
P03.082  Association of aberrant promoter methylation of 
checkpoint genes in miscarriages with chromosomal mosaicism 
that fail to grow in vitro
A. A. Kashevarova , E. N. Tolmacheva, E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, 
Russian Federation.
Chromosomal abnormalities play a significant role in embryo develop -
ment failure. About 50-70% of them are found in mosaic state with 
diploid cells. The molecular bases of chromosomal mosaicism remain 
unknown. In cancer studies hypermethyaltion of cell cycle control 
genes was shown, what potentially can cause chromosome missegre -
gation. We aimed to analyze karyotype of 18 embryos with cell culture 
failure and 44 aneuploid miscarriages after conventional cytogenetic 
analysis using FISH with centromere-specific DNA probes and to study 
epigenetic status of M ( CHFR  and MAD2 ) and G1/S ( RB1 and p14) 
checkpoint genes with methyl-specific PCR. Two extraembryonic tis -
sues (mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) were studied when available. 
Mosaicism was more frequently observed among miscarriages with 
cell culture failure (p<0.01). Cytotrophoblast-specific compartmental -
ization of aneuploid clones prevailed in this group, what testify to the 
higher rates of mitotic mutations in cytotrophoblast and trisomy rescue 
in mesoderm. In successfully cultured embryos abnormal cells pre -
vailed in mesoderm. The frequency of p14 and RB1 hypermethylation 
was significantly higher in miscarriages with cell culture failure - 83% 
vs. 7% in successfully cultured (p<0.01) and it was mainly observed 
in mesoderm or in both tissues. There was no CHFR  and MAD2  hy-
permethylation in both groups. Our findings suggest that there is an 
association between hypermethylaion of G1/S checkpoint genes and 
mitotic errors. Also prevalence of epimutations in cell culture failures 
may indicate their ability to reduce developmental potential of embry -
os. This study was supported by grant of Federal Program #P806.
P03.083  MLPA analysis in children with mental retardation
K. Hirschfeldova , V. Kebrdlova, R. Mihalova, J. Stekrova, K. Vesela, P. 
Lnenicka, M. Florianova, R. Solc, A. Baxova;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st FM and GTH, Charles University 
in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
Chromosomal aberrations are the most common known cause of men -
tal retardation. However, the typical rearrangement is below a resolu -
tion limit of standard cytogenetic banding. MLPA is a modern molecular 
genetics method of choice that can detect such small deletion/duplica -
tion in a number of selected regions at a time.
Our sample was made of 41 unrelated probands in charge of the De -
partment of Medical Genetics (GTH and 1stFM, Charles University in 
Prague). Selection criterions were the presence of mental retardation 
corresponding to cryptic rearrangements but without a positive cytoge -
netic finding on a standard cytogenetic karyotyping. We have analysed 
all probands using MLPA kits P245 for detection of 21 most common 
deletion/duplication syndromes, P036 for the subtelomeres analysis, 
and P297 designed to examine new chromosomal regions recently 
associated with mental retardation.Overall, duplication and five various deletions were obtained (12%). All 
positives were detected by the P245 MLPA kit. In one case the deletion 
covered subtelomeric region and was also traced using the MLPA kit 
P036. No additional positives were after the P297 MLPA kit analysis.
We found the MLPA method as a fast, cheap, and effective method to 
analyse patients with mental retardation within the laboratory routine.
This work was supported by Grant No. IGAMZCR NS/10327-3/2009.
P03.084  Array CGH; an excellent tool in the search for low-level 
mosaics.
B. Sikkema-Raddatz , L. Leegte, K. Kok, C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts, R. Sinke, T. 
Dijkhuizen;  
Department of Genetics; University Medical Centre, Groningen, Netherlands.
Somatic chromosomal mosaicism is a well established cause for 
mental retardation and multiple congenital abnormalities (MR/MCA). 
However, low level mosaicism for clinically relevant chromosomal ab -
normalities can be missed if masked by a high percentage of normal 
cells or due to selective growth of normal cells in culture. To overcome 
this problem, either the number of karyotyped cells is extended and/or 
interphase FISH in uncultured tissues is performed. With the introduc -
tion of array CGH techniques analysis of uncultured cells is easily fea -
sible and up to 10% mosaicism is detectable (Cross et al, 2007).
In our cohort of 1730 MR/MCA patients analyzed by array CGH (either 
105K or 180K custom designed Agilent oligo arrays) and by karyotyp -
ing (10 metaphases), array CGH analysis detected 12 mosaics. Only 
5 of these were detected by karyotyping. Mosaics included four triso -
mies (chromosome 13, 14, 18, 20), two monosomies (chromosome 
X, 21), four extra markerchromosomes (chromosome 8, 12, 14, 18) 
and two submicroscopic structural abnormalities (duplication 1q32.1, 
deletion 1p36.32p36.31). For each case confirmation by FISH analysis 
was performed on PHA stimulated blood cells and on a second tissue 
if available. The percentage of mosaicism ranged from 1 to 80%. In 
our study, karyotyping failed to detect seven out of twelve (58%) chro -
mosomal mosaic cases and these included low level as well as high 
level mosaicism. We conclude that array-CGH is an excellent tool for 
detection of any type of mosaicism and therefore the preferred  choice 
of technique.
Cross et al. 2007. Prenat diagn 27,1197-1204
P03.085  Use of buccal smears to investigate tissue specific 
mosaicism
T. F. Morris , S. A. Lynch, L. Ekstrom, M. Mullarkey, D. R. Betts;  
National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
The suspicion of possible chromosomal mosaicism, the presence of 
two or more chromosomally different cell lines within an individual, can 
lead to diagnostic as well as genetic counselling dilemmas. It is well 
documented that levels of mosaicism can vary greatly within different 
tissue types from the same patient and hence it is clinically advanta -
geous to study tissues of differing embryonic origin. Obtaining smears 
from buccal swabs is a rapid and relatively non invasive technique for 
obtaining skin fibroblasts, which is in contrast to the invasive and time 
consuming procedures such as taking skin biopsies. Buccal smears 
facilitate the rapid identification of identified or suspected chromosom -
al abnormalities using interphase FISH, although their disadvantage is 
that G-band analysis is not possible. We report the FISH analysis on 
buccal smears from 15 patients to investigate possible chromosomal 
mosaicism following G-band analysis on at least one other tissue type, 
most commonly peripheral blood. The presence of mosaicism was 
demonstrated in four of the 15 patients. Our findings included con -
firming a diagnosis of suspected diploid/triploid mosiacism, with the 
detection of a triploid cell line present in approximately 40% of fibro -
blast cells. Another patient was found to have a mosaic cell line within 
the skin tissue containing a structurally rearranged chromosome 18. 
Notably, in both these instances the peripheral blood karyotype was 
normal. These results demonstrate that buccal smears provide a valu -
able and easy to obtain source of material to investigate for possible 
tissue specific mosaicism.Cytogenetics122
P03.086  High-resolution 44K array and 1 Mb array detect similar 
rates of chromosomal imbalances in patients with müllerian 
defects (mD)
É. L. Freitas1, C. Cheroki1, A. C. Krepischi-Santos2, P. A. Otto1, C. Rosenberg1;  
1Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, IB, University of São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil, 2Fundação Antonio Prudente, Hospital A.C. Camargo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
The defective development of the Müllerian ducts results in abnormali -
ties of the female genital tract ranging from upper vaginal atresia to to -
tal absence of Fallopian tubes, uterus and upper vagina, while ovaries, 
breast development and patterns of body hair are normal. Patients 
often exhibit additional clinical features such as renal, vertebral and 
cardiac defects. In most cases its etiology remains poorly understood. 
The vast majority of patients have a normal female karyotype and few 
individuals have been found to carry chromosomal abnormalities. Re -
cently our group investigated by 1Mb BAC array CGH patients with MD 
and chromosomal imbalances in 33% of them affecting the 1q21.1, 
17q12, 22q11.21 and Xq21.31 chromosome regions. In order to verify 
whether smaller genomic alterations contributed to the MD etiology, 
we investigated 15 patients previously screened by BAC array and 
presenting normal results. For this study, we used a CGH microar -
ray platform from Agilent Technologies containing 44.000 oligonucle -
otides, i.e., over 10 times higher resolution than the array previously 
used. Only copy number variations of DNA segments which are also 
observed in control populations (i.e, without a major pathogenic effect) 
have been detected among our patients. A possible explanation for 
these negative results is that the patients of the first study were more 
syndromic than the remaining patients and presents more additional 
clinical signs such as renal, craniofacial and member alterations and 
learning disabilities. Although the size of the sample is still limited, our 
results indicate that array-CGH has little diagnostic value for patients 
with isolated müllerian defects.
P03.087  X-chromosome disorders: identification of underlying 
mechanisms
P. C. Patsalis1, G. Koumbaris1, C. Hatzisevastou2, A. Kurg3, S. Kitsiou Tzeli4, N. 
Scordis5, Z. Kosmaidou6, J. Vermeesch7, I. Georgiou8, N. Carter9;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Dept of Cytogenetics 
and Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Ippokratio Thessaloniki General Hospital, 
Thessaloniki, Greece, 3University of Tartu, IMCB, Department Of Biotechnology, 
Tartu, Estonia, 4Agia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Makarios 
Hospital, Department of Paediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Alexandra Hospital, 
Department of Genetics, Athens, Greece, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium, 8University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 9Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR), nonhomologous end 
joining (NHEJ), and recently Fork Stalling and Template Switching 
(FoSTeS) have been implicated as the main mechanisms for the cre -
ation of genomic disorders. In order to investigate the mechanisms 
responsible for the creation of X-chromosome disorders we analyzed 
70 cases bearing cytogenetically visible X-chromosome abnormali -
ties using whole genome tiling path BAC arrays and custom designed 
targeted ultra-high resolution oligo-arrays. Using whole genome tiling 
path BAC CGH, we were able to accurately map the breakpoints of 
35 cases bearing isochromosomes of the long arm of chromosome 
X at a resolution of 150kb. Fifteen of these had breakpoints at the 
centromere and were considered monocentric. The remaining 20 were 
isodicentric and had breakpoints in proximal Xp in ChrX:51500000-
58500000. This region of chromosome X is rich in segmental dupli -
cations and contains some of the largest and most homologous in -
verted repeats in the human genome. Based on the BAC-array CGH 
findings, we designed custom oligo-arrays which cover this region in 
ultra-high resolution (44K and 385K oligos in 7Mb region of interest) 
and feature enhanced coverage of segmental duplications. Screening 
the isodicentric cases with these ultra-high resolution arrays enabled 
us to identify previously undiscovered breakpoint complexity in 45% 
of the isodicentrics and demonstrate that they are formed by NAHR, 
facilitated by specific highly homologous inverted repeats. Twenty two 
percent of the isodicentrics were mapped within repetitive sequences 
and 33% have simple breakpoints that do not coincide with segmental 
duplications and are probably mediated by a nonhomologous recom -
bination mechanism.P03.088  Common polymorphism near the IL-6 gene is associated with total and abdominal adiposity in caucasian men: 5-year follow-up study in swedish GOOD cohort
S. Adamovic1, N. Andersson1,2, S. Nilsson3, L. Strandberg1, C. Ohlsson4, M. 
Lorentzon4, J. Jansson1;  
1GU/Neuroscience and Physiology/Endocrinology, Gothenburg, Sweden, 
2Food Science, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, 
3Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 4GU/Depts. Of Geriatrics & Internal Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Background: Regulation of fat mass is associated with immune func -
tions. Studies of knockout mice show that endogenous interleukin (IL)-
6 can suppress mature-onset obesity. Our hypothesis is that variants 
of the IL-6 gene can affect obesity in humans. We recently published 
results revealing association between the SNP rs10242594, mapping 
slightly downstream of the IL-6 gene, in GOOD cohort, consisting of 
1049 men aged 18-20 years ( p=.02). This finding was confirmed in 
elderly men (nearly 8000 in total; Andersson N et al 2010, Int J Obes). 
Later on, this association was confirmed and strengthened in the 
GOOD GWAS, after exclusion of individuals with non-Caucasian de -
scent ( p=.002, unpublished data). In this study we aimed to examine 
the influence of rs101242595 on obesity in a 5-year follow-up study of 
the GOOD subjects. 
Study Design: 724 participants of the GOOD-cohort, now 23-25 years 
of age, were available for follow-up measurements of body fat by DXA. 
Association of rs10242595 was analyzed by linear regression and ad -
justed for age, length, tissue lean mass and current physical activity. 
Results: rs10242595 is significantly associated with fat percent 
(p=.016), total body fat mass ( p=.012) and abdominal fat ( p=.01) in 
young Caucasian men investigated 5 years after the first measure -
ment. CONCLUSION:  These findings indicate that rs10242595*A is 
associated with decreased abdominal fat as well as total fat in young 
men. We hypothesize that another, still unknown, polymorphism map -
ping to the coding region of the IL-6 and in strong LD with rs10242595 
is one of the causing genetic factors of obesity.
P03.089  Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in medical 
genetics and clinical counselling
A. Sipek jr.1, A. Panczak1, R. Mihalova1, V. Sobotka2, P. Lonsky2, V. Gregor2,3;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pronatal Sanatory, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer University Hospital, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 [inv(9)] is mostly considered 
to be clinically insignificant variant of the human karyotype. However, 
several studies have shown possible connection of inv(9) with certain 
groups of clinical diagnoses: infertility, repeated abortions or schizo -
phrenia.
In our retrospective epidemiological study, we have analysed the inci -
dence of inv(9) and the spectrum of clinical indications for karyotyping 
in three medical genetics departments in Prague. In cytogenetic ar -
chives of these departments (at General Teaching Hospital, Thomayer 
University Hospital and Pronatal Sanatory) we identified 351 cases 
with inv(9) (1.60 %) among 21 944 cases in total (reference period: 
1981 - 2008). The sex ratio (female to male) in inv(9) patient group 
was 1.29. A special control group of 515 patients with normal karyo -
type was created from the cytogenetic archive in the General Teaching 
Hospital, using the systematic sampling method.
The most frequent clinical diagnoses among the patients with inv(9) 
were: infertility and/or habitual abortion - 124 cases (37.13 %), con -
genital anomalies - 41 (12.28 %) and psychomotoric and/or mental 
retardation - 24 (7.19 %). Comparing these incidences with those in 
the control group we determined the relative risk of infertility and/or 
habitual abortion for inv(9) carriers as 1.21 (95% CI = 0.90 - 1.58); p = 
0.1726 (Fisher’s exact test). As this result was not statistically signifi -
cant we haven’t proved any strong association of inv(9) with specific 
clinical diagnosis and the clinical significance of inv(9) still remains 
uncertain. The molecular-genetic examination of inv(9) itself should be 
our next step.Cytogenetics12
P03.090  Atypical variant rearrangement bearing a BcR/ABL 
fusion gene on the chromosome 7 in a case of chronic myeloid 
leukemia with a translocation t(7;9;22)(q11; q34; q11)
A. Bennour1, H. Sennana1, I. Ouahchi1, A. Laatiri2, A. Saad1;  
1Cytogenetic Department, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Hematology, 
Monastir, Tunisia.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of 
Philadelphia chromosome, usually resulted from a t(9;22)(q34;q11). 
Approximately, 5-10% of CML patients show variant translocations in -
volving other chromosomes in addition to chromosomes 9 and 22. In 
some variant translocations, additional material is transferred on the 
derivative chromosome 22 resulting in a masked Philadelphia chromo -
some. In this study, we report an apparently masked Philadelphia CML 
patient showing a t(7;9;22)(q11; q34; q11) by conventional cytogenetic 
and a b2a2 transcript by multiplexed polymerase chain reaction. A mo -
lecular cytogenetic characterization was performed by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) and disclosed the presence of the BCR/
ABL fusion gene on the derivative chromosome 7. FISH analyses with 
whole chromosome painting specific for chromosomes 7, 9 and 22 al -
lowed us to precisely characterize the variant chromosomal rearrange -
ment that was not perceived by conventional analysis and to discuss 
the mechanism formation of this chromosomal rearrangement. Thus, 
resulted from a sequence of rearrangements (two steps): the first rear -
rangement is a classical t(9;22)(q34;q11) which places the BCR/ABL 
fusion gene on the derivative chromosome 22 , this reciprocal trans -
location is followed by a second rearrangement between derivative 
chromosome 22 and chromosome 7, giving rise to a BCR/ABL fusion 
gene on the derivative chromosome 7.
In summary, our data provide a precise molecular cytogenetic charac -
terization of a Philadelphia negative patient, bearing variant t(7;9;22), 
we also highlight the crucial role of the FISH analyses in disclosing 
masked Philadelphia chromosomes with is beyond the power resolu -
tion of conventional cytogenetic.
P03.091  molecular and cytogenetic studies of the Prader-Willi 
syndrome in Romania
M. Puiu1, C. Rusu2, D. Dan3, A. Dobrescu4, N. Cucu5;  
1University of Medicine &Pharmacy „V. Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 2University 
of Medicine &Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3Romanian Prader Willi Association, 
Zalau, Romania, 4University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 
5University, Bucuresti, Romania.
This study is part of a the research introduced in Romania for PWS 
patients. Multidisciplinary physical examination allows the corect es -
tablishing of the clinical score. The strategy we propose for the con -
firmation of the clinical PWS diagnosis includes initially a methylation 
analysis (MSPCR). This test is used as a diagnostic instrument for 
PWS because methylation pattern is parental specific in this region 
and detects patients with deletions, UPD and imprinting defects, that 
represent 99% of PWS cases. FISH technique, using specific probes 
for the 15q11-q13 region, is considered as the most efficient cytoge -
netic diagnostic method for PWS, identifying the deletion in approxi -
mately 80% of patients. In our preliminary study, only 5 of the 11 pa -
tients (45,5%) had a positive FISH test. Because FISH doesn’t detect 
UPD and mutations of the imprinting center, the rest of the patients 
need a DNA investigation using microsatellite markers inside and out -
side PWS region.
In conclusion, the results obtained in the study group, even if its’ size 
doesn’t allow important statistic conclusions, differ from those report -
ed in the specialized literature, both in the proportion of PWS cases 
confirmed by methylation analysis (70% compared to 99%), and that 
of cases confirmed by FISH analysis (45,5% compared to 70%). The 
explanations could be related to a particular molecular profile of PWS 
patients in Romania. Such studies do not exist for the moment in our 
country and the confirmation will be possible by investigating a bigger 
number of patients.
P03.092  the importance of invasive prenatal diagnostics results 
in genetic screening programme
K. A. Koshkarova , G. S. Svyatova, A. G. Bayisbekova, Z. S. Makhmutova, D. 
N. Salimbaeva;  
The Scientific Centre of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
The purpose of the study was appraised an effectiveness of prenatal 
genetic screening by invasive diagnostics procedures.
1747 samples of fetus material (chorion’s thief or placenta’s cells and 
umbilical blood’s lymphocytes) were materials for invasive prenatal di -
agnostics and cytogenesis analysis by period from 2008 to 2009 years 
in Almaty. Biopsies of chorion’s thief were in 947 (54,2%) cases, plac -
entocentesis were in 589 (34%) cases and cordocentesis were in 145 
(8,2%) cases, interphase/nuclear in situ hybridizationis in 66(3,8%). 
Samples were studied by G-kariotyping cytogenetic method.
Normal karyotypes of fetus were diagnosed in 1602 cases (91,7). 
Chromosomal pathologies were diagnosed in 79 cases by pregnant 
women of high-risk group (5%), that according with literature’s dates.
The more common indications for invasive prenatal diagnostics were 
pregnant women’s age with US-markers (NT, nasal bone) and serum 
markers (PAPP-A, beta-CGH, alpha-fetoprotein).
Invasive prenatal diagnostics in 624 cases were made by isolate 
indication (36%). The highest rate of chromosomal pathology diag -
nostics by isolate indication was by ultrasonic 207(12%) and serum 
502(29%) markers detections. The lowest rate was by only age indica -
tion 385(22%).
But combination of two and more indications was more important (170 
cases, 10%): age factor + serum markers changes (92 cases) the rate 
of fetus chromosomal aberrations was 5,2%, age factor + ultrasonic 
markers - 2,3% (40 cases). The maximal rate of fetus chromosomal 
changes was by combination of serum and ultrasonic markers (38 pa -
tients - 2,1%).
The more common indications for invasive prenatal diagnostics were 
pregnant women’s age with US-markers and serum markers.
P03.093**  An Xp22.33 duplication flanking the pseudoautosomal 
region translocated on Yp11.2
R. Stoeva1,2, A. Vogels2, R. Thoelen2, T. Voet2, J. P. Fryns2, J. Vermeesch2;  
1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, 
Bulgaria, 2Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
The human pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) represent short regions 
of homology on the terminal parts of X and Y chromosomes that be -
have like autosomes and pair and recombine during meiosis. Upon ar -
ray analysis of the DNA of a 13 year-old-boy with behaviour problems 
(Smith-Magenis like) and Ebstein anomaly a 129 kb Xp22.33 duplica -
tion was detected. Surprisingly, the duplication is inherited from his 
healthy father. FISH with a BAC clone from that region showed a signal 
on the Y chromosome. We hypothesize the duplication might repre -
sent an extension of PAR1. One possibility is that this is a de novo 
extension of the PAR by an insertional translocation. Considering that 
the duplication on X is reported in the normal population, it may also be 
an evolutionary ancient PAR. Further analysis is ongoing to distinguish 
between these possibilities.
P03.094  chromosome translocation 46,XX,t(2; 5)(q13; q12.3-13) 
in a girl with psychomotor retardation
J. Toral-Lopez1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta2, V. Madrid-Cedillo2, S. Cuevas-
Covarrubias3;  
1Genetica, ISSEMyM Ecatepec, Estado de Mexico, Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital 
General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General de 
Mexico, Facultad de Medicina., UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
We study a girl with severe psychomotor retardation product of nor -
mal, young, healthy and non consanguineous parents. She was born 
below the 3rd percentile. On physical examination she weighted and 
heighted below the 3rd percentile, she presented plagiocephaly, left 
occipital flattening, narrow forehead, low nasal bridge, flat facial pro -
file, synophrys, narrow palpebral fissures, short nose, long philtrum, 
short neck, prominent anterior chest, aberrant right palmar crease and 
clinodactyly of 5th finger of both hands. Karyotype with G bands was 
46,XX,t(2;5)(q13;q13). To our knowledge this is the first case in the 
literature of translocation between chromosomes 2 and 5 (q13, q12.3-
q13). The patient has severe psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic 
changes probably attributed to one or more genes located on the site 
of rupture. More studies are needed to define more precisely the rup -
ture sites in this case.Cytogenetics12
P03.095  Molecular characterization of r(18) chromosomes in 
four patients
A. Spreiz1, O. Rittinger2, B. Wellek3, B. Utermann1, C. Fauth1, M. Erdel1,4, G. 
Utermann1, J. Zschocke1, D. Kotzot1;  
1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, 
Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 3Department of 
Human Genetics, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 4Hospital of the Sisters 
of Mercy, Linz, Austria.
Ring chromosomes are usually associated with loss of chromosomal 
material at one or both arms of the chromosome and mitotic ring in -
stability. Sometimes the rings are more complex with additional mate -
rial gain. Ring chromosome 18 is a rare finding with about 70 cases 
reported so far. About 75% of these cases are female.
The clinical phenotype mainly depends on the size of the deletion. We 
report here on four cases, three females and one male, with a ring 
chromosome 18 first revealed by conventional karyotyping. Microsat -
ellite PCR analyses indicated maternal and paternal origin in each two 
of them. High resolution Human Omni1-Quad (Illumina®) arrays were 
used to determine the breakpoints and the exact sizes of the dele -
tions, which were between 1.6 and 15 Mb on 18p and 3.8 and 24 Mb 
on 18q, and between 16.6 and 38 Mb in total, respectively. One case 
was found to be complex with an additional 1.5 Mb duplication on 18p 
(p11.23->p11.31). Confirmation experiments as well as investigations 
to determine the parental origin separately for the deleted and dupli -
cated segments and the mechanism of formation in the latter case are 
in progress.
Our cases confirm the previously observed high phenotypic variability 
for r(18), depending on the size of the aberrations. According to the 
literature, the majority of cases shows the clinical picture of the 18q- 
syndrome, i.e. del(18)(q21->qter). This holds also true for the case 
with the duplication, corroborating previous observations according to 
which duplications often remain without major clinical consequences.
P03.096  Genetic investigations on 8 patients affected by 
a characteristic seizure disorder associated with ring 20 
chromosome mosaicism
D. Giardino1, A. Vignoli2, L. Ballarati1, M. P. Recalcati1, S. Russo3, N. 
Camporeale1, M. Marchi3, P. Finelli1, L. Giordano4, M. P. Canevini2, L. Larizza1;  
1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Lab Citogenetica Medica, Milan, Italy, 2Università 
degli Studi di Milano - U.O. Neurologia 2, A.O. San Paolo – DMCO, Milan, 
Italy, 3Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Lab Genetica Molecolare, Milan, Italy, 4Unità 
Operativa di Neuropsichiatria dell’Infanzia e dell’Adolescenza, Spedali Civili, 
Brescia, Italy.
Mosaic Chromosome 20 ring [r(20)] is a chromosomal disorder as -
sociated with a rare syndrome characterized by a typical seizure 
phenotype, a particular electroclinical pattern, cognitive impairment, 
behavioural problems and absence of a consistent pattern of dysmor -
phology. The pathogenic mechanism underlying seizures disorders in 
r(20) syndrome is still unknown.
We performed a detailed clinical, cytogenetic, FISH, array-CGH and 
molecular stuy on 8 patients with ring 20 chromosome mosaicism, in -
cluding two members of the same family.
Our results indicate that higher percentages of r(20) cells are related 
with precocious age at seizure onset and with resistance to antiepilep -
tic drug treatment. Behavioural problems also seems to be associated 
with higher percentages of r(20) cells. FISH and array-CGH experi -
ments failed to detect any cryptic deletion on chromosome 20. No evi -
dence of chromosome 20 uniparental disomy was found. Analysis of 
FISH signals given by variant in size alphoid tandem repeats probes 
on the normal chromosome 20 and the r(20) in the mosaic carriers 
suggests that the r(20) is the same chromosome not circularized in the 
“normal” cell line.
According to this hypothesis an epigenetic mechanism perturbing the 
expression of genes close to the telomeric regions, rather than hap -
loinsufficiency of genes located at the distal 20p and/or 20q regions, 
may underlie the manifestation of r(20) syndrome.
P03.097  Asynchronous replication of human subtelomeric 
regions
I. Petkovic ;  
University Children‘s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
Replication of human genome is linked to different basic cellular pro -
cesses. Studies conducted so far have shown that timing of DNA rep -lication correlates with genomic instability, transcriptional activity, gene 
density and chromatin structure. Synchronous replication of alleles was 
demonstrated for genes with a biallelic expression while asynchronous 
replication for those with monoallelic mode of expression due to im -
printing, X-inactivation or allelic exclusion. Little is known about repli -
cation timing(RT) of subtelomeric regions(SR), and its correlation with 
chromatin structure and function remains poorly understood. SRs of 
human chromosomes are highly unstable, rich in genes and frequently 
involved in aberrations and thus are of particular clinical interest.
In this study the replication pattern of SR of chromosomes 
2,5,7,8,9,16,19 and 20 was investigated using FISH method in lympho -
cytes of 8 healthy donors. At least 200 cells/probe/person were ana -
lyzed. The replication status of a locus was classified as unreplicated(s) 
and replicated(d).
The analysis revealed marked heterogeneity of investigated SR. The 
data suggested a continuum of replication throughout S phase, with 
SR9p (dd:20.9±0.96%) being the first, and SR2p (dd:3.7±0.51%) the 
last to replicate (p<0.01). The results showed asynchronous replica -
tion at some SR. The frequency of sd ranged from 18.6% to 33.2% and 
the mean for SR19q2q16q20q5p (sd:31.08±0.52%) was significantly 
higher (p<0.01) compared to SR2p7q5q (sd:19.9±0.58%).
This investigation revealed that different SR replicates at different 
times during S phase and that certain homologous loci replicate asyn -
chronously. Although the significance of RT is unclear yet, it might con -
tribute to the non-random involvement of specific SR in chromosomal 
rearrangements.
P03.098  Detection of molecular cytogenetic damage of 
individuals affected by retinoblastoma in south india
K. Sasikala , V. Balachandar, S. Mohana Devi;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Retinoblastoma is the most common primary cancer of the eye among 
children and has both hereditary and sporadic form. The aim of the 
present study was to analyze the chromosomal analysis as a marker 
for diagnosing the disease.The details of retinoblastoma patients col -
lected from Eye Hospitals in Coimbatore city, revealed that both sexes 
are commonly affected by this disease. Blood samples were collected 
from 58 retinoblastoma cases for the analysis of chromosomal aberra -
tions using G-banding and the final results were ensured by multicolor 
spectral karyotyping (SKY). Chromosomal analysis of the peripheral 
blood cells in retinoblastoma patients showed that the chromosomes 
1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 17 carry aberrations. The more frequent ab -
errations were 13q-, 6p+ and 1q-. Deletion in the 13q is considered as 
a pre-requisite for tumorigenesis whereas the 6p and 1q are involved 
mainly in tumor progression. The less frequent aberrations were 3q-, 
5p-, 17p-, 8q-, t(17p; 6p) and t(13q; 10q). They may not have a role in 
the tumorigenesis of retinoblastoma. Chromosomes under the group 
A, C and D are more frequently aberrated.
Hence the above described chromosomal aberrations can be used as 
a marker to diagnose retinoblastoma patients.Our results revealed that 
conventional cytogenetics remains an important tool in elucidating the 
complex and diverse genetic anomalies of Retinoblastoma. According 
to these results, chromosomal analysis is of great use in patients with 
Retinoblastoma at diagnosis to have a correct prognostic evaluation 
for clinical decision making.
P03.099**  Identification of copy number variations in early infantile onset Rett syndrom variants
S. Rajaei1, M. Kyllerman2, M. Albåge3, B. Hagberg2, A. Erlandson1;  
1Inst. of Biomedicine, Dept. of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Dept of Paediatrics, Queen Silvia Children’s 
Hospital, Sahlgrenska university/ East, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Dept of 
Paediatrics, Astrid Lindgren Children’s Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
Background: Early infantile onset Rett syndrome (RTT) is character -
ised by Rett syndrome-like presentation with early onset (before the 
age of six months).
Methods: Copy-number variations (CNVs) have been reported in chil -
dren with mental retardation. In this study, we analysed 12 early infan -
tile onset RTT patients in order to find potential genetic abnormalities 
in this particular group, using a high-resolution GeneChip SNP array 
technique.
Results: We found four deletions on the X chromosome; size rang -Cytogenetics12
ing from 1.1 Mb to 4.2 Mb (located on Xp11.22, Xp22, Xq22-q23 and 
Xq27). These regions are known to contain a number of important 
genes which are expressed in the brain and perform critical roles in 
neurite development, the initiation of process formation and axonal 
guidance in the developing neurons. The findings in this study imply 
that CNVs might be involved in this specific type of RTT (4/12 patients) 
rather than MECP2, CDKL5 or FOXG1 genes, since no pathogenic 
mutations were detected in any of these genes.
P03.100  Detection and Analysis of serotonin Receptor Gene (5-
HtR3A) Expression on Human Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes in 
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Patients
M. sadeghi koupaei1, g. ahangari1, s. samanguei2, S. nazari2;  
1NIGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shaheed Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aim: The 5-HT3A receptor is a pentameric ligand-gat -
ed cation channel located in the central and peripheral nervous system 
and on extraneuronal locations like lymphocytes, monocytes and fetal 
tissue. The expression of the serotonin receptors was investigated in 
the brain but little work has been done to examine their expression in 
other tissues. The aim of this study was to show whether the serotonin 
receptor gene expresses on peripheral blood lymphocytes in the pa -
tients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease.
Material and methods: In the present study, using RT-PCR technique, 
we investigated 5-HT3A receptor gene expression in peripheral blood 
lymphocyte cells (PBMC) of forty RApatients.
Results: The results showed that the 5-HT3A receptor gene is detected 
on the lymphocytes of RA patients.
Discussion: There is not any evidence which points to role of serotonin 
and their receptor in the pathophysiology of RA. Therefore, we detect -
ed the expression of 5-HT3A receptor in patient individuals. Expres -
sion profile in RA patients was compared to healthy individuals. It can 
contribute to access some new information related to pathogenesis of 
RA disease.
P03.101  Ring 20 syndrome mosaicism: a new case with 
amplification of two BAC clones at 20q11.21-q22 without 
deletion of the telomeric regions, detected by the Genome Array-cGH.
A. Nucaro1, V. Cabras2, N. Santini3, M. Erriu4, S. Zorco5, A. Milia6, M. Loi7, R. 
Rossino8, C. Montaldo5;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 
2Scuola di specializzazione Patologia clinica, dip. Biologia Sperimentale, 
Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 3OBL, Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche, 
Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 4OBL, Dipartimento di Scienze 
Chirurgiche, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 5OBL, Dipartimento Scienze 
Chirurgiche, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 6Dipartimento Biologia 
Sperimentale, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Italy, 7Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, 
Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Cagliari, Italy, 8Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche e 
Medicina Clinica, Università di Cagliari, Italy, Cagliari, Italy.
Ring 20 syndrome is a rare disease characterized by drug-resistant 
epilepsy, moderate mental retardation and particular electroencepha -
lographic disorder with non-convulsive status epilepticus. Herein, we 
report on a new case of r(20) syndrome mosaicism in a 15 year old 
female that presented minimal dysmorphism, generalized tonic and 
clonic absence and seizures, refractory to medical therapy, and be -
havioural disorders. She was the first child of an unrelated couple, and 
she was born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. Among 50 
analyzed cells, 30 showed a 46, XX karyotype and 20 exhibited a 46, 
XX r(20)(p13q13.3)(40%). FISH using whole specific probe of chro -
mosome 20 confirmed the presence of the ring. Array-CGH (platform 
Bluegnome Cytochips, Technogenetics) showed no deletion at the site 
of the ring formation, but found the presence of an amplification of two 
BAC clones, approximately 1.5 Mb, in 20q11.21-q22. We think that the 
lack of detection of any deletion could be attributed to the mosaicism 
and that clinical symptoms may be assigned either to haplo- insuf -
ficiency of two epilepsy genes, CHRNA4 and KCNQ2, which map in 
this region, or that other mechanisms may be involved. To the best of 
our knowledge, our patient was the first case presenting the typical 
epilepsy disorder but no detectable deletion in the ring chromosome 
20 associated with amplification in 20q11.21-q22. Further studies are 
in progress to better genotype/phenotype correlation and to clarify 
whether there is any association of this particular rearrangement with this characteristic type of epilepsy, occurring exclusively in patients 
with ring 20 syndrome.
P03.102  Developmental delay and autistic features in a girl with 
45,X/46,X,r(X)
B. Barreña1, M. L. Onaindia1, J. García1, M. Fiaño1, M. A. Tapia1, M. J. Angulo1, 
M. A. Fernández-Cuesta2, C. Ruiz-Espinosa2, M. J. García-Barcina1;  
1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA 
/Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Pediatría del Hospital 
Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA /Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, 
Spain.
We report here a case of a 2 years old female with developmental 
delay (sit unsupported at 11 months, walking indepently at 18 months, 
no 2 words phrases by 25 months) and autistic features (limited com -
munication, obsessive behaviour and social difficulties …). No lymph -
edema, neck webbing, congenital heart defcts, dysplastic nails, nor 
facial dysmorphism were present.
Cytogenetics analysis of 48-GTG band metaphases (400-550 band) 
from peripheral blood lymphocytes prepared according to standard 
procedures revealed a 45,X karyotype in 24 cells and 46 chromo -
somes with absence of one X chromosome and the presence of a 
small ring chromosome in 24 cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) studies were also performed. Metaphase arm-specific chromo -
some painting probes, XCAPX long (Texas Red) and XCAPX short 
(FITC), revealed the presence of two red and two green signals, which 
is consistent with the fact that the ring is completely derived from X- 
chromosome material. With the XCyteX probe we confirmed that the 
r(X) had more than pericentromeric material (p11.1-q11.1). The pres -
ence of XIST (Xq13.2) was confirmed on both, ring and normal X chro -
mosome.
Individuals with 45,X/46,X,r(X) cytogenetic constitution comprises 
about 6-7% of cases with a diagnosis of Turner syndrome. It has been 
noted that there is an increased prevalence in mental retardation and 
another atypical physical abnormalities in this group, in comparison 
with 45,X cases. The etiology of mental retardation and congenital 
malformation remains uncertain. Even in the presence of XIST expres -
sion, cases with abnormal phenotypes have been described. X inacti -
vation may be incomplete despite XIST expression.
P03.103  mEcHANisms OF RiNG cHROmOsOmE FORmA tiON
M. I. Melaragno1, V. F. A. Meloni1, C. A. Kim2, R. S. Honjo2, D. M. Christofolini1, 
R. Pellegrino1, B. Heck3, L. G. Alonso1, D. Brunoni1, N. B. Spinner4, L. D. 
Kulikowski2, R. S. Guilherme1;  
1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Hospital São Camilo Pompéia, São Paulo, Brazil, 
4Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
We defined the breakpoints and mechanisms of ring chromo -
some formation in 12 patients using array-SNP Affymetrix® Nsp/Sty 
6.0 and Illumina® platforms. The chromosomal terminal regions 
were investigated by MLPA and FISH techniques using subtelo -
meric and pantelometic probes, respectively. The karyotypes of pa -
tients I-XII were determined, respectively: 46,XY,r(3)(p26.1q29), 
46,XX,r(4)(p16.3q35.2), 46,XY,r(10)(p15.3q26.2), 46,XX,r(10)(
p15.3q26.13), 46,XY,r(13)(p13q31.1), 46,XY,r(14)(p13q32.33), 
46,XX,r(15)(p13q26.2), 46,XY,r(18)(p11.32q22.2), 46,XX,r(18)(p1
1.32q21.33), 46,XX,r(18)(p11.21q23), 46,XY,r(22)(p13q13.33) and 
46,XX,r(22)(p12q13.2). These rings were found to have been formed 
by different mechanisms, such as: from breaks in both chromosome 
arms, followed by end-to-end reunion (patients IV, VII, VIII and XII); 
from a break in one chromosome arm followed by fusion with the 
subtelomeric region of the other (patients I-II); from a break in one 
chromosome arm followed by fusion with the opposite telomeric region 
(patients III and IX); from fusion of two subtelomeric regions (patient 
VI); from telomere-telomere fusion (patient XI). Thus, the r(14) and one 
r(22) can be considered complete rings, since there was no loss of rel -
evant genetic material. The r(13) showed a more complex mechanism 
of formation resulting in a deletion of 11.1 Mb concomitant with an inter -
stitial duplication of 1.5 Mb. His karyotype was 46,XY,r(13)(p13q33.1).
arr13q33.1(101,543,509-103,001,462)x3,13q33.1q34(103,003,268-
114,142,980)x1 dn. We concluded that the phenotypes of ring patients 
can be related with different factors, including gene haploinsufficiency, 
gene duplications and ring instability. Epigenetic factors due to the cir -
cular architecture of the ring chromosome must also be considered, Cytogenetics12
since even patients with complete ring chromosomes can present as -
sociated phenotypic alterations, as observed in our patients with com -
plete r(14) and r(22). (Financial Support: FAPESP/Brazil).
P03.104  Ring chromosomes 9 and 22 in children
L. Letica , R. Lasan, I. Tonković Đurišević, K. Crkvenac Gornik, S. Huljev 
Frković, D. Begović;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia.
Ring chromosome is a rare genetic disorder observed in the children 
with variable clinical presentation and phenotype. Constitutional ring 
chromosome occurs in 1:50000 live birth.
We describe four patients, one with ring chromosome 9 and three chil -
dren with ring chromosome 22. Chromosomal analysis was performed 
using G banding according to standard procedure on peripheral lym -
phocytes.
Ring chromosome 9 is chromosomal aberration include growth and 
psychomotoric retardation, heart malformation, ambiguous genitalia, 
limb and skeletar defects. Cytogenetic analysis was found in all cells 
ring chromosome 9. After FISH analysis karyotype was 46,XY,r(9).ish 
r(9)(wcp+,D9Z1+). Parental karyotypes were normal.
Ring chromosome 22 is a rare occurrence. Most cases of r(22) would 
be expected to show loss of part or all of the short arm in addition 
to loss of some long arm material. Loss of short arm material is un -
likely to have any phenotypic effect. Patients with ring chromosome 
22 may have clinically significant deletions of 22q and application of 
FISH techniques to ring chromosomes in order to confirm that dele -
tion has occurred, is a useful adjunct to conventional cytogenetic stud -
ies. However, partial monosomy resulting from deletion of part of the 
long arm is known to be associated with a syndrome involving global 
developmental delay, mental retardation, severe delay in speech and 
language skills but only minor facial dysmorphology.
All patients were informed by genetic counsellor and they are included 
in multidisciplinar programs.
P03.105  Molecular and clinical definition of an unstable ring 
chromosome 21
L. Kraoua1, O. Boespflug-Tanguy2, J. F. Gadisseux3, M. T. Iba-Zizen4, F. 
Vialard5, A. C. Tabet1, C. Dupont1, B. Benzacken1, A. Verloes3, A. Aboura1;  
1Unité Fonctionnelle de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, 
Paris, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, 
Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Service de Neuroradiologie, Centre Hospitalier 
National d’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de 
Cytogénétique, CHI de Poissy, Poissy, France.
Constitutional ring chromosomes are generally believed to be the result 
of de novo breakage of both end-segments of a chromosome during 
meiosis or early postzygotic mitosis, followed by ends joining, result -
ing in a continuous ring. This mechanism presumes the loss of some 
genetic material during ring formation. Almost one-half of reported ring 
autosomes derives from acrocentric chromosomes. However ring 21 
[r(21)] is a rare finding. Here we report a case of r(21) showed to be 
unstable by SNP array. The proband is a 6-year-old boy with mental 
retardation, epilepsy, facial dysmophism, myopia, and equinovarus 
clubfeet. Brain MRI showed leucoencephalopathy. Karyotype and 
FISH analysis revealed a 46,XY,r(21)(p11q22).ish r(21)(p11q22)(wc
p21+,tel21q-,RP11-61A21+,RUNX1+,LSI21-) formula. Accurate mo -
lecular characterization by SNP array (Illumina) and BACs-on-Beads 
technology (BoBs) confirmed a 21q22.2 deletion and showed a mosaic 
proximal 21q deletion. We suggest that ring instability and death of 
aneuploid cells may explain the microarray results. To confirm this hy -
pothesis, FISH analysis on uncultured lymphocytes is programmed.
P03.106  Ring chromosome 13: characterization by molecular 
cytogenetic and DNA micro-array analyses.
I. Ben Abdallah1,2, H. Hannachi1,2, N. Soyah3, H. Elghezal1,2, S. Mougou1, D. 
Sanlaville4, A. Saad1,2;  
1Laoratory of Cytogenetic And Biology of Reproduction, Sousse, Tunisia, 
2Service Commun de Genetique, Faculte de Medecine, Sousse, Tunisia, 
3Service de Pediatrie, Höpital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Labortoire de 
Cytogenetique Constitutionelle, Hospics Civils Lyon, Lyon, France.
Ring Chromosome 13 is a rare chromosomal abnormality in mental 
retardation. We report three cases of ring chromosome 13. In the first case a female with a karyotype: 46, XX, r (13) [17]/ 45, XX,-13 [33], she 
revealed a language retardation and dysmorphic feature. Patient 2 is a 
boy with a karyotype: 46, XY, r (13) [13]/ 45, XY,-13 [3] dead in 11 years 
old by leukemia. Finally the third case is a boy with congenital cardi -
opathy and mental retardation his karyotype showed 46, XY, r (13).
For further characterization of the ring chromosome 13, FISH was 
performed on metaphase chromosomes from the patient’s cells using 
three DNA probes: WCP13, 13qter and LIS13 (13q14)/RB-1(Vysis®). 
Both cases showed loss of the 13q subtelomeric region by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization and chromosome whole painting probe showing a 
homogeneous painting of the whole normal and ring chromosomes 13 
for the three patients. FISH analysis using LIS13 (13q14)/RB-1 probes 
showed a deletion of RB1 gene only in the ring (13) of patient 2.
For the first patient Agilent® oligonucleotide arrays 44K were performed 
for more characterization of the ring 13 chromosome. It showed a dele -
tion of 4, 7 Mb in 13q34 region and a deletion of 2, 9 Mb in 13q11q11 
region.
Molecular cytogenetic and whole-genome array-based technologies 
can give an accurate delineation of the imbalances which raises the 
possibility of making genotype-phenotype correlations, in order to 
identify minimal critical regions and candidate genes for a pattern of 
clinical features including learning disability
P03.107  Prenatal Diagnosis of de novo  
44,XX,der(13;14)(q10;q10)/46,XXX,der(13;14)(q10;q10) Karyotype
E. E. Kurt1, O. Ozer1, E. Tarim2, Z. Yilmaz1, F. I. Sahin1;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey.
Robertsonian translocations represent the most common human 
structural chromosomal abnormality, occurring with an incidence of 1 
/ 1,000 in the general population. The occurrence of X chromosome 
monosomy and Robertsonian translocation in the same person is rare. 
Turner Syndrome is a chromosome abnormality affecting about 1 in 
every 5000-10000 female births and up to 20% of miscarriages. Many, 
perhaps most, girls and women with Turner Syndrome are actually mo -
saic, meaning that they have cells with more than one karyotype. Often 
there is a mix of 46,XX and 45,X cells, and in this case the resulting 
clinical abnormalities tend to be milder than in 45,X Turner Syndrome.
We report a fetus diagnosed prenatally with both a Robertsonian 
translocation and mosaic Turner’s syndrome. Amniotic fluid sample 
was taken from our patient at the 20 weeks of pregnancy, due to an 
increased second trimester screening risk. Chromosome analysis 
was performed on trypsin G banded chromosome preparations ob -
tained from amniotic fluid cultures. The karyotype was designed as 
44,X,der(13;14)(q10;q10)[23]/46,XXX,der(13;14)(q10;q10)[16] Periph -
eral blood samples were taken from parents which revealed normal 
karyotypes. The family was informed during the genetic counseling 
session and they decided on termination of the pregnancy.
P03.108  An Association studies for search a Susceptibility Genes in schizophrenia
P. Manikantan , V. Balachandar, K. Sasikala, S. Mohanadevi;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Objective: Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder affecting 0.4-1% 
of the population worldwide. It is characterized by impairments in the 
perception of reality and by significant social or occupational dysfunc -
tion. The disorder is one of the major contributors to the global burden 
of diseases. Studies of twins, families, and adopted children point to 
strong genetic components for schizophrenia, but environmental fac -
tors also play a role in the pathogenesis of disease.
Materials and Methods: Molecular genetic studies have identified sev -
eral potential positional candidate genes. The strongest evidence for 
putative schizophrenia susceptibility loci relates to the genes encoding 
dysbindin (DTNBP1) and neuregulin (NRG1), but studies lack impres -
sive consistency in the precise genetic regions and alleles implicated.
Results: The present study shows the role of three potential candi -
date genes by genotyping in the DNTBP1, NRG1 and AKT1 genes in 
schizophrenia patients. Some previously identified a region on chro -
mosome 5q21-34 as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia. Recently, 
two studies reported association between the g-aminobutyric acid type 
A receptor cluster of genes in this region and one study showed sug -
gestive evidence for association with another regional gene.Cytogenetics127
Conclusion: This is the first candidate gene study to explicitly test for 
and provide evidence of a maternal-fetal genotype incompatibility 
mechanism in schizophrenia. In the present study found evidence that 
one GABA receptor subunit, GABRG2, is significantly associated with 
schizophrenia. Furthermore, it also seems to affect to the functioning 
of the working memory.
P03.109  A simple and rapid method for heterochromatin regions 
selective staining on direct chromosomal preparations from 
tissues with spontaneous mitotic activity.
T. Kuznetzova1, I. Trofimova1,2, M. Lyapunova2, E. Zolnerovich2, V. Baranov1,2;  
1Ott’s Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Allknown techniques for selective stainig of polymorpic pericentro -
meric heterocromatin regions and Yqh in human cromosomes include 
CBG, DA/DAPI, MG/DAPI, D278/170, MG/H33258. Acridine orange 
(AO) is routinely used in for RFA and RBA banding. Our study was 
carried out on direct and semi-direct chromosome preparations from 
human chorionic villi and from different embryonic samples at the 5-
12 weeks of gestation (more 200 samples). After AO staining without 
any pretreatments the constitutive heterochromatin regions (CHRs) 
in 1qh, 3cenh, 4cenh, 9qh, 16qh, 15cenh, 22cenh and Yqh showed 
red fluorescence, whereas all chromosome arms were uniformly yel -
low-green. This staining pattern was irrespective of AO concentration 
(0.01-0.1%), buffer solution (PBS, Sorensen‘s buffer, McIlvain‘s buf -
fer), its pH (6.5-7.2) and age of slides (from 1 day to some months). 
The red AO fluorescence of CHRs was detected also on metaphase 
chromosomes of bone marrow cells from patients with lymphoblas -
tic leukemia (10 samples were kindly provided by Dr. I.Martynkevich). 
While they stained in green in cultured amniocytes (4 samples were 
kindly provided by Dr.Y.Loginova). CHRs from PHA-stimulated lym -
phocytes (more 50 samples of fetal and adult origin) revealed yellow-
green staining in most metaphases with red 9qh in some metaphases. 
Mechanism of this selective staining remains unclear. However, as AO 
is metachromatic stain which discriminates single-stranded from dou -
ble stranded nuclei acids, our results advocate in favor of the principal 
cytochemical and conformational differences in CHRs in different cells 
which could be attributed to the variability of their DNA and hystone 
epigenetic modifications.
P03.110  chromosome abnormalities in girls with isolated short 
stature
E. Kouvidi , E. Sekerli, N. Selenti, A. Kolialexi, H. Fryssira, S. Kitsiou, C. 
Tsenghi, E. Kanavakis, A. Mavrou;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine, 
Athens, Greece.
Objective: Short stature is defined as a condition in which the height of 
an individual is more than 2 SD below the corresponding mean height 
for a given age, sex and population group. Many different genetic eti -
ologies of short stature are known. The present study aims to evaluate 
whether isolated short stature (SS) is an adequate indication for rou -
tine chromosome analysis.
Materials & Methods: This is a retrospective survey of 371 girls who 
were referred for cytogenetic investigation at the Department of Medi -
cal Genetics of Athens University between the years 1999 - 2009 for 
SS only. Girls who in addition of SS had other phenotypic features 
were excluded. The mean age of referred subjects was 9.5 years. 
Karyotyping was performed on cultured peripheral lymphocytes using 
GTG-banding.
Results: Abnormal karyotype was detected in 34 (9.2%) of the referred 
cases. Approximately 20% of the girls with abnormal cytogenetic find -
ings had a 45,X0 karyotype (n=7), while the remaining 80% were mo -
saic for Turner syndrome with 2-4 cells lines (n=27). Four girls (1.1%) 
carried chromosome variants (3 inv(9) and 1 inv(6)) and one individual 
had a balanced translocation which did not involve the sex chromo -
somes.
Conclusion: Cytogenetic investigation is essential in the management 
of girls with isolated SS to exclude Turner sundrome, in which effec -
tive, but costly, growth hormone treatment has shown to improve final 
height.P03.111  combined direct dup(7)(q22q33) and inv(7)(q32.3q31.2) 
in a developmentally delayed and dysmorphic boy
A. Frühmesser1, M. Erdel1,2, H. Duba1,3, C. Fauth1, J. Zschocke1, G. Utermann1, 
D. Kotzot1;  
1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Hospital of the Sisters of 
Mercy, Linz, Austria, 3General Women and Children Hospital, Linz, Austria.
De novo  inverted duplications are very rare chromosomal aberrations. 
Chromosome 7 duplications have been described in patients with 
Silver-Russell syndrome indicating possible relevance for this etio -
logically heterogeneous syndrome. We report on a male patient who 
shows muscular hypotonia, global developmental delay, and various 
dysmorphisms resembling Silver-Russell syndrome. Both parents (31-
year-old mother and 29-year-old father) and two older sibs are healthy. 
Family history as well as pregnancy and delivery were unremarkable. 
Length (52 cm), weight (4.030 g), and occipitofrontal head circumfer -
ence (37 cm) at birth were around the 90th percentile. At the age of 5 
years height (101.5 cm) was at the 3rd percentile, weight (17.3 kg) was 
at the 10th percentile, and occipitofrontal head circumference (51 cm) 
was at the 25th percentile.
Conventional karyotyping and FISH analysis with YACs revealed a 
46,XY,dup(7)(q22q32)inv(7) (q32.3q31.2) karyotype. SNP microar -
ray analysis with the Illumina® Infinium HD HumanOmni1-Quad v1.0 
BeadChip defined the proximal and the distal breakpoint of the entire 
duplication between rs10275844 and rs6960639 and rs10954272 and 
rs6467310, respectively, which includes the intrauterine growth retar -
dation- and Silver-Russell syndrome-related imprinted region on 7q32. 
The duplicated region has a size of about 31,7 Mb. Investigations for 
the parental origin of the rearrangement as well as fine-mapping of the 
breakpoints of the inversion and the duplication are in progress.
The constellation in our patient is another example for the observation 
that apparently simple chromosomal rearrangements may be more 
complex than initially thought, and that duplication of 7q32 may cause 
at least some clinical features of Silver-Russell syndrome.
P03.112  skewed X chromosome inactivation is associated with 
OTC deficiency in 9-year-old girl with karyotype 46,X,del(X)(p11)
P. Tammur1, M. Jürgenson1, M. Peters2, R. Teek1,3, O. Zilina4, R. Zordania5, K. 
Õunap1,3;  
1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, 
Estonia, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology , University of Tartu, 
Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Estonia, 4Department 
of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Tartu, 
Estonia, 5Tallinn Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia.
Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, the inherited urea cycle 
disorder, is transmitted as a partially dominant X-linked trait (mapped 
to band Xp21.1). The symptoms in females vary both in onset and se -
verity. Some of them are completely asymptomatic, while others have 
severe hyperammonemic crises, which can lead to brain damage or 
even to death. X-inactivation occurs very early in embryogenesis. It 
is usually a random process and both paternal and maternal alleles 
are randomly inactivated. In some cases, the X-inactivation is skewed. 
When the inactivation is skewed to express more of the mutated allele, 
X-linked disorders may affect female carriers in different ways.
We report a 9-year-old girl who had problems since the birth (respirato -
ry insufficiency, hypoglycaemia), later developmental delay, muscular 
hypotonia, seizures, hepatomegalia and frequent infections. Metabolic 
investigations showed periodic hyperammonaemias. At 3-year of age 
OTC deficiency was diagnosed based on allopurinol loading test re -
sults (increased orotic acid excretion). Despite the treatment (protein 
restriction, L-citrulline and anticonvulsants) she had recurrent seizures 
which were controlled only with natrium-phenylbutyrate. At the same 
time ammonia was normal. Standard G-banding cytogenetic and whole 
genome array analysis showed abnormal karyotype 46,X,del(X)(p11). 
The X-inactivation study showed that the X inactivation was skewed: 
in 14% of cells the aberrant X-chromosome was active. It is previously 
known that in cases where the breakpoint in Xp is proximal to Xp22.3, 
there is a skewed X-inactivation, with the aberrant X being preferen -
tially inactivated. In our case we saw unusual X-inactivation which is 
responsible for the atypical course of OTC deficiency.Cytogenetics12
P03.113  A possible association between the sLcA9A gene and 
epilepsy - a case story
H. R. Nielsen1, J. Graakjaer1, Y. Petkov2, C. R. Fagerberg1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of Paediatrics, 
Esbjerg, Denmark.
The SLC9A9-gene (NHE9) belongs to a family of Na+/H+exchanger 
membrane proteins, which regulates ion fluxes across membranes.
The SLC9A9 gene has in several studies been associated with 
language delay, ADHD and autism. Other genes from the Na+/
H+exchanger family have been associated with epilepsy in mice. A 
possible association to epilepsy in humans was shown by Morrow et 
al., 2008, who described a family of a mother and 2 sons with a non -
sense mutation in the SLC9A9 gene. Both sons had autism, and one 
was diagnosed with epilepsy, while the other had had some seizures. 
Their mother had speech delay, but neither autism nor epilepsy.
We describe a mother and son with a 0,79 MB duplication of chromo -
some 3q23-q24 including the SCL9A9 gene, diagnosed by Array CGH. 
The woman had epilepsy since the age of 11 years. She was treated 
with Valproate 3000 mg daily during pregnancy. Her son was born with 
a phenotype compatible with Foetal Valproate Syndrome, and in addi -
tion language delay and some behavioural problems. At the age of four 
years, he did not have signs of autism, ADHD, or seizures.
Conclusion: We describe a mother and son with duplication of the 
SLC9A9-gene. The mother was diagnosed with epilepsy at the age of 
11 years. The son had Foetal Valproate Syndrome, and had no history 
of seizures at the age of four years. This case supports an association 
between the SCL9A9 gene and epilepsy in humans. However more 
studies are needed in this area.
P03.114  A new case of 4pter duplication and 4qter deletion 
detected by sNPs-array.
S. Dipresa1, M. Rocca1, F. Faletra2, V. Pecile2, P. Gasparini2,3, A. Fabretto2;  
1University of Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-Department of Child 
and Maternal Hospital I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 
3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
Only one case of duplication of the distal part of 4p and deletion of 
the same part of 4q as been so far described. This condition give rise 
to recognizable craniofacial features: prominent glabella, characteris -
tic bulbous nose, retrognathia, pointed chin, short neck with low hair -
line, enlarged and abnormal ears and cardiac defects. Our patient is 
9-years-old boy mentally retardated, born from non consanguineous 
and healthy parents. He was born at 34 weeks, with a birth weight of 
2.140g (<3°). His clinical history was characterized by: interatrial de -
fect (involved spontaneously), frequent otitis and bronchitis and right 
hernia (he underwent surgical treatment at 3 years old). He showed 
facial dysmorphic features as: large forehead, downslanting palpebral 
fissures, telecanthus, prominent glabella, flat nasal root, pug nose with 
anteverted nares, long philtrum, thin upper lip, malformed ears, short 
neck, brachydactyly. The karyotype was 46 XY normal. SNPs-Array 
(370K from Illumina) showed a 4p15.3p16.3 terminal duplication (14.9 
Mb) and a 4q34.2q35.2 terminal deletion (14 Mb). Our patient overlap 
clinical history, cardiac defects and dysmorphic features of the previ -
ously described case. The deleted region is bigger in our case than 
in the previous one. Anyway, our patient confirms that cardiac defect 
are probably due to the deletion of ArgBP2 and PDLIM3 genes in 4q 
region. We agree that the duplicated region may essentially facial dys -
morphisms, also present in cases affected by a 4p trisomy. In conclu -
sion, we might suggest that both these cases with their clinical pictures 
define a new syndrome of contiguous genes alterations.
P03.115  Familial mental retardation: role of subtelomeric 
translocation
A. M. Mohamed , A. K. Kamel, N. M. Meguid, I. Ragaa, W. Mahmoud;  
National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: The identification of subtelomeric rearrangements as a 
cause of mental retardation (MR) has made a considerable contribu -
tion to diagnose MR.
Aim: To correlate genotype/phenotype in 1p subtelomere deletion and 
16p subtelomere duplication. Diagnosis of the balanced carriers for 
prevention of recurrence of MR
Methods: This study carried out on two children who have mental re -
tardation (MR) and dysmorphic features. They are members of a large 
family with recurrence of mental retardation. Cytogenetics and total multi color FISH were performed.
Results: Pedegree analysis revealed fourteen MR cases and eight 
obligate carriers in four generations. Both probands have MR, dys -
morphic features and cleft palate. Conventional cytogenetic analy -
sis showed normal karyotype in the two probands and their parents. 
Total subtelomer multicolor FISH in the 1st proband revealed ish 
der(1)t(1;16)(p36.3-,p13.3+), his father has balanced translocation ish 
t(1;16)(p36.3-,p13.3+;p13.3-,p36.3+). The 2nd proband has the same 
unbalanced subtelomere translocation and his father has the same 
balanced translocation.
Conclusion: The pedigree of this large family indicates that the Sub -
telomere translocation does not affect fertility. This carries a high risk 
of transmission of MR to several generations. In such family genetic 
testing of all members is a must. Prevention of recurrence of MR can 
be achieved through carrier detection and PGD.
P03.116  Identification and interpretation of supernumerary 
marker chromosomes
V. Cejnova , V. Harmas, M. Wilimska, M. Stara, M. Soukupova, J. Lastuvkova;  
Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department 
of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic.
Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs) are extra, abnormal 
chromosomes whose origin cannot typically be determined by con -
ventional chromosome-banding techniques. SMCs are common, oc -
curring in four of every 10,000 newborns, but are approximately 7 
times more prevalent in individuals with mental retardation. The most 
common class of marker chromosomes are derived from acrocentric 
chromosomes and have a satellited or bisatellited structure, with chro -
mosome 15 accounting for the highest percentage of this group.
We present two cases of SMCs. The first one is a prenatally diag -
nosed partial mosaic trisomy of chromosome 22 with the karyotype 
46,XY[65]/47,XY,+mar[35]. Fluorescent in situ  hybridization (FISH) 
and spectral karyotyping (SKY) techniques identified a SMC as an inv 
dup(22)(q11.1) consists of only bisatellited heterochromatic material. 
In the literature there are described several cytogenetically similar cas -
es, which did not show any clinical abnormalities. In the second case 
we report a girl with craniofacial dysmorphism and multiple anomalies 
consistent with the supernumerary der(22) syndrome. Derivative 22 
[der(22)] syndrome is rare disorder associated with multiple congenital 
anomalies including pre-auricular skin tags or pits, conotruncal heart 
defects, and profound mental retardation. The nature of the SMC was 
characterized using FISH and SKY techniques as der(22)t(11;22)(q23
;q12). The karyotype of her mother showed a reciprocal translocation 
over the distal bands 11q23 and 22q12.
SMCs are a major clinical problem, especially when detected prena -
tally during cytogenetic analysis. Molecular cytogenetic techniques 
are necessary for their comprehensive characterization. In general, 
the risk for an abnormal phenotype in prenatally ascertained de novo  
cases with SMCs is given as ~13%.
P03.117  Identification of microdeletion 1q21 by FISH and array-cGH in proband with t AR syndrome
A. Czekajova1, V. Vranova2, J. Blatny3, A. Tovarysova1, J. Sobotka1, P. Kuglik2;  
1Cancer Center, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Experimental Biology, 
Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Children‘s 
Medical Center, Brno, Czech Republic.
Thrombocytopenia-absent radii (TAR) is a rare genetic disorder. In pa -
tients with TAR syndrome microdeletion on chromosome 1 (1q21.1) 
was detected, but the presence of an additional modifier is required 
to elicit the phenotype. It was observed maternal as well as paternal 
transmission and occurrence  de novo  in 25 %.
We performed molecular-genetic methods to detect range of deletion 
in proband with TAR syndrome.
In proband was ascertained bilateral radial aplasia, annulled ulna and 
scaffold of hands normally formalized. Ultrasound of brain was without 
pathology. Cardiology examination found foramen ovale apertum cov -
ered by aneurismatic lash camber. Investigation of the bone marrow 
proved deficit of megakaryopoesis and nonspecific dysplastic chang -
es. TAR syndrome was determined as a clinical diagnosis.
We determined presence of microdeletion by fluorescence in situ  hy-
bridization (FISH) analysis using RP11-315I20 (BlueGnome) probe 
and as a control probe we used centromere probe of chromosome 
1 (Abbott Vysis). They were hybridized to metaphase spreads of the Cytogenetics12
patient’s lymphocytes after PHA stimulated cultivation of peripheral 
blood by use of standard procedures. Oligonucleotide array-CGH (Hu -
man Genome CGH Microarray Kit 44K, Agilent Technologies, USA) 
was used for deletion sizing.
The FISH results revealed deletion of RP11-315I20 probe on one chro -
mosome 1 in locus 1q21.1 in proband. aCGH confirmed this deletion. 
The deletion had a maximum size 350 Kb and encompasses 21 oli -
gonucleotides. Both parents of the proband were also investigated by 
FISH. The deletion of RP11-315I20 probe was proved in mother. FISH 
and array-CGH are suitable methods for detection chromosome aber -
rations in rare clinical syndromes.
P03.118  A case of de novo partial trisomy of short arm of the 
chromosome 4.
N. Oparina , E. A. Shestopalova;  
Vladimirsky Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institution, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
We report newborn male with multiple congenital abnormal -
ity: hypotrophy(m=1840g), asymmetry of the face, depressed nasal 
bridge, bulbous nasal tip, macroglossia, low set and marformed ears, 
short neck, abnormal dermatoglyphics findings, polycystic kidneys, 
small penis and cryptorchism . An additional material of unknown ori -
gin was detected on distal part of long arm (q) of the chromosome 10 
in blood lymphocytes culture analized with GTG- banding. Thus the 
proband’s karyotype was 46,XY,add(10q). Parents’ karyotypes were 
normal. For detection of further detailed analysis FISH with different 
DNA-probs was applied: WCP 4/10, subtel 4 p/q (Vysis, Abbott, USA), 
mFISH (24XCyte Vit (MetaSystems, Germany), a result the proband 
karyotype was 46,XY,der10t(4;10)(p14;q26).ish der(10)(wcp4p+)dn. In 
finally proband had the trisomy 4p and monosomy 10(q26).
P03.119  Particular phenotype in a newborn with partial trisomy 
10p and partial monosomy 9q
M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, D. Stoicanescu1, M. 
Boia2, D. Icma2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Neonatology, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Trisomy 10p is a rare chromosomal syndrome. Most of the reported 
trisomy 10p cases represent unbalanced products of familial recipro -
cal translocations and are complicated by additional segmental imbal -
ances. We present a female newborn with severe facial dysmorphy 
and other anomalies, due to trisomy 10p and telomeric deletion of 9q. 
The pregnancy was followed, and ultrasound examination revealed an 
increased nuchal translucency, but the mother refused other examina -
tions. The newborn, delivered at term presented: growth retardation, 
cranio-facial dysmorphy (microcephaly, high forehead with hirsutism, 
hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, anteverted, hypoplasic nos -
trils, thin lips, macroglossia, low-set, folded ears), supernumerary nip -
ples, flexed fingers, plantar creases, hypotonia, tetralogy of Fallot and 
multicystic left kidney. Cytogenetic analysis from peripheral blood lym -
phocytes showed an extra material on the long arm of chromosome 9 
(46,XX,add(9)(q34)). The mother’s karyotype revealed a translocation 
(9;10). FISH analysis was performed for the mother, using 9q telomere 
and 9p telomere probes, and the telomere 9q signal of the derivative 
chromosome was located on the short arm of abnormal 10 chromo -
some. FISH using telomere 10p and 9q probes was performed for the 
proband and revealed partial trisomy 10p and partial monosomy 9q. 
The evolution of our patient was unfavorable, as she died two weeks 
after birth. Comparing our case to trisomy 10p cases and telomere 9q 
deletion cases the proband associated unlike the reviewed reported 
cases, supernumerary nipples. For best evaluation, arrayCGH should 
have been performed, but it is no longer possible as the newborn died 
and no DNA sample was taken.
P03.120  molecular karyotyping of prenatal samples using 
oligonucleotide-based ArraycGH: A technical feasibility study
A. Caliebe ;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Kiel, Germany.
Objectives: Karyotyping of banded metaphase chromosomes is cur -
rently the gold standard for the detection of chromosomal aberrations 
in prenatal samples. The present technical feasibility study aimed at 
comparing results of conventional karyotyping and oligonucleotide ar -rayCGH in prenatal samples and association of the laboratory findings 
with clinical features.
Methods: DNA was extracted from prenatal (CVS) samples with known 
karyotypes left over from conventional genetic analysis and fully ano -
nymised. The series was enriched for cases with chromosomal aberra -
tions (miscarriages). Array CGH was performed on NimbleGen CGX-
12 arrays. This array contains 135,000 oligos covering more than 200 
targeted regions and more than 675 (functionally significant) genes 
plus 41 unique sub-telomeric regions and 43 unique peri-centromeric 
regions. All of these regions have a coverage of one probe every 10 
kb. The whole-genome backbone coverage is one oligo every 35 kb
Results: DNA of sufficient quality and quantity can be routinely ob -
tained from CVS samples for performing array CGH. Protocols for 
labeling and hybridization were robust. The laboratory process from 
extracting DNA to finishing the array scanning took usually less than 
3 days, and, thus, was significantly shorter than the time frame for 
long-term culturing. Though in depth analysis of the array CGH results 
along with comparison to clinical features is ongoing, initial findings 
suggest that clinically relevant aberrations are readily detectable by 
molecular karyotyping.
Conclusions: ArrayCGH might supplement karyotyping of CVS sam -
ples particularly in cases with structural chromosomal aberrations de -
tected by conventional chromosome analyses or aberrant first trimes -
ter screening.
P03.121  Unusual signs in a phenotype of a patient with trisomy 
8 mosaicism
S. Farcas , V. Belengeanu, C. Popa, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timisoara, Romania.
Mosaic trisomy 8 is a relatively common chromosomal abnormality, 
with a distinct, recognizable phenotype in most cases. We report a 
case, which in addition to certain characteristic features of mosaic tri -
somy 8: a long, slender trunk, limitation of movement in multiple joints, 
and mild-to-moderate mental retardation, the deep plantar furrows, 
presented several signs including craniofacial midline defects: notched 
nasal tip, cleft maxillary alveolar ridge, bifid tip of tongue, grooved 
uvula and left choanal atresia. Transfontanellar ultrasound revealed 
absence of corpus callosum and enlargement of the occipital horns 
of lateral ventricles. Cardiac ultrasonography showed an atrial septal 
defect. Due to the presence of midline defects, we suspicion the pos -
sibility of Toriello-Carey syndrome.
Chromosome analysis on peripheral blood lympocyte culture revealed 
trisomy 8 in 12 metaphases out of a total 50 examined metaphases. 
FISH analysis on cultured blood lymphocytes with CEP of chromo -
some 8 showed 3 hybridization signals in 25 % of cells.
Knowing that even it is a rarely possibility, the association of two syn -
dromes may appear, an arrayCGH was performed to investigate the 
possibility of cryptic unbalanced rearrangements. The commercially 
available array (GenoSensor Array 300, Abbott) containing 287 ge -
nomic targets did not detect genomic imbalance.
We described this case of mosaic trisomy 8, which in addition to cer -
tain characteristic features of this syndrome, presented craniofacial 
midline defects, because these were not previously described in this 
chromosomal disorder. We consider that the clinical findings in our 
patient may contribute to the extension of the phenotypic spectrum of 
trisomy 8 syndrome.
P03.122  A report of a case with partial trisomy 9(p22pter)
F. Nasiri kenari , F. Talebmanochehri, F. Razazian, F. Mortezapour, M. 
Rahnama, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We present a 7 year -old girl who referred to our laboratory for cyto -
genetic investigation. The girl had frontal bossing, left bridge protru -
sion, and left upper lip down, open mouth. She was hyperactive and 
developmentally and mentally delayed . She had speech delay. The 
cytogenetic test performed using standard method. The karytype of 
the proband showed an additional material at 4q.
The mather karyotype confirmed that the additional segment on 4q was 
of chromosome 9p origin, resulting in trisomy 9(p22pter)The karyo -
type of the proband was found as:46,XX,der(4)t(4;9)(~35.2q;22p). Her 
father‘s karyotype was 46, XY.
The parents advice to seek genetic counseling and informed of the Cytogenetics10
possibility of having further child(ren) with partial trisomy or monosomy 
of the relevant chromosomes.
P03.123  mild t urner syndrome caused by Xpter-p21.1 
duplication and Xq22.3-qter deletion
T. Ilus1, R. Teek1,2, K. Varb1, K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, O. Zilina3, K. Õunap1,2;  
1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, 
Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
3Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
The classic phenotype of Turner syndrome includes short stature, 
ovarian failure and variable somatic stigmata. It is associated with X 
monosomy. Mosaic and partial deletions or duplications of chromo -
some X result in different degrees of Turner syndrome. Few cases 
have more complex chromosomal complements. Here we report a 
woman with mild Turner syndrome caused by partial duplication of Xp 
and deletion of Xq.
A 19-year-old woman was first time investigated due to primary amen -
orrhea, infantile external genitals and hypergonadotropic hypogo -
nadism. Her growth was normal 172 cm (+1SD), BMI 16,9. She had 
some dysmorphic features: a low hairline, clinodactyly, and joint laxity. 
Chromosomal analyses revealed a female karyotype with derivative 
X-chromosome (Xq-). FISH-analysis with wcpX and XYpter and XYqter 
subtelomeric probes (Cytocell) showed, that chromosome consisted 
entirely of X-chromosome material and both arms had short arm sig -
nals on subtelomeric regions. Her parents had normal karyotypes (rou -
tine analysis and subtelomeric FISH-analysis). Further, using whole-
genome Infinum-2 array and HumanCytoSNP array, we specified, that 
the patient has a 31,4-Mb duplication in region Xp22.33-p21.2 and 
48,4-Mb deletion in region Xq22.3-q28.
Formation of der(X) chromosomes in females can be more complex 
than previously thought. In our patient, partial Xp trisomy and partial 
Xq monosomy cause mild Turner syndrome. The normal height of our 
patient can be explained by a trisomy of the Xp-located SHOX  gene. 
However, she had amenorrhea and hypergonadotropic hypogonad -
ism, which is common in Xq22-qter deletion patients.
P03.124  mapping of the common deleted region of chromosome 
7 in Uterine Leiomyoma through array cGH analysis
A. C. Queirós1, I. Assil-Kishawi2, C. C. Morton3;  
1Department of Obstrectics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham 
and Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 
2Agilent Technologies, Inc, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 3Department 
of Obstrectics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology and Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, United States.
Uterine leiomyomata (UL) are the most common benign neoplasm 
present in women of reproductive age, with approximately 40% of tu -
mors showing structural cytogenetic abnormalities. Cytogenetic analy -
sis has been fundamental in gene discovery efforts in these tumors. 
One of the most common recurrent abnormalities in UL involves de -
letion or rearrangement of the long arm of chromosome 7; however, 
the underlying genetic mechanism of this frequent aberration remains 
unknown. Identification of the pathogenetic sequence has been com -
plicated by difficulty in determining the smallest deleted region. With 
this study, we sought to determine whether a common gene/region is 
involved in UL with translocation of chromosome 7 in band q22.
Using the human Agilent 1M array to assess genomic variation, we 
analyzed four UL with translocations of the long arm of chromosome 
7. These rearrangements include: t(7;9)(q22;q22), t(1;7)(q42;q22), 
t(7;12)(q22-31;q14) and t(4;7)(p15;q22). Array-comparative genomic 
hybridization revealed accompanying large deletions in three of the 
tumors with a common loss of ~16.3 Mb within bands 7q21.11 and 
7q22.1. Comparison of findings of this study with previously published 
data from our group resulted in a shortest region of overlap of ~3.3 Mb, 
restricting the possible candidate genes present in the region to ei -
ght genes: ZNF498, ZKSCAN1, TRIM4, ZSCAN21, ZNF655, C7orf47, 
COPS6 and PTCD1. These candidate genes will be further investiga -
ted to evaluate their possible role in UL development.P03.125  Williams Beuren critical region duplication due to 
a supernumerary marker in a patient with autism and severe 
behavioural disturbance
J. Ghoumid , A. Aboura, L. Perrin, A. Verloes, C. Baumann;  
Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France.
We report on a 3 years old boy with a mosaic 7q11 trisomy. The preg -
nancy was uneventful, birth measurements were within normal range 
and motor milestones were delayed (sitting achieved at 10 months 
and gait at 17 months). The language was markedly impaired (first 
word at 27 months). He presented with deep mental retardation and 
suffered from particular behavioural troubles consisting in the alterna -
tion of periods of apathy and aggressiveness. Social interactions were 
poor and so, autism was diagnosed. Facial dysmorphy was consistent 
with those reported in Williams Beuren Syndrome Critical Region (WB -
SCR) duplicated patients. Macrocephaly was also observed (+4SD). 
MRI showed non-specific posterior white substance anomaly and 
cardiac ultrasound was normal. Standard and molecular Karyotype 
(FISH and whole genome SNP genotyping array - Illumina), was mos 
46,XY[50%]/47,XY,+mar[50%].ish 7q11.11q11.23(D7Z1+,ELN+).arr 
7q11.11q11.23(62,000,000-74,000,000)x3dn. This 7q11.23 cytoband 
(12Mb) encompasses the WBSCR but also AUTS2, possibly involved 
in autism, CALCN1 which is expressed in brain and WBSCR17. Uni -
parental disomy of chromosome 7 was excluded.
This is the first report of WBSCR mosaic duplication due to a supernu -
merary marker. All patients reported so far carry the same 1.4-1.5Mb 
NAHR mediated duplication.
Our patient shared similarities with the patients already reported but 
presented also with several differences due to the size of duplication 
comprising genes expressed in brain and involved in autism. Thus, this 
observation underlies the involvement of these genes in this particular 
phenotype.
P03.126  sibs recurrence of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome resulting 
from a paternal cryptic translocation (4;15) characterized by FisH and sNP array analysis.
K. Nieto-Martínez1, L. Zepeda2, F. Fernández3, J. Berumen1, S. Kofman1, C. A. 
Venegas-Vega1;  
1Facultad de Medicina UNAM-Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico, 
2Hospital General de Mexico-Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico, Mexico, 
3Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a segmental aneusomy caused 
by partial deletion of 4p. WHS is originated by different mechanisms 
including de novo 4p terminal or interstitial deletions or an unbalanced 
translocation (45%) either de novo or inherited from a familial balanced 
translocation (~15%). Clinical modifications in the phenotype could be 
explained by variation in the size of the deletion. We report two siblings 
with WHS due a cryptic translocation (4;15)(p16.1;p11.2)pat. Both pa -
tients had similar clinical findings; however the girl also showed urinary 
tract anomalies. High resolution banding were performed and for FISH 
analysis LSl WHS region/CEP4 and mixture #4 (4p,4q,21q and LSI 
AML1) and #10 (10p,10q,15q and LSI PML) of ToTelVysion (Vysis) 
were used. SNP array was done using the GeneChip Human Map -
ping 500K platform (Affymetrix). Cytogenetic analysis in both children 
revealed a deletion of 4p, while both parents revealed an apparently 
normal karyotype. FISH analyses using LSI WHS region probe de -
mostrated in both sibs a submicroscopic deletion (4p16.3) while the 
father revealed a subtle balanced translocation involved a group D 
chromosome; to confirm that finding in the father a mixture #10 sub -
telomeric probe was used. A subtelomeric 4p region was observed in 
the boy and absent in his sister. SNP array confirmed different 4p in -
terstitial deletions, being a ~6.31 Mb in the boy and 6.41Mb in the girl. 
Our results support the need of using FISH and high-density array for 
optimal characterization of the genetic imbalances in patients and will 
contribute to further correct phenotype/genotype correlations.
P03.127**  X-inactivation silencing is not maintained on 
the autosomal segment of an inherited unbalanced X;19 
translocation in a male
E. O. Onat1, S. Balci2, O. Engiz2, T. Liehr3, T. Ozcelik1;  
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Bilkent 
University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Hacettepe 
University Medical School, Ihsan Dogramaci Childrens` Hospital, Ankara, Cytogenetics11
Turkey, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany.
X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is a programmed transcription -
al silencing in mammalian female embryos. In naturally occurring 
X;autosome translocations, the inactivation signal spreads to the auto -
some and leads to delayed replication. Here we report the allele spe -
cific expression profiles of genes selected from the autosomal portion 
of the translocation in a unique male with 46,XY,der(19),t(X;19)(q11.1-
11.2;p13.3) karyotype and bilateral periventricular nodular heterotro -
pia, severe learning disability and epilepsy (Dev Med Child Neurol, 
49: 219-24, 2007). The mother as well as the maternal grandmother 
of the patient is carrier of the same translocation, albeit in a balanced 
state with no phenotypical consequences. XCI analysis showed that 
selection pressure favors an active translocated X in the mother and 
the opposite in the patient. High resolution SNP genotyping array 
positioned the translocation breakpoints between the telomere and 
rs8105536 (212,033 bp) on chromosome 19, and between rs34355157 
(62,794,454 bp) - rs3892372 (63,312,400 bp) on the X. This suggests a 
very small subtelomeric deletion (less than 0,21 Mb) of 19p13.3-19pter 
and a large duplication (almost 95,4 Mb) of Xq11.1-Xqter in the patient. 
Allelic expression analysis of 15 genes, including NDUFS7 at 19p13.3 
and DNMT1 at 19p13.2, revealed that seven are heterozygous and are 
expressed biallelically in the patient. These results demonstrate that 
the transcriptional silencing of the genes on the autosomal segment 
of the translocation is not maintained, and that a compromise between 
stability versus plasticity occurs early in development.
P03.128  Association of breakage on Xq region and sterility
F. Farzanfar , C. Azimi, Z. Safari;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
According to Lyon hypothesis, in somatic cells of mammalian females, 
one X chromosome is randomly inactivated at the onset of embryonic 
development. The inactivated X is late replicating and can be cytoge -
netically distinguished from the active one. The analysis of balanced 
X;autosome translocations has revealed that in most cases the normal 
X is constantly late replicating.
A few published data showed that translocations between X chromo -
some and an autosome are very rare and are usually associated with 
primary amenorrhea and sterility.
Our proposita, aged 17, was referred to our department because of 
primary amenorrhea. She was the fourth child of a non-consanguine -
ous parents. She has two heathy brothers and three healthy sisters. 
Her father was 47 and her mother 35 years old when she was born 
with the normal delivery. Her axillary and pubic hair was scant (Tanner 
2), and her breast development was scaled Tanner 2. Ultrasonograghy 
showed a hypoplastic uterus and ovaries.
Investigation for chromosomal anomalies was routinely performed by 
cytogenetic analysis of our proposita and her parents. The karyotypes 
were carried out by G-banding technique studying 30 cells from the 
peripheral blood. Her karyotype was: 46,X,t(X;2)(q22;q23), and her 
father and her mother showed normal karyotypes.
It has been suggested that there is a critical region on the long arm of 
the X chromosome, ranging from Xq13 to Xq26, and breakage in this 
region would result in gonadal dysgenesis and sterility. In our proposi -
ta, the breakpoint was inside the critical region and caused sterility.
P03.129  the relationship of X;20 translocation and amenorrhea
A. Faraj Pour , C. Azimi;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
It has been suggested that translocations involving X chromosome 
and an autosome are rather rare due to the association with infertility 
in men and subfertility in women, being estimated to occur in about 
one in 30,000
live births. Some researchers showed that male carriers of an X-auto -
some translocation, which is either inherited from their mother or is de 
novo, are sterile, regardless of the position of the breakpoint in the X 
chromosome. A few published data revealed that in women, X-auto -
some translocations are frequently associated with primary or second -
ary ovarian failure.
We report a 23-year old woman who was referreds to our department 
for chromosomal study due to secondary amenorrhea. Her parents 
were nonconsanguineous. She had three brothers and one sister, all were older, healthy, and were married and had healthy children. Our 
proband had married six years ago, and claimed that before her mar -
riage, she had regular menstrual periods, but after marriage, her pe -
riods became irregular by 2-3 months and stopped within a couple of 
years.
Her physical features including build, height, breast developement, 
body hair and intelligence were normal.
Her pelvic sonography showed normal size and echo pattern of her 
uterus and ovaries. Evaluation of her hormones showed elevated for 
FSH and LH.
The G-banding technique was performed on her cultured peripheral 
blood, and revealed: 46,X,t(X;20)(q21;q13).
The presence of t(X;20) plus hypergonadotropic amenorrhea in our 
proband confirms the role of X-autosome translocations in ovarian fail -
ure.
P03.130  Karyotype/phenotype correlation in Egyptian patients 
with Xeroderma pigmentosum.
H. T. El-Bassyouni1, G. El-Kamah1, A. El-Koutory1, M. El-Darouty2, S. 
Hammad1;  
1National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt, 2Department of Dermatology, Faculty 
of Medicine,Cairo University, Guiza, Egypt.
Xeroderma pigmentosum is a very rare hereditary disorder. We studied 
14 Egyptian patients clinically diagnosed as xeroderma pigmentosum 
(XP). The main aim was to determine the effect of karyotype variation 
on phenotype. Patients were clinically classified and the number of 
sister chromatid exchanges were calculated for each case. Karyotype 
studies showed the following results: 12 & 13 % SCEs were detected 
in 28.6% of patients, 8.8-11% in 57.1% of the patients whereas 7.9% 
and 5.9% in two patients respectively. Karyotype/phenotype correla -
tion showed that the severity of clinical phenotype is related to the 
number of sister chromatid exchanges in the patients‘ chromosomes. 
Our findings revealed a dosage effect of the number of chromosomal 
affection on phenotype, thus confirming the reliability of karyotype as 
modifier of clinical phenotype, hence a marker for prognostic expec -
tations and support both the additive and interactive hypotheses of 
karyotype/phenotype correlation.
P03.131  An Xp deletion detected prenatally by karyotype and 
defined by FISH and MLPA analysis
A. Bengoa Alonso , B. Hernández Charro, M. Artigas López, R. Narvaiza 
Martinez, A. Pérez-Juana Del Casal, M. Ramos Arroyo;  
Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain.
Xp chromosome deletions in the female, predict the probability, but not 
the certainty, of an incomplete form of Turner syndrome and/or prema -
ture ovarian failure. The phenotypic effects may be extremely variable, 
from partial Turner Syndrome through minor menstrual abnormality, or 
even normal menses and fertility.
We used karyotype, FISH and MLPA analysis to investigate an Xp 
deletion, fortuitously diagnosed in a prenatal karyotype performed for 
advanced maternal age.
Initially, a terminal deletion was suspected from G-banded chromo -
some analysis, but FISH with a probe for Xp telomere region showed 
that the deletion was interstitial. MLPA with SALSA P018 and P106, 
confirmed the deletion and delineated the breakpoints at Xp22.13 and 
Xp11.4. Some remarkable findings with this technique were that the 
deleted region did not include STS (steroid sulfatase deficiency) and 
SHOX (short-stature gene), but it does include other important genes 
like IL1RAPL1 (responsible for X-linked mental retardation). Parents´ 
karyotypes were normal, and patient´s karyotype was redefined as 
46,X,del(X)(p11.3p22.2)dn, indicating a de novo occurred interstitial 
Xp deletion with breakage and reunion at Xp11.3 and Xp22.2, of about 
20Mb in size. The deletion, being ≥15Mb, would show completely 
skewed inactivation, and thus, no clinical manifestations of X-linked 
disorders.
Here we have described a case in which molecular cytogenetics (FISH 
and MLPA) can further delineate the size and position of the chro -
mosome abnormality detected by karyotype. Those techniques suple -
ment classical cytogenetics, obtaining a more precise and accurate 
information, which is critical for genotype-phenotype correlations and 
with important consequences for prenatal genetic counselling.Cytogenetics12
P03.132  46,XY karyotype with a duplication on the short arm of 
chromosome X in a girl with mental retardation and dysmorphic 
features.
S. Chirieac1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, M. Budisteanu2,1, A. Arghir1, A. Lungeanu1;  
1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical 
Hospital of Psychiatry „Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia“, Bucharest, Romania.
We present cytogenetic and molecular results in a 7 years old girl, 
referred for genetic investigations due to clinical dysmorphic features 
(up-slanting, short palpebral fissures, small eyelashes, broad nose, 
short philtrum, thick lips, micrognatia, hypoplasia of great labias and 
congenital cataract), epileptic seizures, tetraparesis and severe men -
tal retardation. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a normal 
uterus, the absence of ovaries and left suprarenalian calcification.
Classical and molecular cytogenetic investigations, performed on 
peripheral blood lymphocytes, consisted in GTG-banded karyotype, 
FISH and array-CGH (44K, Agilent).
Notably, a male karyotype was found, with an atypical large Xp as 
confirmed also by FISH analysis with centromeric probes for X and Y 
chromosomes [SE X (DXZ1), SE Y class q arm - Kreatech, Poseidon] 
and a BAC probe for SRY gene (RP11-400O10).
Moreover, array-CGH showed a 25.7 Mb duplication on the short arm 
of X chromosome, with proximal and distal breakpoints at Xp21.1 and 
Xp22.31, respectively.
In conclusion, we appreciate that the above-described cytogenetic re -
arrangements raise many questions concerning the origin and their 
pathogenetic role, which remain to be elucidated.
Acknowledgements: The authors thank Mrs. Mioara Cristea, Ioana 
Borcan and Leontina Dita for technical assistance. Financial support: 
Research National Projects: PN 09.33.02.03 and PNII 140/2008.
P03.133  case report: complex mosaicism in 45,X/49,XYYYY 
male
V. B. Chernykh , E. G. Okuneva, N. Y. Kuzina, N. V. Shilova, T. V. Zolotukhina, 
O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Objective: We report a patient with rare gonosomal abnormality. The 
proband was newborn male born to a 27-years woman from a second 
pregnancy. The first pregnancy has stood on 4-5 week. The patient‘s 
father, who is 28 years old, is phenotypically normal 46,XY male. Peri -
natal hypoxic-ischemic brain injury was diagnosed in the patient. The 
proband was referred to genetic examination because of dysembryo -
genesis stigmas. Following phenotypic features: backward sloping 
foreheads, high nasal bridge, microretrognatia, were prominent. The 
patient had male genitalia descended in the scrotum testes and de -
formed penis. No pathology was revealed by abdominal ultrasonogra -
hy and ophthalmologic examination.
Materials and Methods: Chromosome analysis was performed on cul -
tured PHA-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes with GTG- and C-
staining in accordance with standard techniques. FISH analysis was 
performed on interphase nuclei using standard protocols with CEP 
X/CEPY DNA probes. Complete AZF deletions were tested accord -
ing to Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromosome 
microdeletions (EAA/EMQN, 1999), with some modifications. Partial 
AZFc deletions were detected by multiplex PCR of following STS loci: 
sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, sY1206, sY1054 and sY1125.
Results: Chromosome analysis shown 45,X[6]/49,XYYYY[19] karyo -
type in the patient. FISH analysis detected complex mosaicism with 5 
cell clones: 45,X(21.2%)/46,XY(1.2%)/47,XYY(7%)/48,XYYY(14.1%)/
49,XYYYY(56.5%). No complete (classic) Y-chromosome microde -
letion was found. Partial AZFc deletion, b2/b3 was detected in both 
the patient and the patient’s father. Revealed in the patient complex 
gonosomal mosaicism is the result of postzygotic errors of sex chro -
mosome segregation, possibly because of instability of the structural 
rearranged Y chromosome.
P03.134  Fine mapping of FRA1B  and FRA1C  revealed new 
large common fragile site (cFs) genes frequently rearranged in 
different human cancers
D. Zheglo , L. Brueckner, A. Blumrich, M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva;  
DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany.
Common fragile sites (cFS) are evolutionary conserved chromosomal 
regions that are most prone to breakage under conditions partially inhibiting DNA synthesis. These regions are found in all individuals 
and appear to be hotspots of chromosomal rearrangements in cancer. 
Approximately 90 cFS regions have been cytogenetically identified, 
but only few of these have been determined at DNA sequence level 
and completely characterized. Major part of examined cFSs coincides 
with extremely genomically large genes. The identification of the full 
repertoire of Human Fragilome sequences is and an important task 
of Cancer Genome research leading to the discovery of new cancer 
susceptibility genes.
Using six-color FISH-mapping with BAC-probes on metaphase chro -
mosomes of aphidicolin-treated lymphocytes we have specified the 
locations of two aphidicolin-inducible cFS, FRA14B  and FRA14C , and 
narrowed them down from chromosome bands 14q23 and 14q24.1 to 
smaller regions of 600 kb and 800 kb, respectively. Both cFSs span 
genomically large genes, gephyrin ( GPHN , 670kb) and neurexin-3 
(NRXN3 , 1,6Mb), encoding neuronal proteins.
To assess the possible role of FRA14B and FRA14C  in cancer chro -
mosome rearrangements we performed fine-tiling oligonucleotide 
array CGH. We have detected multiple breakpoints within these two 
cFS occurring in neuroblastoma, melanoma, glioma, colon cancer and 
breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Subsequent validation of 
CGH results by six-colour FISH with BAC probes revealed additional 
balanced rearrangements at cFSs loci.
Our data enlarge the list of fine-mapped cFSs of the Human Fragilome 
and lead to the identification of two large cFS genes potentially associ -
ated with cancer.
P03.135  molecular cytogenetic characterization of an interstitial 
6q25.2q26 deletion in a 4-year-old girl with severe developmental 
delay, corpus callosum agenesis and hypertrichosis.
L. Gwanmesia1, F. Béna1, S. Gimelli1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1;  
1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development University of 
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
Microdeletion of 6q25.2q25.3 was recently described in four patients 
with developmental delay, microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus cal -
losum, hearing loss, and dysmorphic features (Nagamani et al., EJHG, 
2009).
We describe a 4-year-old female patient who was shown by array-
CGH (Agilent 244K) to have a heterozygous de novo  9.46 Mb deletion 
in 6q25.2q26.
The girl was born by caesarian section at 38 weeks of gestation after 
an uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 2870 g (p10-50), length 46 
cm (p10-50) and head circumference 33 cm (p50). Examination at 3 
months revealed severe hypotonia, umbilical hernia, large ears, and 
macrostomia. Major xerosis of hands and feet complicated by bouts of 
eczema as well as hypertrichosis (face, back, upper limbs) were also 
noted. Ophthalmological and audiological examinations were normal. 
Brain ultrasound and MRI at 4 months showed agenesis of the cor -
pus callosum without other abnormality. At the age of 4 years, severe 
psychomotor delay (walking not yet achieved and absent speech) and 
microcephaly were noted, as well as mild growth retardation (weight 
and height slightly below 3rd percentile).
The region of overlap in 6q25.2q25.3 between the previously-reported 
patients and our case is 3.52 Mb long and harbours 12 protein-coding 
genes. Among these, TIAM2, NOX3  and SYNJ2  are candidates for 
normal development of the brain. Haploinsufficiency of any of these 
genes could be causative of mental retardation, microcephaly, and/or 
corpus callosum agenesis. In addition, a locus for hypertrichosis could 
be situated in the deleted interval.
P03.136  molecular cytogenetic characterization of interstitial 
5q14.3q15 deletions in two patients with severe developmental 
delay, hypotonia and seizures.
F. Béna1, M. Mascaretti2, S. Gimelli1, E. Veneselli2, S. E. Antonarakis1,3, A. 
Bottani1;  
1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, G. Gaslini Institute and 
University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and 
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.
Intersititial deletions of 5q are rare events. Only three independent 
studies reported on cases of 5q14.3q15 deletions in patients with se -
vere mental retardation, muscular hypotonia, and epilepsy (Cardoso et Cytogenetics1
al., 2009; Engels et al., 2009; Le Meur et al., 2010).
We describe two unrelated patients with de novo  overlapping micro -
deletions in 5q14.3q15, spanning 5.73 Mb and 1.94 Mb, respectively. 
Patient 1 showed at the age of 4.5 years severe developmental delay, 
absence of speech, poor visual contact, stereotyped behaviour, ataxia, 
and epilepsy. Patient 2 was referred at the age of 10 months because 
of psychomotor delay and severe hypotonia. At the age of 2.5 years, 
he still did not walk or speak. EEG showed epileptic alterations from 
the age of 9 months and seizures occurred thereafter during 5 febrile 
episodes.
The boundaries of the deletions were different in the two patients, but 
an overlapping region of 1.84 Mb in 5q14.3 was defined. This region 
includes six genes: CETN3, MBLAC2, POLR3G, LYSMD3, GPR98 , 
and MEF2C . Among those, three can be considered as particularly 
interesting in relation with the phenotypes of our patients: GPR98 al-
ready reported to cause febrile and afebrile seizures (Nakayama et 
al., 2002), MEF2C  recently shown to be responsible when haploinsuf -
ficient for severe mental retardation, poor eye contact and seizures 
(Le Meur et al., 2010), and LYSMD3 which is highly expressed in the 
central nervous system.
J03.1  Hypersexuality, mental retardation and infertility in a 
47,XYY patient
C. Azimi , A. Faraj Pour, M. Khaleghian;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The phenotype of 47,XYY males is normal, but the subjects are often 
tall. The majority of them are usually fertile, but genital hypoplasia, 
testicular ectopy and hypospadias have been also reported. They can 
have semen parameters ranging from severe oligozoospermia to nor -
mozoospermia. There is a definite correlation between this syndrome 
and committing offenses.It has been suggested that 47,XYY males 
have an increased risk of behavioral problems, poor social integration, 
low tolerance to frustration, emotional instability, aggressivity, and poor 
self-control.
A 26-year-old mentally retarded man referred to our department.His 
parents were non-consanguineous, and at birth,his father and his 
mother were 55 and 45, respectively.He was the last child and he has 
two normal brothers, five normal sisters, One of his sister and one of 
his niece were also mentally retarded.
His clinical features were included tall stature, mild gynecomastia, 
small testes, as well as temper tantrums, aggressive and defiant ac -
tivity. He has unusual elevated sexual desire caused a big problems 
such as sexual assaults on his mother and his sisters, masturbation 
addiction and masturbating in front of others and on the public areas.
Therefore, he is kept in the restricted mental hospital.
His IQ was 65. Endocrinological testing demonstrated increase in the 
FSH and LH, and decrease in the testosterone levels. His seminal 
analysis revealed azoospermia. Conventional cytogenetic analysis us -
ing GTG-banding technique revealed the karyotype of 47,XYY in all 
his cells.
J03.2  Androgen insensitivity syndrome and inversion of 
chromosome 9: in one family
M. Khaleghian , C. Azimi;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a set of disorders of sex develop -
ment caused by mutations of a gene encoding the androgen receptor. 
A person with complete AIS is a phenotypic female with a chromo -
somal genotpye of 46,XY. This syndrome is an X-linked recessive and 
its gene is located at Xq11-12
Pericentric inversion of the chromosome 9 is such a common minor 
chromosomal rearrangement which some cytogeneticists would con -
sider them as normal variants. However, many reports in the literature 
raised conflicting views regarding the association with subfertility, re -
current abortion, and abnormal clinical conditions..
We are reporting a woman and two her aunts which have the androgen 
insensitivity syndrome and inversion 9.
A 22-year-old woman was referred to our department due to primary 
amenorrhea and hirsutism. On physical examination, she measured 
167 cm and weighed 61 kg.She was a female by appearance and 
external genitalia. Her axillary and pubic hair was scant (Tanner 2), and she was rated Tanner 4 for her breast development. Her hormone 
assays showed normal FSH, mildly elevated LH and estradiol, highly 
elevated testosterone and DHT.
Her sonography showed absence of uterus and ovaries, and presence 
of aplastic testes in the abdomen.
Investigation of her family revealed that two of her aunts have also 
exactly the same clinical features.
Lymphocytes of the members of the family were cultured, and ana -
lyzed by use of the conventional G-banding technique. The karyotype 
of our proposita and two of her aunts revealed: 46,XY,inv(9)(p11q13).
Her mother showed: 46,XX,inv(9)(p11q13) and her father was nor -
mal.
J03.3  Parity and consanguinity of Down syndrome in iran. A 
study of 402 free trisomic cases.
E. Daei,1, M. Shariaty2;  
1A.A.Taleb Hospital of Rafsanjan University, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Tehran University Cancer Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Background: Down syndrome is the most frequent chromosomal ab -
normality in newborns with an incidence of around one per 700 live 
birth worldwide .Since the discovery of trisomy 21 in 1959 maternal 
and paternal age effect relation to the etiology and chromosomal pat -
tern of affected persons has been studied .Since 1965 and with the 
establishment of the first Cytogenetics Lab.in the Country, we* have 
karyotyped over 700 Down patients. In this retrospective study par -
ity and consanguinity of 402 free trisomic patients’s is analyzed and 
reported.
Materials and methods: Peripheral blood of 736 patients aged one day 
to 23 years were cultured and Karyotyped Two hours colcemide treat -
ed cultures after 70 hours incubation and ten minutes KCl treatment 
were G-banded at 300-400 band level and analysed after air dry slide 
preparations..35 well spread mitoses were analyzed by one of us* and 
seve mitoses were karyotyped .Results were reported to the in charge 
physicians according to ISCN nomenclature of 1995.
Results: Among 402 none mosaic free trisomic Down patients 53 per 
cent were products of the first pregnancies, 29 percent were the re -
sults of the second pregnancies and the rests were outcomes of the 
3rd to the 15th pregnancies. Only EIGHT per cent had consanguineous 
parents which is quite low as comparing to the average familial mar -
riages in Iran which is over 15 per cent.
Conclusion: we believe that in Iran the risk of having a Down syndrome 
offspring in the first pregnancies is quite high and should be noticed 
by health officials.
J03.4  A report of a XYY male with hydrocephaly
F. Talebmanochehri , F. Razazian, F. Mortezapour, M. Rahnama, F. Nasiri 
kenari, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Here we are presenting the clinical finding in a five days old baby boy 
who refereed to our Genetic Dept. due to undetectable testis and pos -
sible hydrocephaly. He was born premature at 32 weeks of gestation 
by cesarean. His parents were first cousin. He had a healthy sister. 
He had a feeding and respiratory problem. He passed away at age 
10 day.
Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes 
cells.Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 
supplemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding 
was Performed in all subject.
His karyotype revealed to be 47,XYY. From reviewing the article and 
case reports, we found that there least 4 other suspected cases of 
hydrocephaly whom with further clinical investigation appeared to be 
normal. We think that it is important to report our case to help the pos -
sible correlation between phenotype and 47, XYY karyotype.
J03.5  Report of a patient with isochromosome Xq and 
Robertsonian translocation 13;14
M. Moutabi Alavi , C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, A. Fathpour;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Patients with isochromosome Xq phenotypically are resembled Turner 
syndrome with similar manifestations such as amenorrhea and infer -
tility. Robersonian translocation between chromosomes 13 and 14 is Cytogenetics1
a common translocation among normal population with no obvious 
phenotypical effect. The combination of isochromosome Xq and the 
Robertsonian translocation 13;14 is a very rare event.
We are reporting a 30 years old single woman, who was referred to 
our department due to amenorrhea. Her clinical features were: short 
stature, broad chest, narrow palate, low posterior hairline, infantile nip -
ples, undeveloped breasts, infantile external genitalia, absent of axil -
lary hair, very scant pubic hair. Ultrasonography investigation revealed 
gonadal dysgenesis and hypoplastic uterus. Her IQ, cardiac and renal 
examinations were normal.
Cytogenetic analysis was performed by G-banding procedure, study -
ing 30 metaphases of proliferating lymphocytes from her pertipheral 
blood. Her karyotype was found to be: 45,X,i(X)(q10),der(13;14)(q1
0;q10).
We also studied her parents chromosomes to find out the origin of 
the translocation. It was revealed that her mother was normal, but her 
father carries the same translocation.
J03.6  Are there any association between 13q;14q Robertsonian 
translocation with Down‘s syndrome?
M. Pilechian Langeroudi , M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
There are contradictory data on the association of translocation 
(13q;14q) and Down‘s syndrome. Some researchers reported the as -
sociation of translocations not involving chromosome 21 with Down‘s 
syndrome, and focused on the inherited 13/14 Robertsonian transloca -
tions and Down‘s syndrome. On the other hand, a study of four-gen -
eration kindred of 86 sibships was carried out when an index case had 
the Down‘s syndrome, due to trisomy-21, and aslo carried the 13/14 
translocation.Their aim was to examine the risk of t(13q;13q) carriers 
having trisomy-21 children. They could not find any association.
We report a 21-year old healthy man who came for genetic counseling 
due to the Down‘s syndrome of his 23-year old sister. His father was 
64, his mother 62, and both look healthy. His sister showed typical 
clinical features of Down‘s syndrome including: small stature, brachy -
cephaly, flat occiput, flat facial profile, small ears, epicanthal folds, 
upslanting palpebral fissures, simian crease, hyperflexibility of joints, 
and mental deficiency.
Peripheral blood samples of the consultand, his sister and his parents 
were cultured, harvested and banded according to standard methods.
Chromosome analysis of our consultand and his mother showed 
breakage and reunion at bands 13q10 and 14q10, and a derivative 
chromosome (13;14).
Consultand: 45,XY,der (13;14)(q10;q10)
Mother: 45,XX,der (13;14)(q10;q10)
Father showed normal karyotype.
Sister revealed trisomy-21 with 46 chromosomes due to the Robertso -
nian translocation between the chromosomes 13 and 14, as follows:
46,XX,der (13;14)(q10;q10),+21
The sister of our consultand was another rare case of Down‘s syn -
drome with trisomy-21 in association with inherited Robertsonian 
translocation(13q;14q).
J03.7  short stature with t(11;22) and normal pituitary function
M. Shakiba1, N. Ghasemi2;  
1Yazd SS medical sciences university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Research and Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences 
university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Short stature and genetic disease is an interesting aspect in pediat -
ric medicine. Several chromosomal diseases were reported with short 
stature. Previously t(11; 22) was reported with short stature and hy -
popituitarism. The present case was described is a case with short 
stature and translocation 11;22. She is a 14 years old normal appear -
ing intelligent girl with no sign of puberty. In physical examination, her 
weight was 24Kg and height 127 cm, with normal blood pressure. 
There is no sign of cardiac or eyes abnormality. Laboratory findings 
were shown normal provocative growth hormone, estradiol in prepu -
bertal range with normal thyroid hormone and cortical level. Other rou -
tine tests were normal, but mild iron deficiency anemia (Hb10.7mg/dl) 
was seen. Father height was 155 and mother 163cm. Her birth weight 
was 3100gr and he mother complains growth problem of whom around 
first year of life. Two other children of family have normal growth. Her cytogenetic study, on the basis of G-banding, showed 46XX, t(11; 22) 
(q23.3; q11.2). The t(11; 22) is the common non-Robertsonian consti -
tutional translocation in humans. This translocation was reported by 
impaired anterior pituitary function and short stature, but this is the 
first case with similar translocation without gross pituitary dysfunction. 
A detailed clinical description of this patient, along with a precise cyto -
genetic designation of chromosomal breakpoint, allows further refine -
ment of genotype-phenotype correlation for this translocation.
J03.8  A Down child with a de novo translocation
F. razazian , F. Taleb manoochehri, F. Nasiri kenari, M. Rahnama, F. 
Mortezapour, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
A 2 year sold girl was referred to our Genetic laboratory of being sus -
pected to be Down Syndrome. She was born at term by natural deliv -
ery. Ultrasound performed during pregnancy but report the fetus to be 
normal. Her weigh and head circumstances were within normal range. 
She had developmental delay. She did not gain weight from 6 months 
age.
Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes 
cells.Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 
supplemented with 20% FBS.highresolution chromosome banding 
was Performed in all subject.
Chromosome study was performed on stimulated lymphocytes of the 
case and parents. She found to be a Down child plus a de novo car -
rier of an apparently translocation between chromosome 3 and 20. 
Her karyotype was reported as 47,XX,+21,t(3;20)(p23;p11.2). There 
are few cases of a familial translocation plus a trisomy and a very few 
cases of de novo translocation and trisomy. Therefore, we think it is 
important to report our case.
J03.9  t ranslocation and trisomy 21 in a baby boy.
M. Rahnama , F. Mortezapour, F. Talebmanoochehri, F. Nasiri Kenari, F. 
Razazian, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
A 7 months old baby boy was referred to our laboratory because of 
having clinical manifestation of Down syndrome. He was born at term 
by natural delivery.The eyes were oriental and attention was normal 
with normal reflection to sounds rolling as like as other babies without 
any other MR signs . His parent were unrelated. They had also such a 
delivery in family history.
Chromosome study was performed using stimulated lymphocytes cells 
.Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were set up in RPMI 1640 sup -
plemented with 20% FBS. high resolution chromosome banding was 
Performed in all subject.
The karyotype was ascertained as :47,XY,+21,tr(12;15)(p13.3;q26.1). 
His parents had normal karyotypes
P04  Reproductive genetics
P04.01  investigation of the 4977 bp mitochondrial DNA deletion 
in asthenozoospermic men
S. S. Hayat ;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Objective: Sperm motility is one of the major determinants of male 
fertility. There is increasing evidence that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
mutations in sperm may lead to infertility. Due to the loss of several 
vital OXPHOS genes, mtDNA deletions mainly affect high-energy 
demanding post meiotic cells. Since spermatozoa movement also 
requires great amount of energy, defects in mitochondrial respiratory 
function is assumed to cause a decline in motility and, consequently, 
decrease of fertility.
Design: Detection of mitochondrial DNA deletion in human sperma -
tozoa.
Materials and Methods: We collected 240 semen samples from 240 
infertile men with asthenozoospermia (a<25% or a+ b<50% (WHO 
1999). The samples with sperm agglutination, high viscosity and in -
creased numbers of seminal leukocytes (leukospermia) were exclud -
ed. Blood samples obtained from 46 healthy individuals were used as 
control.
DNA was extracted from each semen sample. The mtDNA 4977 bp Reproductive genetics1
deletion, so called `common deletion‘ was recognized by nested PCR-
amplified fragments in agarose gel electrophoresis.
Results: The 4977 bp deletion was identified in 96% of analyzed 
samples. Sperm motility (a+b) extremely varies (3%-38%) in semen 
samples with mtDNA mutation. The deletion was detected also in 87% 
control group blood samples. 13 bp direct repeats located at flanking 
region (8470-8482 and 13447-13459 respectively) may cause PCR 
slippage and artificial fragment amplification.
Discussion: The results of our study correspond to the current data 
confirmed that nested PCR doesn‘t allow detecting mtDNA deletion 
4977 accurately. Potential use of this mtDNA deletion as a diagnostic 
test requires more reliable methods.
Support: none
P04.02  molecular diagnosis of dominant and recessive 
spinocerebellar ataxias
R. Selvatici , B. Dolcini, A. Venturoli, C. Trabanelli, S. Carturan, M. Taddei 
Masieri, A. Ravani, A. Ferlini;  
Sezione di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy.
Autosomal dominant ataxias (SCA1-2-3-6-7) and autosomal recessive 
Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) are the most frequent ataxias in Europe. 
Mutations in SCA1-2-3-6-7 are CAG expansions that are transcribed 
and translated into a long sequence of polyglutamine in the corre -
sponding proteins, resulting in a toxic function for the cell. PCRs were 
performed with pairs of specific primers for each SCAs, in which the 
forward primer was usually fluorescinated. PCR products were ana -
lyzed by gel electrophoresis and by capillary electrophoresis using ABI 
PRISM 3130xl gel Analyzer. Liz500 was used as internal molecular 
weight standard and GeneScan Software was used to elaborate the 
data.
FRDA is a mitochondrial disease with a prevalence of 2x10-5 and a 
carrier frequency of 1/100. Almost 98% of the alleles has a pathologi -
cal expansion of GAA in the first intron of the gene causing reduction 
of frataxin in homozygotes. Missense and truncating mutations are 
present in the remaining 2%. FRDA affected or carriers were identified 
by Hot-Start amplification using the XL-PCR kit (Applied Biosystems), 
with the following primers:
GAA-F(5’ GGG ATT GGT TGC CAG TGC TTA AAA GTT AG 3’)
GAA-R(5’ GAT CTA AGG ACC ATC ATG GCC ACA CTT CGG 3’).
PCR products were analyzed on agarose gel and by capillary electro -
phoresis ABI PRISM 3130xl gel Analyzer. To confirm the diagnosis, 
Rox1000 and Liz500 were used as molecular weight standards and 
GeneScan Software was used to elaborate the data.
40 patients were analysed of which two resulted SCA2 affected, one 
was SCA1 affected, two were Friedreich affected and seven were 
Friedreich carriers.
P04.03  Homozygous c.144delc of AURKc detected by 
bidirectional sequencing
N. B. Abdelmoula , R. Louati, T. Rebai;  
Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia.
Molecular investigation by bidirectional sequencing of the exon 3 of 
AURKC gene using the couple of primers: TACCCTACCTCCCAAGCT -
GA and CTTCAGGGCCACAATGAAAT, is performed for two Libyan 
brothers who complain from infertility with large-headed polyploid 
multi-flagellar spermatozoa. Clinical history showed absence of paren -
tal consanguinity and failure of many attempts of ICSI and IMSI. Ge -
netic analysis showed the homozygous c.144delC for the two patients. 
This mutation leads to the production of large-headed polyploid multi-
flagellar spermatozoa and causes meiosis I arrest in infertile men.
We underline that screening for c.144delC mutation of AURKC gene 
should be offered routinely to patients with macrocephalic sperm head 
syndrome in our countries (carrier frequency of 1/50), by setting up a 
rapid molecular test. Consideration of AMP treatment remains still not 
clear and will be discussed.
P04.04  chromosome mosaicism in males with idiopathic 
azoospermia
C. Garrido1, V. Català1, E. Cuatrecasas1, E. Masip1, L. Bassas2, E. Ars2, A. 
Serés-Santamaría1;  
1Prenatal Genetics, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Dicentrics are among the most common structural abnor -
malities of the human Y chromosome, and the phenotype is difficult to predict, because it depends on different factors like duplications or 
deletions or the degree of mosaicism (45,X cell line). Clinical presenta -
tions in these patients can range from a classical female Turner phe -
notype, through mixed gonadal dysgenesis, to phenotypically normal 
males.
The essential genes for spermatogenesis are in Y chromosome and, 
because of that, karyotype is very important in males with idiopathic 
azoospermia (IA).
Case: A male with IA was referred to our laboratory for cytogenetic 
analysis.
Cytogenetic result showed the presence of a mosaicism 45,X[50]/
46,XY[8]; chromosome Y was normal by GTG banding techniques but 
very small.
The result for the screening of STS markers showed a microdeletion in 
AZFb and AZFc intervals.
We also evaluated the percentage of mosaicism in another tissue; 
buccal smear‘s cells were selected. A normal male result in 100% of 
the cells was obseved. Finally, SRY was studied by FISH in peripheral 
blood chromosomes and showed two red signals, which meant the pa -
tient had an isodicentric Y chromosome with common break point. Actu -
ally the karyotype was 45,X[50]/46,X,idic(Y)(q11.1).ishYq(SRY++)[8].
Conclusions: This case report underlines the necessity of a full-scale 
genetic analysis in all patients with reproductive failures. This case 
also aimed to establish the influence of sex chromosome mosaicism 
on the resulting phenotype respecting to differential tissue distribution, 
effects of the SRY and the breakpoints in the AZF region. Our results 
are in agreement to others reported.
P04.05   
cFtR gene mutations and non-obstructive azoospermia: An 
iranian study
F. Mirzajani1, R. Mirfakhraie1, S. M. Kalantar2, N. Salsabili3, M. Montazeri1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Genetic factors cause about 10% of male infertility. Cystic fibrosis 
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutations are among relatively 
frequent causes of male infertility. The aim of the present study was 
to evaluate the effect of CFTR gene mutations in non-obstructive azo -
ospermia.
The incidence of common CFTR mutations including delF508, G542X, 
N1303K, W1282X and R117H was investigated in 106 Iranian patients 
with non-obstructive azoospermia using ARMS-PCR and PCR-RFLP 
methods. Also probable mutations in exons 4, 7, 10, 11, 20 and 21 
of the CFTR gene were studied using SSCP, TTGE and sequencing 
methods. 50 fertile men were also studied as control group.
Thirteen patients (21.26 %) showed 406-6T>C, A120T, I148T, ΔF508, 
G542X, and IVS8-5T mutations. None of the mutations were observed 
in the control group. No significant statistical correlation was observed 
between the incidence of M470V polymorphism and male infertility ( P 
= 0.755).
The present study indicates that there is a relation between CFTR 
gene mutations and developing non-obstructive azoospermia. There -
fore, couples undergoing assisted reproductive technologies such as 
intra cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) are advised to be screened for 
CFTR gene mutations.
P04.06  DEtEctiON OF cFtR mUt AtiONs iN GAmEtE DONORs 
iN sPAiN
A. Urbano1, I. Ochando1, L. Gil2, C. Ochoa3, C. Calatayud4, I. Torres5, J. 
Rueda6,1,1;  
1U. Genética, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 2U. Reproducción, 
Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 3CEFIVA, Asturias, Spain, 
4CREA, Valencia, Spain, 5TAHE Reproducción, Murcia, Spain, 6Fac. Medicina, 
Univ Miguel Hernández, Alicante, Spain.
Mutation of CFTR protein can originate CF and CAVD; it is a recessive 
disorder and because of its high prevalence (1/25 in Caucasian popu -
lation) it might be a good candidate for screening in gamete donors 
for assisted reproductive techniques. Our objective was to study the 
prevalence of CFTR gene’s mutations in Spanish gamete donors from 
five reproductive centers.
Blood DNA samples from 588 healthy, both male and female donors, Reproductive genetics1
ranging in age 18-32, were studied. The donors were from two repro -
ductive centers in the North of Spain and three more from the East. 
DNA analysis was performed using a commercial kit from Innogenet -
ics that covers, roughly, 80% of the mutations of European Caucasian 
population.
The incidence of CFTR mutations in donors was 3.9% higher in the 
North than in the East (4.32% vs. 3.21%). The premutation genotype 
5T was present in 9.8% of the individuals (10.63 vs. 9.63, respectively). 
These differences were not statistically significant. The most frequent 
mutations were ΔF508 (42%), I148T (15.6%) and G542X (10.6%).
Our data show some differences with previous reports in the Spanish 
population, such as a relatively high prevalence of the I148T muta -
tion, and an unexpectedly high prevalence of the 5T genotype. The 
5T/TG variant decreases the efficiency of intron 8 splicing and its ef -
fects depend on other associated mutations, if any. Since a relatively 
high number (13.7%) of the individuals should not be accepted to be 
gamete donors, it is highly recommended to screen the candidates for 
CFTR gene mutations, including 5T analysis.
P04.07  AGORA, a biobank of congenital malformations and 
childhood cancers
I. A. L. M. van Rooij , K. Y. Renkema, E. M. H. F. Bongers, L. F. M. van der 
Zanden, C. H. W. Wijers, I. de Blaauw, W. F. J. Feitz, B. Franke, N. V. A. M. 
Knoers, N. Roeleveld;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The aetiology of many congenital malformations and childhood can -
cers has not been established, but is most likely interplay between 
genetic and environmental risk factors. Large series of patients are 
needed to identify genes involved, and biobanks are a key resource 
for this purpose. Therefore, we have set up a biobank of congeni -
tal malformations and childhood cancers at the Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre (RUNMC) named AGORA, Aetiologic re -
search into Genetic and Occupational/environmental Risk factors for 
Anomalies in children. In almost every paediatric department of the 
RUNMC, a reference centre for 5 million people in the Eastern part of 
the Netherlands, patients and their parents are asked to donate blood 
or saliva for DNA isolation and to fill out questionnaires addressing 
the pregnancy period. Approximately 75-80% of the invited families 
participate and we already obtained 9150 DNA-samples (± 3350 case-
parent-triads) and 2150 questionnaires. Currently, we are starting up 
the recruitment a random sample of Dutch children as a control group 
through the nationwide population administration. The availability of 
large cohorts of well-phenotyped patients within this biobank has en -
abled us to identify two new genes involved in the aetiology of hy -
pospadias and renal anomalies, emphasizing the significant value of 
the AGORA biobank. Expansion of the biobank with Dutch, European 
and worldwide collaborators is set up for more rare disorders, such as 
specific anorectal and renal malformations. A significant challenge in 
this pursuit of genetic and environmental basis of congenital disorders 
is the efficient and coordinated collection of genotype, phenotype and 
environmental data.
P04.08  Cytogenetic study for couples with reproductive 
problems
M. Mackic-Djurovic , I. Aganovic-Musinovic, S. Ibrulj;  
Center for Genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During last ten years, 278 married couples came to Center for genetics 
of Medical faculty-University of Sarajevo, for chromosomal cytogenetic 
analyze due to infertility or larger number of spontaneous abortions. To 
each married couple, kariotype has been made, using GTG technique 
from cultures of lymphocytes from peripheral blood.
Results: 25 (9%) of 278 had one partner carrying a chromosomal 
changes. Chromosomal changes at men were: 4 (1,43%) transloca -
tions, 4 (1,43%) marker chromosomes, 1 (0,35%) numerical chromo -
somal changes in mosaic types. Analyzes at women, have reviled 
larger number of chromosomal changes than at men. Changes found 
were: 4 (1,43%) translocations, 3 (1,08%) inversions, 2 (0, 71%) mark -
er chromosomes and 7 (2, 51%) numerical chromosomal changes in 
mosaic types.P04.09  Germline rearrangements in the tumour suppressor 
genes WWOX and FHit are associated with Disorders of sex 
Development
S. White1,2, E. Turbitt1, P. Bernard3, J. Hewitt1,2, Y. van der Zwan4, R. Hersmus4, 
Z. Juniarto5, M. Cools6, S. Faradz5, S. Drop4, L. Looijenga4, A. Sinclair1,2;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, 
Melbourne, Australia, 4Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Diponegoro 
University, Semarang, Indonesia, 6University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
Disorders of Sex Development (DSD), ranging in severity from genital 
abnormalities to complete sex reversal, occur in ~0.5% of live births 
and represent a major paediatric concern. In many cases it is not pos -
sible to make an accurate molecular diagnosis, with consequences for 
both treatment and genetic counseling.
We have used whole genome microarray copy number variation (CNV) 
analysis in an attempt to identify causative mutations in a cohort of 
DSD patients. In one 46,XY patient with ambiguous genitalia we de -
tected a multi-exon deletion within the WWOX gene, which was also 
seen in the 46,XX mother. In another 46,XY patient with ambiguous 
genitalia we identified a single exon deletion within the FHIT gene.
Both WWOX and FHIT are known tumour suppressor genes, and to 
the best of our knowledge the deletions we have identified represent 
the first germline rearrangements affecting their coding regions. Both 
genes have been implicated as inhibitors of the Wnt/beta-catenin path -
way (a critical component of ovarian development), and a previously 
described knock-out mouse of Wwox showed gonadal abnormalities 
in both sexes.
We are currently exploring the functional consequences of the identi -
fied mutations on the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, as well as 
determining the frequency of WWOX and FHIT mutations in a larger 
cohort of DSD patients.
P04.10**  Endometrial gene expression analysis in infertile 
women in natural and artificial cycles
S. Altmäe1,2, J. A. Martinez-Conejero3, A. Salumets2, J. A. Horcajadas3, A. 
Stavreus-Evers4;  
1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
3iGenomix, Valencia, Spain, 4Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
We aimed to investigate endometrial gene expression profile in wom -
en with unexplained infertility in comparison with fertile controls at the 
time of embryo implantation in order to find potential predictive mark -
ers of uterine receptivity and to identify the molecular mechanisms of 
infertility. Further, we aimed to compare the gene expression pattern 
of receptive endometrium in natural cycles and in artificial cycles in 
these infertile women, in order to provide additional knowledge in the 
complex process of artificial endometrial preparation, which could be 
helpful for improving the outcome of assisted reproductive techniques 
in infertility treatment.
We used high-density oligonucleotide gene arrays, comprising 44 000 
gene targets for endometrial gene expression profiling ( n=5 in each 
group).
Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis showed a 
clear distinction in endometrial gene expression between study groups. 
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis showed dysregulation of gene pathways 
involved in leukocyte extravasation signalling, lipid metabolism, and 
detoxification in the endometria of infertile women. In the artificial cy -
cle, significantly high levels of cytokine activity and hormone activity, 
with cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathways were affected.
Our study provides new information on genes and pathways that may 
have functional significance as regards to endometrial receptivity and 
subsequent embryo implantation.
P04.11  search for epimutations of maternal expressed gene MEG
 (14q32) in early pregnancy losses
E. A. Sazhenova , I. N. Lebedev;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic phenomenon, which is involved 
in regulation of embryonic development and placental function. In 
general, paternally expressed imprinted genes enhance fetal growth 
whereas maternally expressed suppress it. Previously we have re -
ported a tissue-specific loss of methylation in paternal expressed loci 
KCNQ1OT1  (11p15) and PLAGL1 (6q24-25) in 9.5% and 10.3% spon -
taneous abortions, respectively. At the same time, normal epigenetic Reproductive genetics17
status of the maternal expressed genes H19, CDKN1C  and paternal 
expressed gene  SNRPN  was found. The aim of the present research 
was estimation of epigenetic status of other maternal expressed gene 
MEG3  (14q32) in samples of first-trimester spontaneous abortions. 
The product of this gene is a regulatory RNA, which is involved in inhi -
bition of cell proliferation. Methylation-specific PCR of MEG3 promoter 
was performed using DNA from extraembryoniñ mesoderm and cho -
rion cytotrophoblast of 87 first-trimester missed abortions with abnor -
malities of cell proliferation. Thirty induced abortions were studied as a 
control group. Normal differential methylation of MEG3  parental alleles 
was observed in all studied embryos. Our data indicates that methyla -
tion status of MEG3  imprinted locus on the chromosome 14 has no ap -
parent effect for disruption of early human embryogenesis. This study 
was partially supported by Federal Special-Purpose Program (¹ P303) 
and RFBR (¹ 08-04-01344).
P04.12  the genetics of gonadal mosaicism
N. V. Kovaleva ;  
St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Gonadal mosaicism (GM) for chromosome abnormalities in otherwise 
asymptomatic carrier is not a rare condition. However there are many 
problems related to GM which remain to be elucidated, including its 
prevalence, mechanisms and timing of formation, causing factors, and 
phenomenon of female predominance among GM carriers.
An approach to determine the population rate of GM for trisomies of 
chromosomes without severe imprinting effect was developed recently 
[Genet Test 11:342]. A female predominance of individuals with GM 
for free trisomy and for rearrangements involving pericentromeric 
breaks may be explained by female-specific chromosome loss and 
female-specific centromere instability in early embryo development 
[AJMG 136A:413]. Strong female predominance found among carri -
ers of GM for derivative chromosomes but not in carriers of balanced 
reciprocal translocations suggests male-specific selection against 
unbalanced rearrangements [EJHG 13(S1):135]. Both direct (origin 
of trisomy 21 (T21)) and indirect (advanced grandmaternal age) evi -
dence allow to assume that significant proportion T21 GM carriers had 
been conceived as trisomics. Mosaicism transmission reported in 12 
of 80 families with T21 GM carrier(s) suggests a predisposition to tri -
somic rescue. Typical male preponderance in affected offspring with 
either maternally- or paternally transmitted T21 indicates that meiotic 
events are not responsible for the skewed sex ratio in Down syndrome.  
Among unaffected offspring of female T21 GM carriers, there was no 
bias from population sex ratio, while a strong female excess among 
unaffected offspring of male carriers of T21 GM uncovers meiotic non-
homologous co-orientation of chromosomes 21 and X in spermatogen -
esis [Mol Cytogenet, in press].
P04.13  clinical application of preimplantation genetic 
haplotyping for monogenic disorders in czech Republic: 
Huntington disease, a case report.
M. Hejtmankova1, M. Putzova1, I. Eliasova1, L. Pecnova1, R. Kren1, D. 
Stejskal1, J. Zidovska2;  
1Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproduction Medicine GENNET Ltd., 
Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Medical Genetics,1stMedical faculty, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Preimplantation genetic haplotyping (PGH) for preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis (PGD) of monogenic disorders has been used at our centre 
since 2007.
Genetic haplotyping technique allowed to use the testing of multiple 
loci using standard DNA - based PCR protocols on products of multiple 
displacement amplification (MDA) from one blastomere biopsied from 
the cleavage-state embryo. Twenty seven gene - specific multiplex 
have been developed. Now they are ready to be used for the couples 
at risk of these monogenic disorders: cystic fibrosis, Huntington dis -
ease, Charcot-Marie-Tooth X-linked and type 1A, Duchenne/Becker 
muscular dystrophy, Haemophilia A, SCIDX1, Dystrophia myotonica 1, 
spinal muscular atrophy 1, polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD), con -
nexin disorders associated with deafness, RHD typing (D antigen), 
BRCA1, HSAN1, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, Neurofibromatosis 
type I, epidermolysis bullosa, propionic acidemia and Marfan, Lynch, 
Alagille, Currarino, Treacher Collins, IPEX, Crouzon and Fragile-X 
syndrome. The list of diagnosis where we can offer PGD/ PGH is be -ing continually extended.
We demonstrate a case report of successful PGH for Huntington dis -
ease.
Genetic testing for an inherited predisposition to specific disease 
brings a deep dilemma for people with positive family history and de -
termined reproductive period. PGH provides an efficient and success -
ful alternative within prenatal diagnosis services and it counts among 
the methods reducing individual risk.
P04.14  the investigation of AZF, CFTR, AR  genes in patients 
with impaired spermatogenesis
O. Fesai , L. Livshits;  
Institute of Molecular Biolody and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine.
Male infertility is found to have a role in approximately 50% of infertile 
couples. Microdeletions of the long arm of the human Y-chromosome 
are associated with spermatogenic failure. Mutations in the CFTR  
gene are also involved in male infertility. The androgen receptor medi -
ates androgen action determining male sexual phenotypes and pro -
motion of spermatogenesis.
Y-chromosome microdeletions, mutations and IVS8-nT sequence of 
CFTR  gene and CAG-repeats number of exon 1 of the AR gene we 
have screened in 125 patients with azoospermia (n=53) and oligozoo -
spermia (n=72) and in control groups by PCR-based methods. For 
each patient, PCR analyses were performed on DNA isolated from 
leukocytes derived from peripheral blood.
Microdeletions were detected in 10 of total 125 (8.0%) infertile men. 
Mutations in the CFTR  gene were detected on 9 out of 125 analyzed 
infertile men. The most common mutation was F508del (7 of total 9 
mutations). IVS8-5T allele of CFTR  gene associated with congenital 
bilateral absence of the vas deferens was detected in 20 of total 125 
(16.0%) of patients.
The frequency of alleles with CAG-repeats ≤17 was significant higher 
(P<0.05) in group of patients with azoospermia (9.4%) comparing with 
control group (2.7%). The frequency of alleles with CAG-repeats ≥26 
was significant differed (P<0.01) between group of patients with oligo -
zoospermia (19.4%) and control group (2.7%).
Molecular-genetic analysis of the AZF, CFTR  and AR genes mutations 
as well as genetic counseling are necessary very important of diagnos -
tics for patients with male infertility, especially if they are included in an 
assisted reproductive technologies program.
P04.15  Analysis of sperm chromosomal abnormalities and 
sperm DNA fragmentation in infertile men
S. brahem , M. Meriem, J. Sonia, E. Hatem, S. Ali;  
hospital Farhat hached sousse, sousse, Tunisia.
Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate levels of sperm nucle -
ar DNA fragmentation and of chromosomal abnormalities in a popula -
tion of infertile men with severely teratozoospermia.
Materials and methods: The level of DNA fragmentation was deter -
mined by TUNEL assay in infertile men with severely teratozoospermia 
(n = 70) and in adult healthy fertile men (control group, n = 30). Three 
color fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed with probes 
specific for chromosomes 8, X, and Y in the control group and terato -
zoospermic men.
Results: Ours patients with severely teratozoospermia showed a sig -
nificantly higher abnormality with total rate of 6.31% for chromosome 
X,Y and 18 in their spermatozoa compared to control group ( 1.52 
% ; p < 0.0001). A significantly higher proportion of total sperm DNA 
fragmentation was detected in patient with teratozoospermia (32.7% 
± 5.1 %) compared to the control group (8.19 % ± 2.1 %; p < 0.0001). 
There were significant correlation between sperm DNA fragmentation 
and abnormal sperm morphology (r = 0.75; p < 0.0001). Aneuploidy 
rate was correlated to abnormal morphology, macrocephalic heads 
and abnormal flagella (p < 0.001). Moreover a positive correlation was 
found between the rate of sperm chromosomal aberration and the rate 
of sperm DNA fragmentation (r = 0.45; p < 0.001). 
Conclusion: The result indicates that spermatozoa from patients with 
teratozoospermia contain greater DNA fragmentation and chromo -
somal aneuploidy and may lead to male infertility.Reproductive genetics1
P04.16  Repeated genetic counselling in the family with 
infertility, Cystic fibrosis and chromosomal aberration - case 
report
R. Gaillyová1,2, K. Kvačková1,3, M. Vozdová4, I. Valášková1,2, P. Kuglík1,5, M. 
Vilémová1, J. Rubeš4,6;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Biological Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic, 3Dept. of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. of Genetics and Reproduction, 
Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Dept. of Genetics 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, 
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 6Repromeda, Brno, Czech Republic.
In pairs with reproductive failure we perform genetic counselling, cyto -
genetic examination using karyotyping of lymphocytes from peripheral 
blood and DNA analysis of most frequent mutations in CFTR gene in 
Czech population. In men with severe oligospermia or azoospermia 
we perform DNA analysis of AZF a, b, c regions on Yq. In men who 
carry balanced chromosomal translocations we determinate sperm 
aneuploidy and frequency of chromosomally unbalanced sperm using 
fluorescent in situ hybridisation. This examination helps to clarify the 
genetic prognosis and recommendations of appropriate methods of 
prenatal genetic diagnosis or preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
We describe repeated genetic counselling in the couple with reproduc -
tive failure. We confirm the CFTR genotype: p.[F508del]+[ Q685PfsX4] 
in son from the pregnancy after IVF.
Within the preventive genetic testing of CFTR gene in this family we 
found chromosomal translocation in the mother‘s younger brother and 
we recommneded examinations of sperm aneuploidy and cytogenetic 
analysis in other relatives.
Supported by grant NS 9842-4/2008.
P04.17  A pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 in a infertile 
man
V. Radoi , D. Mierla;  
Life Memmorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Infertility affects an ~ 15 % of couples and male factor infertility is ~ 
50% of cases.
A 34 years old men with oligozoospermia attending assisted reproduc -
tion program referred to our clinic for genetic testing and counseling.
Cytogenetic analysis was performed according to standard methods 
(GTG banding, with a minimum of 400 bands) on cultured cells ob -
tained from the patient peripheral blood and the result showed an ab -
normal karyotype 46,XY,inv (5)(pter-q13).
Chromosomal study is very important to predict probability of trans -
mission of affected gamete to offspring. Thus, in infertile males with 
abnormal karyotype, preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) aid in 
increasing outcome of pregnancy.
P04.18  Frequency of cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator gene mutations in infertile men
P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, Faculty 
of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
It is well established that 60-70% of patients with congenital bilateral 
aplasia of the vas deferens (CBVAD) have mutations in the cystic fibro -
sis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Increased 
CFTR mutation frequency was also reported in males with non-ob -
structive azoospermia and oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, emphasiz -
ing the importance of screening for CF mutations not only in men with 
CBVAD, but in all men with reduced sperm counts. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the frequency of CFTR mutations in infertile 
males from the Republic of Macedonia. A total of 169 infertile men (73 
with azoospermia, 46 with severe oligozoospermia, 23 with mild oligo -
zoospermia and 27 with normozoospermia but unexplained couple in -
fertility), as well as 136 fertile controls were included in the study. Five 
common CFTR mutations (DF508, G542X, N1303K, 621+1G->T and 
R117H) and IVS 8 polyT alleles were analyzed by a multiplex PCR and 
single nucleotide extension reaction using a SNaPshot multiplex kit. 
Six DF508 and one G542X mutations were detected among infertile 
men, while two DF508 mutations were present among fertile controls. 
The frequency of CFTR heterozygosity was slightly higher in all groups 
of infertile males (5.5% in azoospermia, 2.2% in severe oligozoosper -mia, 4.3% in mild oligozoospermia and 3.7% in normozoospermia) in 
comparison to the fertile controls (1.5%). The frequency of IVS 8(5T) 
allele was 4.1% in infertile men and 3.3% in controls. Two infertile men 
with CFTR mutation (one with obstructive azoospermia and one with 
mild oligozoospermia) were also carriers of a IVS 8(5T) allele.
P04.19  FsHB promoter polymorphism within Progesterone 
Response element is associated with serum FsH level in men
M. Grigorova1, M. Punab2, M. Laan1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
2Andrology Unit, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia.
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates and regulates spermato -
genesis in males. FSH consists of alfa- ja beta-subunit, alfa-subunit 
is common for all gonadotropins, whereas beta-subunit coded by the 
FSHB gene (#MIM 136530; 11p13) is hormone-specific.
We identified a potential regulatory SNP (rs10835638; G/T), located 
within an evolutionarily conserved Progesterone Response element 
(Grigorova et al., 2008). Genotyping of the rs10835638 in a cohort 
of young men (n=554; age 19.2 ± 1.7 years) revealed an association 
with serum FSH level in men (ANCOVA: p=0.001). Compared to the 
wild-type homozygotes (GG), the heterozygotes (GT) and the homozy -
gotes (TT) for the minor allele had on average 15.7% and 40% lower 
levels of FSH in their bloodstream, respectively.
In a consequent study we genotyped the rs10835638 in the cohort of 
infertile male patients (n=1,029, age 31.7 ± 0.2 years). A significant 
excess of TT homozygotes as well as GT heterozygotes was detected 
among infertile men compared to the young male cohort (p<0.05). 
Consistent with the previous data for a cohort of young men, we de -
tected an extremely strong association between the carrier status of 
rs10835638 variants and serum FSH levels (ANCOVA: p<0.001). The 
median serum FSH values in the heterozygotes (GT) and the homozy -
gotes (TT) for the minor allele were 20.6% and 48.5% lower compared 
to wild-type homozygotes (GG). Moreover, among the patients diag -
nosed with idiopathic infertility, TT-carriers had significantly smaller 
combined testes volume (ANCOVA p<0.05).
Rs10835638 (FSHB -211 G/T) is the first identified polymorphism, 
which determines male serum FSH level and affects male reproduc -
tive potential.
P04.20  Gene expression of YBX2 and the interacting genes 
suggests a common pathogenic network involved in male 
infertility
F. Raicu , R. Cocoş, L. C. Boîţea;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Infertility affects about one in six couples and approximately half of 
them have a male component. Despite the large amount of data col -
lected in the last years about the molecular genetic basis of male infer -
tility still remains a large group of men with unexplained infertility.
Ybx2 gene has been identified as a central component in the regula -
tion of spermatogenesis in mice but the potential role of its human 
orthologue YBX2 in human infertility is not well known.
To explore the possible association of the YBX2 gene with idiopathic 
male infertility in humans we developed quantitative real-time PCR 
assays for the YBX2 and its previously reported interacting genes: 
PRM2, ODF1, TP1 and ACTL7B.
Testis biopsy, 50 mg specimen of testis tissue, was obtained from pa -
tients with obstructive azoospermia (5 normospermic controls) and 
infertile male (10 with microdeletions in the long arm of the Y chromo -
some and 10 with idiopathic infertility) with the histopathology ranged 
from Sertoli cell only (SCO) to severe oligozoospermia.
Real time RT-PCR assays (QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit) reveal 
large reductions in the mRNA levels of YBX2, PRM2, ODF1, TP1, AC -
TL7B in all patients with spermatogenic defects except patients with 
idiopathic oligozoospermia. Patients with idiopathic azoospermia had 
similar pattern of gene expression as those carrying microdeletions 
suggesting a possible similar mechanism leading to infertility. Further 
studies are necessary to explore the functional roles of this network of 
genes in germ cell development.Reproductive genetics1
P04.21  Four SRY- Positive 46,XX male cases with and without Y 
chromosome microdeletions
Z. Yilmaz1, O. Ozer1, M. R. Goren2, F. I. Sahin1;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Urology, 
Ankara, Turkey.
XX males resemble individuals with Klinefelter’s syndrome (47,XXY) 
in their general masculine appearance with azoospermia. They are in -
fertile and have small atrophic testes. Ninety percent of these patients 
have Y chromosomal material including the SRY (testis-determining 
factor) gene. Y sequences are usually located on the distal tip of the 
short arm of the paternal X chromosome. We report four 46, XX cases 
referred to our department for azoospermia and primer infertility.
Cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and multiplex PCR for Y chro -
mosome microdeletion analysis were performed on peripheral blood 
samples. STR analysis for X chromosome was made in one case who 
had two derivative X chromosomes.
Chromosome analysis showed a 46, XX karyotype and translocation 
of SRY from chromosome Y to chromosome X was identified by fluo -
rescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in all cases. One of the cases 
had two distinct derivative X chromosomes containing Y chromosome 
fragments and Y chromosome microdeletion was not detected. Other 
cases had Y chromosome microdeletions of the studied STR regions.
We concluded that the cytogenetic analysis should be performed in in -
fertile men with azoospermia and detection of SRY is important for the 
clinical diagnosis of XX males. Although, azoospermia in these cases 
is explained by the absence of long arm material including the candi -
date gene family for spermatogenesis, presence of different sizes of 
long arm of Y chromosome could explain clinical discrepancies.
P04.22  Association of mannose-binding lectin genetic variations 
with genital tract infections and tubal factor infertility
T. Laisk1, M. Peters1, M. Saare1, K. Haller-Kikkatalo1,2, H. Karro1, A. Salumets1,3;  
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
2Department of Immunology, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Competence Centre on Reproductive 
Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia.
Upper genital tract infections can inflict ineligible immune response 
and cause Fallopian tube damage and concomitant female infertility. 
However, the exact role of host genetic variation in the development 
of tubal factor infertility is still not fully established. We selected five 
genetic variations in mannose-binding lectin gene (MBL2) involved 
in immune response modulation and assessed their association with 
tubal factor infertility by comparing genotype frequencies among 164 
women with tubal factor infertility and 400 control individuals. In our 
study MBL2 low-producing genotypes were related to increased inci -
dence of pathogens associated with genital infections (OR=6.40 95% 
CI 1.99-20.34). In addition, hyper-producing MBL2 genotype HYA/HYA 
and low-producing MBL2 genotypes were associated with susceptibil -
ity to tubal factor infertility (OR=2.12 95% CI 1.19-3.79 and OR=2.34 
95% CI 1.17-4.69, respectively), whereas high-producing MBL2 geno -
type HYA/LYA had a protective effect (OR=0.28, 95% CI 0.11-0.75). 
Our data suggest MBL2 polymorphisms play a role in receptiveness to 
pathogens causing genital infections and contribute to susceptibility to 
tubal factor infertility.
P04.23  maternal smoking during pregnancy induces mitotic 
chromosome instability in fetal tissues
S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov2,1, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, A. D. Kolotii1,2, I. 
A. Demidova1,2, E. A. Kirillova3, A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets1, V. V. 
Monakhov1,2, E. A. Saprina2,4, I. V. Soloviev2, Y. B. Yurov2,1;  
1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, 
Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Woman‘s Health Center, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 4Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
Smoking is known to be related to DNA damage, chromosome/ge -
nome rearrangements, and aneuploidy and is associated with cancer 
and pregnancy complications. However, effects of maternal smoking 
during pregnancy on either somatic genome or mitotic chromosome 
instability in human embryos have not been ever evaluated. Here, 
using interphase multiprobe FISH and DNA chromosome-enumera -
tion probes we have analyzed the rate of aneuploidy in spontaneous abortions (SA) in the first trimester among smoking and non-smok -
ing pregnant women. Chorionic villi of 600 consecutive cases of 5-15 
weeks gestation from women aged from 16 to 47 years (mean age: 30 
years) were processed for molecular cytogenetic analysis. Chromo -
some abnormalities were found in 303 out of 600 cases (50%). Chro -
mosomal mosaicism due mitotic errors was detected in 157 from 600 
cases (26.2%). Among 463 non-smoking females chromosomal ab -
normalities were detected in 237 cases (51.2%) including 122 mosaic 
cases (26.3%). Among 137 smoking females (22.8%) chromosomal 
abnormalities were detected in 65 cases (47.4%) including 35 mosaic 
cases (25.5%). This indicates that the incidence of regular and mo -
saic chromosomal abnormalities was similar among SA exposed and 
unexposed to smoking. However, the level of stochastic (spontane -
ous/background) aneuploidy or chromosome instability index (propor -
tion of cells with aneuploidy involving other chromosomes than those 
of the main chromosome abnormality per chromosome) was signifi -
cantly increased in SA exposed to smoking (1.4-2.1%) as compared to 
unexposed ones (0.3-1.2%). We conclude that smoking has negative 
impact on fetal physiology through increasing mitotic chromosome in -
stability manifesting as spontaneous aneuploidy. Supported by Philip 
Morris USA Inc.
P04.24  mitochondrial tRNA threonine and proline mutations in 
repeated pregnancy loss
S. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Houshmand2, S. Kalantar1, A. Aflatoonian1, G. 
Modabber2;  
1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Mitochondrial transfer RNAs (tRNA) genes are essential 
components of protein biosynthesis. These genes are hotspots for 
mutations. These mutations are associated with a wide spectrum of 
human disease. Many genetic factors are known in assessment of re -
peated pregnancy loss (RPL). Because of the role of mitochondria and 
its maternal inheritance, analysis of tRNA Thr and tRNA Pro in women 
with RPL are good candidate for more genetic evaluation.
Material and Methods: The nucleotide variations of threonine and pro -
line were investigated in 96 women with idiopathic repeated pregnancy 
loss. The related mitochondrial area was amplified using a polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products were demonstrated by 2% 
agarose gel electrophoresis, and all the positive samples were purified 
and verified by an automated DNA sequencing method.
Results: The sequence analysis revealed 4 mutations in tRNA Thr . 
There were A15907G (2.08%), A15924G (3.12%), G15928A (10.42%) 
as the most common mutations and G15930A (3.12%) as a novel mu -
tation. The result of tRNApro sequencing showed the T15972C muta -
tion in 1 woman (1.04%) as a novel mutation too.
Discussion: These tRNAs mutations can alter their steady state level 
and affect the structure of tRNAs. It results in protein synthesis defects 
and, in turn, mitochondrial dysfunction. The mutations of these genes 
may be of help in the assessment of RPL. Further study of an expand -
ed series of these tRNA mutants will be recommended to describe 
their etiologic role in idiopathic RPL.
P04.25  H1 methylation in müllerian aplasia.
M. Sandbacka1, S. Bruce1,2, I. Fransson2, M. Halttunen3, K. Aittomäki1, J. 
Kere1,2, H. Laivuori4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, and Folkhälsan 
Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, 
Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, 4Department of 
Medical Genetics, and Women‘s Health Research Program, University of 
Helsinki, Finland.
Müllerian aplasia (MA) is a congenital abnormality of the female genital 
tract presenting as absence of functional uterus and upper two-thirds 
of vagina. Apart from three MA patients with signs of androgen excess 
and a mutation in WNT4 , the cause is unknown.
Hypomethylation of the H19 imprinted control region (ICR), on 11p15.5, 
has previously been suggested to be associated with genital and skel -
etal malformations. In addition, two Finnish patients with Silver-Russell 
growth restriction syndrome (SRS) and MA show extreme hypometh -
ylation (<9%) of the H19 region. Thus we hypothesized that non-syn -
dromic MA could also be associated with aberrant methylation of H19.Reproductive genetics10
We have performed restriction site-specific methylation analyses by 
quantitative Real-Time PCR of the H19 ICR region in blood-derived 
DNA samples from104 Finnish MA patients, 19 healthy relatives and 
20 healthy female controls. No significant differences in mean methyl -
ation values were observed between patients (48%, SD 8,7), relatives 
(46%, SD 4,7), and controls (50%, SD 10,8).
The results indicate that hypomethylation of H19 is not associated with 
the MA phenotype in our patients. We cannot exclude, however, the 
contribution of other epigenetic changes in the development of MA. 
Our ongoing genome-wide methylation studies in MA patients using 
Illumina´s HumanMethylation27 Bead Array will spread further light on 
the general methylation status in patients with MA.
P04.26  screening for NLRP7 mutations in t unisian women with 
sporadic hydatidiform moles: report of two novel mutations
H. Landolsi1, M. T. Yacoubi1, C. Rittore2, L. Philibert2, M. Gribaa3, A. Saad3, S. 
Hmissa1, I. Touitou2;  
1Laboratoire d’anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, CHU F. Hached, 
Sousse, Tunisia, 2CHU Montpellier, Unité médicale des maladies 
autoinflammatoires, Hôpital A de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Laboratoire 
de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la Reproduction 
Humaines, CHU F. Hached, Sousse, Tunisia.
Hydatidiform mole (HM) is an aberrant human pregnancy character -
ized by hydropic degeneration of placental villi without embryo; it is 
commonly non recurrent. Familial recurrent HM is an extremely rare 
autosomal recessive condition associated with homozygous mutations 
in human NLRP7 gene on maternal locus.
Our aim in the present study was to look if either this mutation exists in 
Tunisian women with sporadic HM.
Material and methods:
Molecular analyses were conducted on genomic DNA extracted from 
the peripheral white blood cells of 38 Tunisian patients with sporadic 
HM. All samples were screened by direct DNA sequencing of all exons 
of NLRP7 gene. A high resolution melting (HRM) analysis or sequenc -
ing was performed on testing controls.
Results:
Two novel missense mutations in a heterozygous state were found, 
c.544 G>A (p.Val182Met) in one patient and c.1480G>A (p.Asp494Thr) 
in two patients. These two variants of mutations were lacking in 66 
unrelated controls. Two other mutations, a heterozygous state as, 
c.1532A>G (p.Lys511Arg) and c.2156 C>T (p.Ala719Val), already re -
ported, were also documented in 2 patients.
Conclusion :
In our knowledge, this is the first reported study of NLRP7 mutation 
in patients with sporadic HM. As homozygous MLRP7 mutations are 
thought to be associated with a failure status as the occurrence of 
recurrent HM, or conception loss; heterozygous type could be a risk 
factor for non recurrent mole.
P04.27  FisH reanalysis of embryos suspected as aneuploid by 
PGD for monogenic disorders
T. Frumkin1, Y. Yaron2, V. Gold1, N. Mey-Raz1, A. Amit1, D. Ben-Yosef1, M. 
Malcov1;  
1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky 
Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic 
Institute , Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Introduction: In PGD for monogenic disorders, 5%-10% of the embryos 
are suspected of being chromosomally imbalanced. That may be the 
result of true aneuploidy or represent artifacts of single cell PCR.
Aim: To estimate the rate of true aneuploidy by FISH reanalysis of 
PGD embryos, suspected of having chromosomal abnormalities, as 
assessed by single cell PCR.
Methods:  PGD for monogenic disorders is performed by multiplex 
nested PCR for the causative mutation(s) and haplotype analysis. We 
have reanalyzed 35 PGD embryos suspected of being aneuploid, by 
spreading the entire embryo on day 5 and FISH hybridizing with 2-5 
probes. Aneuploidy and mosaicism rates were evaluated.
Results: FISH results confirmed chromosomal aberrations in 21/35 
embryos (60%).  Of these , 2 were trisomic, 7 monosomic, and 12 pre -
sented a mosaic aneuploid pattern.  The remaining 14 embryos (40%) 
were chromosomally balanced. 5/14 were considered as true mono -
somy in a single cell (i.e. mosaicism). 2/14 embryos, analyzed for an 
X-linked condition, were suspected of being 45, X, but FISH reanaly -sis hinted for PCR amplification failure. In 1/14 embryos, results were 
compatible with allele drop out (ADO). In 6/14 embryos the most prob -
able explanation was maternal cell contamination.
Conclusion:  FISH reanalysis confirmed the PCR results in the ma -
jority of embryos suspected as aneuploid. We therefore suggest not 
transferring such embryos. Conflicting PCR results may be explained 
by high rate mosaicism, resulting from post-meiotic errors. However, 
incompatibility could also be attributed to contamination, amplification 
failure or ADO which may be reduced by the use of additional polymor -
phic markers.
P04.28  Preimplantation genetic diagnosis - 4 years‘ experience 
at the University medical centre Ljubljana
K. Writzl1, N. Teran1, A. Veble1, J. Kmecl2, B. Peterlin1, G. PGD3;  
1UMC Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Medical 
Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Reproductive Unit, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3UMC Ljubljana, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers early in -
vestigation of embryos in couples with a high risk for offspring affected 
by a genetic disease. We report indications and results associated with 
the PGD program conducted at Gynecology clinic Ljubljana from June 
2004 to December 2008.
Methods: Retrospective analysis. Sixty cycles were performed in 34 
couples enrolled in the PGD program. Embryos were biopsied on the 
third day and the genetic analysis was performed using FISH and PCR 
method. Embryo transfers were carried out on the fifth day.
Results: The main indication was chromosomal abnormalities (67%), 
followed by recurrent miscarriages (16%), autosomal dominant and 
recessive diseases (9%), and X-linked diseases (6%). Sixty cycles 
were performed and 48 embryo transfer procedures. There were 17 
biochemical and 15 clinical pregnancies resulting in clinical pregnancy 
rate 25% per cycle and 31,25% per embryo transfer. A total of eleven 
unaffected children were born.
Conclusions: PGD is technically a very challenging procedure. Supe -
rior knowledge and communication between geneticists and reproduc -
tive medicine scientists is mandatory for successful PGD procedures. 
PGD has gained a place among the choices offered at Gynecology 
clinic Ljubljana to couples at risk of transmission of genetic disease.
P04.29  the paternal effect of chromosome translocation carrier 
in the embryos meiotic segregation. 
B. Lledo1, J. A. Ortiz1, R. Morales1, A. Rodriguez-Arnedo2, J. Ten2, J. Llácer2, 
R. Bernabeu2;  
1IB BIOTECH, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain.
Introduction: Understanding the meiotic segregation mechanism of 
translocation is important is a crucial step for an estimation of the risk 
of either pregnancy loss or birth defects. The objective of this work is 
to estimate the meiotic segregation rates in preimplantation embryos 
from PGD cycles of female and male reciprocal translocation carriers.
Material And Methods: Fourteen couples with reciprocal translocations 
carried out 20 PGD-FISH cycles from January 2006 through July 2009.  
PGD was performed on 118 day 3 embryos using FISH with specific 
probes for each translocation. The meiotic segregation modes were 
estimated and the effect of the paternal origin of translocated carrier.
Results: Overall, 2:2 segregation was observed in 78 embryos (66.1%), 
3:1 in 28 (23.7%), and 4:0 and chaotic patterns in 12 (10.2%). The 
segregation most frequently was alternate. According to the gender 
of translocation carriers, the frequencies of adjacent-1 and adjacent-2 
were significantly lower in embryos from female than male PGD-cy -
cles. For male translocations, alternate was the most frequent mode. 
The 3:1 was the most frequent in female translocations carriers.
Conclusions: We describe the segregation modes in male and female 
translocation carriers by FISH on preimplantation embryos. The pro -
duction of unbalanced gametes was very different between the sexes. 
These data may be explained by differences in the frequency and lo -
calization of crossing-over. Analysis of the meiotic behaviour of chro -
mosomes and the differences between the meiotic products of female 
and male for a chromosomal rearrangement could provide clues as to 
the respective roles of the mechanism in meiosis.Reproductive genetics11
P04.30**  the genetics of Premature Ovarian Failure
T. Corre1, S. Carrabino1, C. Sala1, F. Viganò1, C. Masciullo1, M. Cocca1, M. 
Traglia1, G. Pistis1, P. D’Adamo2, S. Ulivi2, P. Gasparini2, D. Toniolo1;  
1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Department 
of Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS-Burlo 
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a complex disorder characterized 
by menopause before the age of 40 years. Its occurrence is about 1 % 
in the Caucasian population. A genetic basis for the disease has been 
demonstrated by the prevalence of familial cases but to date only a 
few of the genetic determinants for POF were identified. The aim of our 
study is to combine several genetic approaches in order to discover 
different genetic risk factors for POF.
Using POF case/control cohorts and a candidate gene approach we 
confirmed the role of the DIAPH2 X-linked gene, and excluded the 
INHA gene as a determinant of POF. We also showed that the DIAPH2 
gene is one of the main determinants of cytoskeleton rearrangements 
associated with FSH stimulation of granulosa cells suggesting that al -
teration in cytoskeleton may be responsible for POF. Deep-sequencing 
study of POF patients is ongoing to identify DIAPH2 variants impli -
cated in the disease.
From the study of the isolated populations in Italy, Val Borbera and 
Friuli-Venezia-Giulia in Northern Italy, and Carlantino in Southern It -
aly we identified 52 POF patients among 887 women in menopause. 
Whole-genome genotyping and association analysis showed promis -
ing preliminary results. Replicas in the Italian case/control cohorts are 
currently ongoing in order to further validate these findings.
P04.31  Polymorphisms in the thrombophilia genes are 
associated with severe preeclampsia (EPH - gestosis).
I. Zainullin1,2, A. Zainullina1, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical 
University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Recently, it has been proposed that abnormalities in coagulation and 
fibrinolysis contribute to the development of preeclampsia by increas -
ing the thrombotic tendency. This hypothesis was tested in women 
who have had preeclampsia (EPH - gestosis) compared with matched 
controls. Polymorphisms in the thrombophilia genes (PAI-1 4G/5G pro -
moter polymorphism, MTHFR C677T polymorphism, FV G1691A poly -
morphism, FII G20210A polymorphism, eNOS VNTR polymorphism 
in 4 intron, TPA Alu repeat I/D polymorphism in 8 intron) were deter -
mined in women with severe preeclampsia (N=198) and women with 
uncomplicated pregnancy (N=206) in the populations from Bashkorto -
stan (Russia). Allelic and genotypic frequencies of FII polymorphism 
(p>0,05) and TPA polymorphism (p>0,05) did not differ between both 
groups of pregnant women. The PAI-1*4G allele (OR=1,35), eNOS*4a/
*4b genotype (OR=1,82), FV*G/*A genotype (OR=2,93) and FV*A al -
lele (OR=3,22), MTHFR*T/*T genotype (OR=6,06) and MTHFR*T 
allele (OR=2,40) were associated with increased risk of severe pre -
eclampsia. Based on these results, we recommend the incorporation 
of these four analyses in individuals with severe preeclampsia. These 
patients may benefit from the application of low molecular weight hep -
arin as early as possible in the pregnancy in order to prevent uteropla -
cental microthromboses.
P04.32  Possible relation between 22s+ heteromorphism and 
recurrent pregnancy loss
T. Rebai1, R. Louati1, M. Cherif2, D. Sallemi3, N. B. Abdelmoula1;  
1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genetics private sector, Sfax, Tunisia, 
3Gynecology private sector, Sfax, Tunisia.
Polymorphic variations of heterochromatin (heteromorphisms) on chro -
mosomes 13-15, 21-22 are described as heritable chromosomal varia -
tions without a proven impact on phenotype. Relationship between 
chromosome heteromorphisms and infertility is yet undefined but there 
are many reports of a high frequency of these variations among infer -
tile men and couples with recurrent pregnancy losses.
The aim of this study was to report the 22s+ heterochromatic variants 
among cytogenetic abnormalities recorded in couples with recurrent 
pregnancy loss and to discuss the possible mechanism of how 22s+ 
might affect spermatogenesis through a documented observation.
Cytogenetic analysis was undertaken in 334 couples who were ex -
plored because 2 or more pregnancy losses. Only two male patients (1,2 %) were found to have 22s+ heteromorphism. Familial investiga -
tion made for one case showed a maternal transmission of the vari -
ant. Sperm fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was applied in 
the second men, who had two children, secondary infertility related 
to astheno-teratozoospermia and 3 early pregnancy losses after ICSI 
treatment. FISH analysis revealed an increased rate of sperm aneu -
ploidy which can explain negative impact on ICSI outcome.
At genetic counselling, the couple has been informed about the place 
of preimplantation genetic screening to improve ICSI success.
We conclude that heterochromatin polymorphism in infertile males 
and couples with recurrent pregnancy loss seems to be more than 
an incidental finding, and must not be considered as a normal vari -
ant. Polymorphic heterochromatin may have deleterious effects on the 
genetic constitution of spermatozoa but more studies are needed to 
make clear an eventual relation ship.
P04.33  Functional evidence implicating FOXL2 in non 
syndromic premature ovarian failure and in the regulation of the 
transcription factor OsR2
B. Lakhal1, H. Elghezal1, R. Veitia2, P. Laissue3, M. Fellous3, A. Saad1;  
1Farhat Hached university teaching hospital - Sousse – Tunisia., Sousse, 
Tunisia, 2Université Paris-Diderot/Paris 7 and Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-
UMR 7592, France, 3INSERM U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France;, France.
FOXL2 encodes a forkhead transcription factor whose mutations are 
responsible for the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syn -
drome (BPES), involving craniofacial/palpebral abnormalities often as -
sociated with premature ovarian failure (POF).
We describe a FOXL2 variant (p.Gly187Asp) in a case of POF with -
out BPES. The subcellular localisation of FOXL2-G187D was normal 
but its transactivation capacity tested on two reporter promoters, one 
of which should be relevant to the ovary, was significantly lower than 
that of normal FOXL2. However, FOXL2-G187D was able to activate 
strongly a reporter construct driven by the promoter of Osr2 (odd-
skipped related 2 transcription factor), which we have suggested to be 
a crucial target of FOXL2 in the craniofacial region. This is compatible 
with the absence of BPES in our patient.
Our data provide evidence in favour of the implication of FOXL2 vari -
ants in non-syndromic POF and confirm the regulatory interaction be -
tween FOXL2 and OSR2 whose perturbation might contribute to the 
palpebral abnormalities observed in BPES patients.
P04.34  Role of mitochondrial mutations in premature ovarian 
failure
A. Sharma1, M. Kumar1, K. Kumar1, A. Kriplani2, A. C. Ammini3, R. Dada1;  
1Lab for Molecular Reproduction & Genetics, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Department of 
Endocrinology & Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
Premature Ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the cessation of ovarian 
function under the age of 40 years and is characterized by amenorrhea, 
hypoestrogenism and elevated serum gonadotrophin concentration 
(FSH). It is a heterogeneous disorder with a multicausal pathogenesis 
such as chromosomal, genetic, enzymatic, iatrogenic or infectious ab -
errations. But in idiopathic POF, involvement of unknown mechanisms 
may affect the rate of oocyte apoptosis. Studies have shown that oxi -
dative stress (reactive oxygen species) affects the quality of gametes. 
Mitochondrial mutations in different complexes of electron transport 
chain have been reported to disrupt the electron flow which lead to 
formation of more superoxide ions or increased level of ROS. This 
study was aimed to analyze the mitochondrial genome of idiopathic 
POF patients. 30 POF diagnosed patients were enrolled in this study. 
Blood samples were collected from the patients and controls. DNA was 
extracted using phenol chloroform method. 24% variations were found 
to be non-synonymous and 76% were synonymous. It was found that 
48% variations were in complex I, 8% in complex III, 24% in complex 
IV and 20% were in complex V of electron transport chain. We found 
most of the non-synonymous mitochondrial variations in complex I 
(48%) of the respiratory which is the largest of enzyme complex. The 
data suggest that the mitochondrial mutations (high ROS stress) may 
be the cause of follicular atresia which may lead to premature ovarian 
failure. The role of OS in female fertility and sub-fertility is an area 
deserving of continued research.Reproductive genetics12
P04.35  ATPase  mutation and oxidative stress is associated 
with premature ovarian failure (POF)
S. Venkatesh1, M. Kumar1, A. Sharma1, A. Kriplani1, A. Ammini1, P. Talwar2, R. 
Dada1;  
1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2ART, Research & 
Referal Hospital, New Delhi, India.
Purpose:  Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a heterogeneous, multi -
factorial disorder. ATPase6 synthase helps to maintain the mt genome 
integrity and mutations in ATPase 6 are associated with overproduc -
tion of ROS in variety of diseases. Methods:  This pilot study included 
20 POF patients and 20 age matched healthy female controls. ROS 
levels in blood plasma were measured by chemiluminescence assay. 
mtDNA ATPase6 gene was amplified and sequenced from the blood 
lymphocyte DNA.
Results:  55% (11/20) patients showed nucleotide changes in ATPase6 , 
as compared to 10% (2/20) in controls and all of these mutations were 
either G>A or C>T (mostly non-synonymous) except one case showing 
silent polymorphism A>G at nucleotide position 8679. Overall median 
RLU/min was found to be significantly (p=0.0037) higher in POF pa -
tients 50480 (120, 132966) as compared to controls 340 (120, 5094). 
Nucleotide changes were found to be positively correlated with ROS 
levels in the POF patients. Moreover, 50 % of the POF patients had 
high ROS levels, 20 % had medium and 30 % had normal values as 
compared to controls.
Conclusions : OS associated with ATPase6  gene instability may be the 
underlying aetiology in idiopathic POF. Screening other mt genes with 
large number of samples may help in better understanding the role of 
OS in POF. Thus the results from this preliminary pilot study highlight 
that mt gene (ATPase6) nucleotide alteration and supraphysiological 
ROS levels may play a causal role in accelerated atresia of germ cells 
and lead to premature ovarian failure.
P04.36  Dissecting the role of FmR1 mRNA in the molecular FX-
POi pathogenesis
N. Locatelli1, V. Padovano2, M. Cavaletto3, C. Caslini1, C. Santoro4, G. Pietrini2, 
E. Ginelli1, A. Marozzi1;  
1Dept. of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences-University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy, 2Dept. of Pharmacology-University of Milan and Institute of Neuroscience-
CNR, Milan, Italy, 3DiSAV- University of Piemonte Orientale, Alessandria, Italy, 
4Dept. of Medical Sciences - University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy.
CGG repeats expansion (55-200 units, permutation range) in the 
5’UTR of FMR1 gene (Xq27.3) is associated with Fragile-X Tremor/
Ataxia Syndrome and Primary Ovarian Insufficiency (POI). FMR1 pre -
mutation represents the most significant single gene variant associ -
ated with POI, however no studies are available to evaluate its patho -
genic effect in the ovary context.
As for FXTAS, an RNA-mediated toxic gain of function could be hy -
pothesized for FX-POI. By R-EMSA and RNA-pull down assays, 
76ribo(r)CGG probe showed a higher binding affinity for several pro -
teins derived from human granulose ovary (named rCGG-Repeat 
Binding Proteins, rCGG-RBPs) compared to the 28rCGG one. rCGG-
RBPs were identified by means of MALDI-TOF analysis (Tab. 1). The 
interaction of endogenous FMR1 mRNA for identified rCGG-RBPs was 
tested in vivo by RNA immunoprecipitation; FMR1 premutated mRNA 
solely co-immunoprecipitate with HSP27 and CRYAB heat shock pro -
teins, suggesting that in vivo premutated FMR1 mRNA differs from 
the wild type in making RNA-protein complexes. The role of HSP27 
and CRYAB in the FX-POI pathogenesis was further investigated in 
an ovary cell model.
An “heat shock like” response in human ovary granulosa cells express -
ing expanded CGG mRNA was observed, strongly suggesting the toxic 
role of premutated mRNA itself in the ovaries.
This work is supported by Telethon grant GGP009126Tab.1 List of ovary rCGG-RBPs identified by MALDI-TOF
Protein N° peptides
Splicing factor proline/glutamine rich gi4826998 5
hnRNP A2/B1 gi4504447 11
hnRNP F gi4826760 7
hnRNP H gi1710632 14
hnRNP M gi14141152 14
hnRNP G gi542850 2
hnRNP A1 gi133254 9
hnRNP H3/2H9 gi23503095 17
Unknown belonging to α-crystallin-type 
heat shock proteins gi28526483
HSP27 gi11036357 4
Chaperonin HSP60 gi31542947 3
Nuclear cap binding protein gi158513766 4
H1 histone family gi28839618 6
Histone H2A.2 gi31979 7
P04.37  Use of Y choromosome specific repeat sequencing for sexing by single cell PcRand real time PcR
E. Arbabi Aval1, F. Mahjoubi1, M. Taheri2;  
1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Zahedan University of medical sciences, Zahedan, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Embryo sexing is one of the important ways for sex selection of off -
spring. This is a potential method to considrerably improve animal 
breeding and the efficiency of dairy and meat production. A novel 
repeated sequence specific to male cattle has been identified and 
named S4 . S4 is a 1/5 Kb repeating unit contains various internal 
repeated sequence. S4 is localized on long arm of the Y chromosome 
in the region near to ZFY genes. Aim: The objective of this study was 
to established a simple, sensitive, reliable, reproducible and cost ef -
fective PCR based technique for sexing.. Materials and Methods: Ge -
nomic DNA was extracted from the whole blood samples of 4 male and 
female cattles. PCR and real time PCR were performed using specific 
primers for this region. Result: By this PCR based methods we could 
differentiate between female and male genomic DNA. Real time PCR 
employed in order to have a quantitative method. Discussion:With this 
technique we can distinct male from female using as much as 1pg 
DNA . Using this method we could determined the sex of an embryo (4 
blastomers) . The Real Time PCR method optimized here was able to 
be used for the quantitative detection of Y chromosomes in semen.
P04.38  Genetic aspects of recurrent miscarriage
N. Almadani ;  
genetic department, reproductive medicine research center, Royan institute, 
ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Recurrent Pregnancy loss is the miscarriage of two or three Consecu -
tive Pregnancies in The first of early second trimester. Although approxi -
mately 10-15% of all recognized Pregnancies result in miscarriage, less 
than 5% of women will experience two consecutive miscarriage, and 
only 1% experience three or more. In recurrent Pregnancy loss, Cur -
rent Practice often Fails To make a diagnosis, as the fetal causes of 
Pregnancy loss are usually ignored and only the maternal factors are 
assessed. The maternal causes are well known and include: Uterine 
factors, Infections, Autoimmune syndromes, endocrine abnormality, all 
immune factors and possibly hereditary thrombophilia.The fetal Causes 
of embryo loss include structural malformations that are incompatible 
with life, and Chromosomal aberrations. Unfortunately, no explanation 
is found in 50% to 70% of Couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. About 
5% of Couple with recurrent Pregnancy losses have A Chromosomal ab -
normality and translocation is the most common inherited Chromosomal 
abnormality. Although a parent who carries a translocation is frequently 
normal, their embryo may receive too much or too little genetic mate -
rial. Couples with translocation or other specific chromosome defects 
may benefit from pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. But in fact 60% or 
more of early miscarriages may be caused by a random chromosomal 
abnormality, usually a missing or duplicated chromosome. These mal -
formations are usually associated with a normal karyotype. Single gene 
disorders associated with recurrent miscarriage are myotonic dystrophy.
The factor V leiden mutation is the most common genetic predisposition 
to thrombosis but its carrier frequency in the white population is 3-4%.Reproductive genetics1
P04.39  Genetic markers Related t o Ovarial Response in 
Bulgarian Women With Reproductive Problems
S. Bichev1, L. Dimitrova2, A. Savov1, D. Tacheva2, T. Todorov3, A. Todorova3, I. 
Vladimirov2;  
1Medical University Sofia, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National 
Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Center for Reproductive Medicine and 
In Vitro Fertilization, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genetic Medico- diagnostic Laboratory 
Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Background : recent studies showed a relation of the genetic polymor -
phisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes together with FSH receptor variants 
with ovarian response during in vitro fertilization. However a popula -
tion and ethnic specificity has been described. The previous studies 
showed a relation of genetics variants in the studied genes with poly -
cystic ovarian syndrome in the Bulgarian population.
Aim: to investigate the ESR1 Pvu II and Xba II polymorphisms, ESR2 
Rsa I polymorphism and Thr307Ala and Asn680Ser polymorphisms in 
Bulgarian women with reproductive problems.
Materials  and methods:  72 women with reproductive problems and 58 
healthy controls were investigated.
Results : The women with reproductive problems were categorized in 
three groups: with poor, boundary and normal ovarian response. We 
found unexpected low heterozygosity for ESR2 Rsa I polymorphism 
both in the group of patients and controls. For ESR1 XbaI polymor -
phism A/A (-/-) variant demonstrated association with poor ovarian re -
sponse in the groups investigated (p= 0.040). Association has been 
found for the Thr307Ala polymorphism in the FSH receptor where the 
A/A (+/+) variant is significantly most common in the groups with better 
ovarian response (p = 0.037).
Conclusions: Larger studies are needed to establish the role of the 
ERS1 and FSHR polymorphisms for the ovarian response during as -
sisted reproduction before they can be used for establishing of an indi -
vidual protocol during stimulation.
P04.40  sperm deoxyribonucleic acid fragmentation is increased 
in failed fertilization and associated with a high risk of 
pregnancy loss after invitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection.
s. jallad, s. brahem, m. mehdi, h. ghezel, A. saad ;  
laboratory of cytogenetic molecular biology and human biology of reproduction, 
soussa, Tunisia.
Introduction: Numerous recent studies involve DNA damages asso -
ciated with poor fertilization rates, early embryo development defect, 
and poor quality of conceptus following assisted reproductive tech -
nologies (ART).
The aim of this study is to correlate any detected DNA damage with 
fertilization rates and with spontaneous abortion rates after IVF and 
ICSI.
Material and methods: Semen samples (n = 25) were collected from 
men who had a repeated unsuccessful ART cycle or recurrent miscar -
riage. For each sample a Pure Sperm density gradient centrifugation 
was performed and the percentage of recovered sperm with DNA frag -
mentation was determined with the use of terminal desoxynucleotidyl 
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate biotin nick-end label -
ing (TUNEL) assay.
Results: Our patients showed a significantly higher percentage of 
sperm DNA fragmentation (21.04 ± 9.87) which can explain in the part 
the failed of ART cycle.
The sperm DNA fragmentation is increased in failed implantation group 
23.9% versus 20.75% in the group with failure of fecundation after IVF 
and ICSI.
The DNA fragmentation index was significantly higher in the failed 
implantation group after in vitro fertilization30% versus 17.83% after 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
The patient who showed recurrent miscarriage approved a high level 
of DNA fragmentation 19.45 %.
Conclusion: Sperm DNA damage is associated with decreased IVF 
outcomes; it may contribute to failure of pronuclear formation and em -
bryo development. It is also associated with a significant increased risk 
of pregnancy loss after IVF and ICSI.P04.41  +1040 c/t polymorphism in coding region of thrombin-
activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor gene contributes to the risk of 
recurrent fetal loss
I. B. Pruner1, V. Djordjevic1, P. Miljic2, M. Kovac3, N. Antonijevic4, L. Rakicevic1, 
D. Radojkovic1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 
2Institute of Hematology, University Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 
3Blood Transfusion Institute of Serbia, Haemostasis department, Belgrade, 
Serbia, 4Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Clinical Centre of Serbia, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
Recurrent fetal loss is common health problem affecting up to 5% of 
women in reproductive age. It has been shown that plasma thrombin-
activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) concentrations increase dur -
ing pregnancy and return to baseline levels soon after delivery. The 
+1040C/T single nucleotide polymorphism in coding region of TAFI 
gene is associated with TAFI blood levels.
Our objective was to determine whether there is an association be -
tween +1040C/T polymorphism in TAFI gene and recurrent pregnancy 
loss.
Study was carried out in a group of 95 women (45 controls and 50 
women with recurrent fetal loss). The +1040C/T polymorphism was 
detected by polymerase chain reaction, followed by digestion with spe -
cific restriction enzyme.
Increased frequency of +1040T/T genotype was observed in a study 
group, but without statistically significant difference. Carriers of T/T 
genotype have increased risk of fetal loss by 4-fold, compared to car -
riers of C/C (95%CI 0.768-20.819; P=0.1) and 4.22-fold compared to 
carriers of C/T genotype (95%CI 0.788-22.616; P=0.09). C allele is 
associated with reduced risk of recurrent pregnancy loss compared to 
T allele, (OR 0.67; 95%CI 0.355-1.249; P=0.2).
In conclusion, we observed increased frequency of +1040T/T geno -
type in a patient group, suggesting that this genotype could be poten -
tial risk factor for reccurent fetal loss. Further investigation should be 
carried out in order to establish definite role of this polymorphism in 
etiology of recurrent miscarriages.
P04.42  substantive sex difference in fetal germinal t risomy 21 
mosaicism
E. Iwarsson1, J. Jonasson2, T. Johannes3, M. A. Hultén4;  
1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping 
University, Linköping, Sweden, 3MetaSystems GmbH, Altlussheim, Germany, 
4Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
We have previously proposed that the underlying cause for the well-
known parental sex difference in risk of having a child with Down 
syndrome is different degrees of fetal gonadal trisomy 21 (T21) mo -
saicism. To test this hypothesis we have performed fluorescence in 
situ hybridisation (FISH) using two chromosome 21-specific probes on 
fetal ovaries and testes, obtained from termination of pregnancy for a 
non-medical/social reason.
In the initial study we documented an average of 0.54% ovarian T21 
mosaicism (range 0.20-0.88%; SD 0.23) in fetal ovaries from eight 
cases (Hultén et al. Molecular Cytogenetics  2008, 1:21). We have now 
followed up this observation by recording copy number of chromosome 
21 in testes from four male fetuses. Analysing at least 2000 cells per 
case in a total population of nearly 12.000 we could not detect a single 
T21 cell nucleus (Hultén et al. Molecular Cytogenetics  2010, 3:4). This 
sex difference is highly statistically significant (p<0.001).
We conclude that the aberrant recombination patterns seen by fam -
ily linkage most likely is related to meiotic pairing and recombination 
abnormalities in T21 oocytes. Thus, the risk in having a child with T21 
DS is likely to be dependent on degree of gonadal T21 mosaicism, 
with the maternal age effect due to an accumulation of any such T21 
oocytes during development from fetal life until menopause (Hultén et 
al. Reproduction  2010, 139:1).
P04.43  A new accuracy method to undocumented embryo 
diagnosis
A. Rodríguez-Arnedo1, J. Ten1, J. Guerrero-Villena1, B. Lledó2, J. Ortiz2, M. 
Carracedo1, J. Llácer1, R. Bernabeu1;  
1Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu Biotech, Alicante, Reproductive genetics1
Spain.
Introduction: The FISH technology has been applied to evaluate the 
chromosomal pattern of unipronuclear and undocumented embryos. 
However, this technique presents limitations; and we can not differ be -
tween paternal and maternal contributions.
The aim of this study was to ascertain the real ploidy of these embryos 
with an accuracy method, using DNA technology in order to increase 
the success rate per IVF-cycle or to prognose a next treatment in case 
of no pregnancy.
Materials And Methods: Since March 2009, 23 undocumented em -
bryos were collected in our in vitro  fertilization Unit. DNA from parents 
were obtained and isolated from bucal swab. Embryos were placed 
in alcaline lysis buffer. After neutralization, cells lysates were used di -
rectly for multiple displacement amplification (MDA).
In order to identify the paternal-maternal origin of the DNA from the 
undocumented embryos, the AmpF lSTR® Identifiler® PCR Amplifica -
tion Kit was used.
Results: The 23 undocumented embryos obtained had DNA amplifi -
cation and positive paternity test. Eighteen embryos (78.27%) were 
disomic embryos (2n) with paternal and maternal contributions, and 4 
of them (17.39 %) were 2n embryos with only maternal contribution. 
Only one embryo (4.34%) was haploid (n) or uniparental disomic with 
maternal origin.
Conclusion: We are able to discriminate between disomic embryos 
and partenogenic embryos with a common paternitiy test. Moreover, 
we could apply a comercial genotyping kit after MDA amplification.
Thanks to this, a great number of couples could benefit from these 
findings. To our knowledge, this is the first report evaluating undocu -
mented embryos by means of a paternity test.
P04.44  Y;21 translocation in infertile male patient with 45,X 
karyotype
M. Eser1, L. Şatıroğlu-Tufan1, T. Kalkan1, G. Çetin1, Ö. Öztürk2, G. Bağcı3, C. 
Semerci1;  
1Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical 
Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2Maslak Acıbadem Hospital Department of 
Obstetric&Gynecology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Pamukkale University School of 
Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey.
30-year-old male patient has referred to our clinic for unraveling the 
underlying aetiology of the azoospermia. He had no unusual medical 
history. At physical examination, obesity, short neck and gynecomasty 
were noted. All studied hormon levels were normal but estradiol was 
2-fold higher than upper limit. Having azoospermia in the spermiogram 
scrotal USG was in normal range. Cytogenetical analysis and FISH 
studies were performed subsequently and 45,X,add(21)(p10) and 
45,X,add(21)(p10).ish der(Y;21) (q12;p10) were found, respectively. 
On C-banding, dicentric staining of translocated chromosome was was 
observed. Molecular genetics studies using multiplex PCR revealed 
the presence of Y chromosome sequences at SRY, AZFa, AZFb, AZFc 
regions.
J04.1  The social homogamy in Morocco
L. SBII , H. HAMI, D. BENALI, A. SOULAYMANI, A. MOKHTARI;  
university Ibn Tofail fac Scienes Kenitra Maroc, Kenitra, Morocco.
The study of the social homogamy, which is the tendency to marry 
from the same social group, derives its importance from the fact that 
the choice of the spouse has consequences not only on the couple, but 
also on the descendants. Indeed, the choice of the spouse influences 
the genetic structure of the family and guides the evolution of the he -
reditary patrimony of the population.
To assess the level of social homogamy in the region of Souss-Massa-
Darâa in southern Morocco and to determine to what extent this rule of 
marriage marks the population of this region, a prospective study was 
carried out through a survey of 194 families sampled randomly in the 
region between October 2005 and April 2007.
The results showed that the choice of a spouse having the same level 
of study is a frequent phenomenon. In fact, nearly one in three women 
has the same study level as her husband. Moreover, according to the 
survey results, more than one third of the female population marry men 
who resemble their fathers. Indeed, more than half the girls whose 
fathers are farmers marry farmers. Furthermore, individuals show a 
greater tendency to marry a spouse of the same social status.P05 Prenatal and perinatal genetics
P05.01  Prenatally diagnosed two distinct cell lines of 18p 
terminal deletion/monosomy X possibly due to chimerism
F. Duzcan1, O. Cetin1, E. Tepeli2, A. Ayaz1;  
1Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of 
Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey.
Monosomy 18p is a rare disorder with an incidence of about 1:50000 
live born infants. Here we report a patient with mosaic18p deletion 
accompanying to monosomy X. The case was the second live birth of 
a non-consanguineous couple. She was prenatally diagnosed by fetal 
blood sampling and amniocentesis at the 26th gestational week due 
to ultrasonographic findings of cleft lip/palate and polyhydramnios and 
the karyotype was 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2)/45,X. The parents decided to 
continue pregnancy and she was born at 36th gestational week. Her 
birth weight, length and head circumference was 2080 g (3-10p), 41 
cm (<3p) and 32 cm (25-50p) respectively. Physical findings included 
asymmetric cranium, micro/retrognathia, low set ears, bilateral cleft 
lip, short neck and diastasis recti. Postnatal confirmation of karyotype 
from peripheral blood revealed 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2) in all 20 meta -
phases and subsequent FISH analysis for X aneuploidy resulted in 
4.4% monosomy X mosaicism in 1255 cells showing the dominant cell 
line was 46,XX,del(18)(p11.2). Subtelomeric FISH analysis supported 
the 18 p deletion. Cranial MRI, abdominal ultrasonography, ophthal -
mologic, oto-rhino-laryngologic and orthopedic examinations were 
normal. Pelvic ultrasonography for internal genitalia was planned but 
has not resulted yet. The mild clinical findings of our case except for 
cleft lip due to 18p deletion can be explained by the compensation of 
the 18p deletion by the presence of the cell line with 45,X karyotype 
and two distinct cell lines in this individual may be due to chimerism 
resulted from an embryonic fusion of twin pregnancy.
P05.02  The verification of ADAM12 effectivity in first and second 
trimester aneuploidy screening
M. Macek1, D. Springer2, H. Klučková1, R. Vlk3, I. Špálová3, P. Calda4, A. 
Lashkevich1, D. Chudoba1, D. Novotná1, L. Dvořáková1, H. Kuželová1, Š. 
Vilímová1, M. Simandlová1, M. Turnovec1, M. Hladíková1, H. Cuckle5;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics of Second Medical School of 
Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine of First Medical 
School of Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 3Department of Obstetric and Adult and Paediatric Gynaecology of 
Second Medical School of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of First 
Medical School of Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 5Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
The aim of the study was to verify ADAM12 aneuploidy screening ef -
fectivity in the Ist and IInd trimester.
The ADAM12 levels in frozen maternal sera from controls and from 
fetal aneuploidies were measured by DELFIA ADAM12 Resarch Kit 
(Perkin Elmer). For each day, in average 30 samples were used for 
control percentile (P) calculations. The 85 Ist and IInd trimester sera 
from pregnancies with autosomal and heterochromosomal aneuploi -
dies were tested to ascertain the decrease under P25.
The P50 levels within week 9-19 rise from 254 to 1337 ng/ml with aver -
age daily increase of 15 ng/ml. The screening effectivity between Ist 
and IInd trimester was not different. Screening positivity (<P25) within 
week 9-19 was for T21 48 % (15/35), T18 57 % (4/7), T13 100 % (4/4), 
triploidy 89 % (8/9), 47,XXX 88 % (7/8) and for 45,X 12,5 % (1/8). The 
highest level of decrease from P25 was for T21 within range P10-25 
(22 %). In other trisomies the highest positivity was within P1-P5: T18 
29 %, T13 50 %, triploidy 78 % and 47,XXX 62,5 %. ADAM12 did not 
detect 47,XXY, 47,XYY and mosaic form of 45,X.
Our results indicate inverse relationship between the degree of phe -
notypic alteration in autosomal aneuploidies and decrease of ADAM12 
under P25. It is remarkable, that the same is true for 47,XXX with mild 
phenotypic affection. Our results suggests, that ADAM12 is important 
marker for severe autosomal aneuploidies, including triploidy and 
47,XXX in Ist and IInd trimester.
Supported by MZ0FNM2005 and NR9448-3/2007.Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
P05.03  molecular study of alpha-globin non-deletional mutation 
in iran.
Z. Shahab-Movahed1, A. Eskafi1, S. Mousavi1, M. Sharafi-Farzad1, M. Sharafi-
Farzad1, S. Kianfar1, F. Safi1, S. Ghahremani1, M. Vahidi1, M. Masoudifar1, F. 
Mollazadeh1, M. S. Fallah1,2, S. Zeinali1,3;  
1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Kawsar Genomics & Biotech 
Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Dep’t of Mol. Med., Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Alpha thalassemia is the most common hemoglobin dis -
order in Iran. Most of known alpha thalassemia mutations include dele -
tion of one or both alpha globin genes. However a considerable num -
ber of cases remain unknown after investigation for common deletion. 
In this case, investigating for point mutation in alpha-globin genes may 
help to detect the mutation and make a correct decision for performing 
prenatal diagnosis (PND) and differentiating unknown alpha thalas -
semia from normal HbA2 beta thalassemia.
Material and Methods: Couples referred to Kawsar Genomics Center 
for PND investigated for common deletional alpha-globin mutations 
(including -α3.7kb, -α4.2kb,--20.5 and --Med) using multiplex Gap-
PCR. Those showed no deletion, further investigated for point muta -
tion using direct sequencing using ABI-3130 genetic-analyzer.
Result: From 281 suspected cases with low MCV, low MCH and nor -
mal HbA2 and no common deletion which investigated using direct 
sequencing, 148 (52.67%) showed at least one point mutation either 
in α1-globin or α2-globin. More than 20 different mutation was detect -
ed. Most common mutation was Poly A2 (AATAAA>AATGAA) in 38 
cases (25.67%) followed by Poly A1(AATAAA>AATAAG) in 26 cases 
(17.57%) and CD142-CS (TAA>AAA) in 14 cases (9.46%). 121 cases 
(81.76%) showed a mutation in α2-globin gene.
Conclusion: This study, showed using sequencing for further investiga -
tion of α1-globin or α2-globin genes can help us to increase accuracy 
of prenatal diagnosis for alpha thalassemia. Because of much higher 
frequency of mutation in α2-globin, it seems it is much cost effective to 
sequence α2-globin at first.
P05.04  the study of Alpha-thalassemia prevalence in referral patients to Pasteur institute of iran during september 2003 to september 2009
A. Amirian , M. Jafarinejad, A. Kordafshari, F. Bayat, M. Mosayebzadeh, M. 
Taghavi, S. Fathiazar, A. Valaei, Z. Azadi, M. Mohammadi, M. Karimipour, F. 
Maryemi, S. Zeinali;  
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and Objective: Alpha thalassemia is the most common 
inherited disorder of hemoglobin synthesis in the world. Unlike beta-
thalassemia, in which nondeletional mutations predominate over 95% 
of recognized alpha-thalassemia involves deletion one or both alpha-
globin genes. The aim of this study is the determine the prevalence of 
alpha-thalassemia frequency in provinces of Iran during September 
2003 to September 2009.
Materials and Methods: The assay was tested on a total 446 blood and 
prenatal DNA samples. The samples were referred to genetic labo -
ratory of Pasteur Institute of Iran from health centers. After obtaining 
informed consent, blood sample was taken at initial visit and genomic 
DNA was extracted according to salting out method. Multiplex Gap-
PCR method and direct DNA sequencing were performed to detect al -
pha-globin gene deletions and nondeletional mutations, respectively.
Results: Out of 446  samples153  were carrier for deletions , 40 had 
nondeletional mutations and 253 were unknown. Among prevalence 
deletions the -α3.7 (77.1%%) is the most common alpha-thalassemia in 
Iran. The less common deletion was -α20.5(6.5%) , other deletions were, 
--MED (8.5%) and -α4.2 (7.9%). Nondeletional mutations were detected by 
direct DNA sequencing includes: PolyA(47.5%) , -5nt(20%) , Cd59(Hb 
Adana)(12.5%) , Hb C.S, Cd19, Hb Q(15%), Cd21(Hb Fontainebleau) 
, 11bp deletion(5%).
Discussion: )MCV and MCH were <65-70 and <18-22, respectively.
The study showed that in severe deletions (e.g. -α20.5 , --MED
However , in mild deletional and nondeletional mutations (rest 
mutations),MCV and MCH were
>70-73 and >21-24, respectively.P05.05  Aneuploidy Detection by QF-PCR of STR Markers on the 
Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer
V. Bansal1, C. J. Davidson1, A. Pradhan1, A. Felton1, N. Duxbury2, S. Higgins2;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gen-Probe Life Sciences, 
Abingdon, United Kingdom.
Analysis of short tandem repeat (STR) markers using quantitative fluo -
rescence PCR (QF-PCR) is a common strategy employed in clinical 
research laboratories for the detection of chromosomal aneuploidy. 
Laboratories that routinely perform these types of analyses demand 
high-throughput, efficient, and highly automated solutions. Here we 
demonstrate performance equivalent between the Applied Biosystems 
3130 Genetic Analyzer and the new Applied Biosystems 3500 Ge -
netic Analyzer for the detection of aneuploidy using the Elucigene™ 
QST*R plus) assay. A large panel of cell-line and clinical samples were 
assessed to demonstrate the accuracy, ease of use, and throughput 
capabilities of the 3500 system for aneuploidy analysis of chromo -
somes 13, 18, 21, and sex chromosomes X and Y. The advanced ca -
pabilities of the 3500 Series Genetic Analyzers, including new thermal 
control systems, enhanced optical detection, and new consumables 
designs, provide an easy-to-use platform for the detection and analy -
sis of multiplexed QF-PCR assays. The optional normalization reagent 
(GeneScan™ 600 LIZ® Size Standard v2.0) and compatible run mod -
ule enable increased precision and accuracy in relative peak area or 
height determinations, which are particularly important for aneuploidy 
analysis. In addition, flexible GeneMapper® Software v4.1 was used to 
create reports and calculations to give user-configured tools for report -
ing multiplexed QF-PCR assay results. For Research Use Only. Not 
intended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use.
P05.06  the values of echographic markers versus biochemical 
markers for antenatal screening of chromosomal aneuploidies
N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, C. Popa1, M. Stoian1, M. Muntean2, E. Bernad2, V. 
Belengeanu1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
At present, antenatal screening of the chromosomal aneuploidies in -
cludes evaluation of the echographic markers, biochemical markers 
and cytogenetic analysis using chorionic villus samples, amniotic fluid 
and blood from umbilical cord. Even if it is not a rule, frequently the 
prenatal cytogenetic analysis is request based on an abnormal ultra -
sound, biochemical markers or advanced maternal age. We present 
the cytogenetic analysis results of 210 cases of amniocentesis. These 
cases were evaluated as pregnancy at risk for chromosomal aneuploi -
dies based on echography, biochemical markers or advanced mater -
nal age and referred for cytogenetic analysis to our Genetics Labora -
tory. 63 cases were investigated for echographic signs suggestive for 
chromosomal aneuploidies: increased nuchal translucency, shortened 
femur length, echogenic bowel, choroid plexus cysts and echogenic 
intracardiac foci. In this lot we found one case of trisomy 18 and one 
case of monosomy X. Out of 82 cases with abnormal biochemical 
screening, one case was diagnosed with trisomy 21. Out of 57 patients 
with abnormal combined ultrasound and biochemical screening, one 
case was diagnosed as having trisomy 21 and one case with trisomy 
13. The advanced maternal age was the reason for cytogenetic evalu -
ation in 8 cases and one case of trisomy 21 was found. The ultrasoud 
investigation was more reliable than bioghemical screening for the de -
tection of chromosomal aneuplodies. The risk was increased when two 
markers were abnormal (utrasound and biochemical) and we would 
recommend karyotyping under these circumstances, the cytogenetic 
analysis remains the gold standard for the prenatal diagnosis.
P05.07  clinical application of whole genome array-cGH 
during prenatal diagnosis: study of 25 selected pregnancies 
with apparently balanced structural aberrations or ultrasound 
findings
P. Evangelidou1, C. Sismani1, M. Ioannides1, C. Christodoulou1, G. Koumbaris1, 
V. Velisariou2, P. C. Patsalis1;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Dept of Cytogenetics and 
Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Mitera Maternity, Gynecolocical, and Children’s 
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
The aim of this project was the application and evaluation of micro -
array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) in selected Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
cases during prenatal diagnosis.
Array-CGH was applied in 25 fetal samples with normal karyotypes 
and abnormal ultrasound findings, or with apparently balanced struc -
tural aberrations with or without ultrasound findings. 1Mb BAC array-
CGH (Cytochip, BlueGnome Ltd.) was applied and abnormal results 
were confirmed with either Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH), 
Multiplex Ligation-dependant Probe Amplification (MLPA) or Real-
Time PCR.
Three out of 25 samples (12%) referred for prenatal array-CGH carry 
copy number alterations. The rate of clinically significant alterations is 
2/25 (8%) and the rate of findings with uncertain clinical significance is 
1/25 (4%). Two benign CNVs were also found in 1/25 cases (4%).
The outcome of this study indicates the ability of array CGH to identify 
chromosomal abnormalities which cannot be detected during routine 
cytogenetic analysis, therefore increasing the overall detection rate of 
prenatal diagnosis.
P05.08  Axenfeld-Rieger and Dandy-Walker malformations in two 
fetuses with 6p subtelomeric deletion
S. Khung-Savatovsky1, A. Aboura2, R. Guilherme3, A. Tabet4, S. Serrero4, A. 
Verloes5, A. Delezoide3, F. Guimiot3;  
1Department of Developmental Biology, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, 
France, 2Department of genetics, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 
3Department of Developmental Biology, Robert Debre hospital, AP-HP and 
University Paris 7 Diderot, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Robert 
Debre hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Department of Genetics, Robert Debre 
hospital, AP-HP and University Paris 7 Diderot, Paris, France.
We report two unrelated fetuses with Axenfeld-Rieger malformation, 
and a 6p subtelomeric deletion. The first fetus had an unbalanced 
translocation inherited from its father : 46XY, der (6) t(6;8)(p23;p23) 
resulting in a partial monosomy 6p23-pter and a partial trisomy 8p23-
pter. The second fetus had a de novo distal deletion of the short arm 
of chromosome 6 : 46XX, del (6p24.3-p25.3). Both had an Axenfeld-
Rieger malformation (abnormal cleavage of the anterior chamber of 
the eye and hypoplasia of the iris) and Dandy-Walker malformation 
(enlarged cisterna magna and hypoplasia or agenesis of cerebellar 
vermis). Other anomalies included, for the first fetus, hypertelorism, 
ventricular septal defect, genital hypoplasia, diaphragmatic hernia 
and cochlear hypoplasia and for the second fetus, hypoplasia of the 
left heart and cleft lip and palate. Breakpoints were mapped by BAC-
array CGH (Perkin). In both cases, the forkhead transcription factor 
gene FOXC1 was deleted. The Axenfeld-Rieger malformation is a well 
known developmental anomaly of the eye, which occurs in as an iso -
lated malformation or in a multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) con -
text and related to mutations or deletions of a chromosomic region in 
4q25 ( PITX2  gene) or in 6p25 ( FOXC1  gene). FOXC1  has recently 
been shown to play a role in cerebellar development and the Dandy-
Walker malformation ( Aldinger et al., 2009 ).
To our knowledge, this is the first fetal report of Axenfeld-Rieger mal -
formation including a cochlear anomaly.
P05.09  comparison of plasma cell-free DNA levels with gene 
expression profiles of peripheral blood cell during hemodialysis
A. Horinek1, M. Korabecna2, K. Rocinova1, A. Panczak1, V. Tesar1, D. Cerny1, 
M. Mokrejsova3,1;  
1Charles University, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty 
of Medicine in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 3Charles University, 3rd Faculty 
of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Objective: The levels of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) have been considered 
as potential marker of biocompatibility of membranes used for hemodi -
alysis. Some studies demonstrated the elevations of cfDNA concentra -
tions during the hemodialysis. Therefore we focused on comparison of 
plasma cfDNA levels and expression of selected genes in peripheral 
blood cells during the procedure. We selected genes with known func -
tions in the process of inflammation and apoptosis.
Methods: The concentrations of plasma cell-free DNA of 30 patients 
undergoing hemodialysis (HD) have been measured and compared 
with the cfDNA levels of 30 healthy volunteers (before HD, after the 
first, second and third hour of HD and 30 min after HD). The mRNA 
expression of selected genes (pathways regulated by BAX, BCL-2 and 
by TNF receptor, caspase and interleukine families) were measured 
(immediately before and after HD) using real-time PCR technology. 
Plasma cfDNA was isolated and DNA quantification was carried out by the real-time PCR method using GAPDH gene sequence.
Results: We found significant elevations of cfDNA in plasma during 
hemodialysis sessions with the highest values at the end of HD and 
with the rapid decline to normal levels within 30 minutes after HD in 
most patients. In comparison with healthy controls, the cfDNA levels 
in patients were significantly higher in the interdialytic interval. In ex -
pression profiles, we found individual differences among our patients 
and we discuss these differences with regard to the kinetics of cfDNA 
during HD session.
Supported by the grant of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Re -
public MSM 0021620807
P05.10  Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for beta-thalassemia 
using pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization (PAP
M. Phylipsen1, E. E. Treffers1, D. T. S. L. Jansen1, S. Yamsri2, P. C. Giordano1, 
C. L. Harteveld1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
Currently, prenatal diagnosis for hemoglobinopathies relies mainly on 
invasive testing, using chorionic villi sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis 
(AC). The risk of miscarriage following CVS or AC is 1-2%. The dis -
covery of fetal cells and free fetal DNA (ffDNA) circulating in maternal 
plasma has led to the possibility of reliable non-invasive prenatal di -
agnosis (NIPD). Recently, a highly specific PCR technique was intro -
duced, pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization (PAP), which has 
been shown successful in fetal sex determination using ffDNA.
Our aim is to develop a PAP-assay for NIPD of beta-thalassemia. In -
stead of designing PAP primers for each of the ~180 putative beta-
thalassemia causing mutations and optimizing the conditions for each 
of them, we have chosen to select informative SNPs (i.e. with a fre -
quency of >10% determined in a pilot study in 6 subsets of different 
populations) in linkage to the normal or mutant allele derived from fa -
ther and absent in mother.
We have designed PAP-primers for 15 informative SNPs within the 
beta-globin gene cluster. After optimizing reaction conditions using 
genomic DNA, mixtures of wildtype and homozygous SNP samples 
were prepared to test the sensitivity of the assay. Until now, 16 PAP 
reactions for 10 SNPs are optimized and able to detect <3% target 
DNA in a background of >97% wildtype DNA. We have developed a 
primer for both wildtype and SNP variant for 6 SNPs. The next step is 
to retrospectively test plasma samples of pregnant women referred 
to our department for prenatal diagnosis using CVS or AC. The first 
results will be presented.
P05.11  BTK (Bruton t yrosine Kinase) mutations in X-linked 
agammaglobulinaemia (XLA)
S. Fernandes1, E. Faria2, L. Marques3, A. Bonito Vitor4, M. Martins5, A. B. 
Sousa6, A. Barros1;  
1Genetics - Faculty of Medicine of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Primary 
Immunodeficiency Ambulatory, Paediatric Hospital of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal, 3Commission of Infection Control, Maria Pia Hospital, Porto, Portugal, 
4Paediatric Department, S. João Hospital, Porto, Portugal, 5Genetics - Trás-os-
Montes e Alto Douro Hospital, Vila Real, Portugal, 6Genetics - Lisbon Hospital, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction: X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA; MIM 300300) is 
an immunodeficiency characterized by failure to produce mature B 
lymphocyte and is associated with a failure of Ig heavy chain rear -
rangement. Affected males suffer from recurrent bacterial infections 
starting in early childhood. The immunoglobin levels are reduced and 
B lymphocytes number is less than 1% of the normal level. The XLA is 
caused by BTK gene mutations. BTK gene is mapped on Xq21.3-q22 
and codes for a cytoplasmatic tyrosine kinase.
Material and methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 23 patients 
with XLA clinical diagnosis and 30 relatives. The 19 exons of BTK gene 
were amplified by PCR (Vorechovsky et al ., 1995). The amplicons 
were sequenced and analysed in an ABI Prism 310.
Results: 17 different mutations were detected, 6 missense (C154F, 
R288W, R288Q, V535F, D579V and R641H), 4 nonsense (K53X, 
R255X, Y361X and E441X) and 7 new mutations: 2 missense (K18R 
and T354I), 1 nonsense (E7X), 2 frameshift (H285X286, Y345X402), 
1 splicing mutation (IVS7+1G>T) and 1 large undefined deletion 
(g.IVS15_IVS18del). So far, carrier status was detected in 18 out of 30 
relatives. 2 PND were performed and the familiar mutation was absent Prenatal and perinatal genetics17
in both male foetuses.
Conclusions: The X-linked agammaglobulinaemia was confirmed by 
the identification of one BTK mutation in all cases studied. All families 
studied presented private mutations. Carriers could be identified and 
it is now possible to offer PGD and PND to these families. An early 
diagnosis of XLA will allow a correct clinical surveillance and an im -
munoglobulin replacement therapy.
P05.12  Non-invasive prenatal diagnostic mLPA test detects fetal 
Y-chromosome using cell-free fetal DNA extracted from maternal 
blood plasma early pregnancy
S. G. M. Frints1,2, N. Kisters1, J. G. Nijhuis1,3, J. P. Offermans1,3, M. V. E. 
Macville1,2, J. Engelen1,2, G. de Wert1,4, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1,2, J. P. M. 
Geraedts5,2;  
1Research Institute for Oncology and Developmental Biology, GROW, Faculty 
of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Prenatal Diagnosis & Therapy, 
Maastricht University Medical Center+, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 
3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Maastricht University Medical 
Center, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Health, Ethics and 
Society, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Faculty 
of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis (AC) is used to 
detect chromosomal abnormalities including trisomy 21. The major 
disadvantage herewith is the procedure-related risk of abortion. Cur -
rently, no cheap, non-invasive prenatal diagnostic test exists to detect 
chromosomal abnormalities. We aim at developing a targeted prena -
tal diagnostic screening test applicable in pregnancy using cell-free 
fetal DNA present in maternal blood plasma. In this study we used a 
“Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification” (MLPA) P95 kit in 
order to detect chromosome 13, 18, 21, X and Y abnormalities. There -
fore, peripheral blood plasma samples were collected from A. Women 
undergoing pregnancy termination because of trisomy 13, 18 or 21 
detected with CVS (n=4) or AC (n=10), B. Women undergoing prenatal 
screening at 12-14 weeks of gestation with low risk (n=4), C. Women 
undergoing AC because of age ≥ 36 years (n=3), and D. Non-pregnant 
control women who had 0,1,2 or 3 offspring (n=9). So far, all samples 
were tested with the MLPA P095 kit after specific amplification to de -
tect fetal Y-chromosomal sequences. The MLPA test results obtained 
were compared with the CVS, AC or pregnancy outcome and controls. 
All but one false negative sample did correlate with the non-invasive 
MLPA test results, detecting the fetal Y-chromosome. Two out of three 
Y-MLPA-probe sets within the P095 kit were reliable. We conclude that 
further validation and quantification is needed to detect fetal Y chromo -
some and/or fetal trisomy 21 in non-invasively obtained cell free fetal 
DNA.
P05.13  cell free fetal nucleic acid sNP quantitative analysis for 
potential noninvasive prenatal diagnosis purposes.
J. Bohmova1, R. Vodicka1, I. Dhaifalah1, R. Vrtel1, R. Kratochvilova1, M. 
Prochazka1, M. Kvapilova1, E. Krejcirikova1, L. Dusek2, J. Santavy1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic, 2Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Genotyping based on the SNP analysis could be usefull 
tool for detection and quantification of cell free fetal (cff) DNA/RNA in 
maternal plasma. For this purpose, is needed to choose genes ac -
cording to their specific expression in placenta and chromosomal lo -
calization. Selected SNPs in particular genes should display high level 
of variability. Also, there is necessary to select more SNPs in several 
genes to ensure the cffDNA/RNA detection.
Aims: Our aims include: optimization and calibration of SNPs in cffDNA 
obtained from blood plasma of pregnant women, SNP genotyping in 
parents and fetuses followed by cffDNA SNP quantification of plasma 
cffDNA in pregnant women in the first and second trimester. Project is 
supported by IGA MZCR NS9624.
Method: We designed 12 SNPs in silico  in following genes: DSCR4, 
PLAC4, KRTAP26, PLAC1, PAPPA, PSG11. Particular genotypes 
were previously determined by sequencing of SNP regions in 30 ran -
dom samples of maternal DNA. Than, TaqMan RealTime PCR system 
in chosen SNP regions were optimized and calibrated. SNP quantifica -
tion was made on cohort of 80 DNA samples isolated from plasma in pregnant women.
Results: Heterozygozity in the SNPs varied from 14 % to 55 % 
with probability of the proper genotypes (Mother‘s SNP differs from 
fetal)detection from 12 % to 28 %. Sensitivity of minority genotype 
detection depends on the fluorescent background of non-specifically 
bound probe. The most sensitive TaqMan SNP systems were able to 
capture 1% artificial genotype mixture. Our analysis confirmed direct 
dependence of fetal DNA amount with the week of gestation.
P05.14  TNFα genotypes and risk for cerebral palsy in preterm 
and term infants
H. Kapitanovic Vidak1, S. Kapitanovic2;  
1Special Hospital for Children with Neurodevelopmental and Motor Difficulties, 
Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
Background. Cerebral palsy is a nonprogressive motor disorder 
caused by white matter damage in the developing brain. Activation of 
the cytokine network by a variety of insults (infection and/or hypoxia-
ischemia) and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines can cause 
white matter brain damage as well as the development of CP. Recent 
data suggest a significant role of TNFα in the pathophysiology of peri -
natal brain injury. The aim of our study was to investigate the influence 
of TNFα promoter SNPs on susceptibility to CP in preterm and term 
neonates.
Methods. We analyzed 94 CP patients and control group of 118 un -
related children with comparable gestational age and sex distribution. 
Real-time PCR SNP analysis of TNFα SNPs was performed using pre -
developed TaqMan SNP genotyping assay reagents.
Results. Statistically significant association between TNFα -1031 T/
C high expression genotypes (TC and CC) and risk of CP was ob -
served (OR 2.1811 (1.2075-3.9396), p=0.0097). Statistically significant 
association was also found between TNFα -1031C high expression 
allele and risk of CP (OR 1.9909 (1.1831-3.3501), p=0.0095). Statis -
tically significant association between TNFα -1031 T/C high expres -
sion genotypes (TC and CC) and risk of CP was observed in term 
children (OR 4.7475 (1.5576-14.4696), p=0.0062) but not in preterm 
infants. Statistically significant association was also found between 
TNFα -1031C high expression allele and risk of CP in term children 
(OR 3.0952 (1.2124-7.9020), p=0.0181).CONCLUSION. Our results 
suggest a role of TNFα -1031 T/C gene polymorphism as modifying 
factor for development of CP in term, but not in preterm infants.
P05.15  Difficulties of interpretation of a complex chromosomal 
rearrangement in the prenatal period.
J. Puechberty1,2, A. Schneider1,2, C. Coubes1, M. Pérez1, M. Tournaire2, M. 
Girard2, C. Pébrel-Richard3, A. Chaze1, N. Bigi1, P. Vago3, D. Geneviève1,4, P. 
Sarda1, G. Lefort1;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale et Chromosomique, Centre de Référence 
Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs 
Sud-Languedoc Roussillon, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU, Université 
Montpellier 1, Faculté de Médecine, Montpellier, France, 2Plate-forme puces 
à ADN, Département de Génétique Médicale et Chromosomique, CHRU 
Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, 3Laboratoire de 
Cytogénétique, CHRU, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4Unité Inserm U844, Institut 
des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) are considered as rare 
events, but the frequency of their discovery increases with the con -
tribution of molecular cytogenetic techniques. Here we report on the 
identification of apparently inherited balanced complex chromosomal 
rearrangement during prenatal period. It was the 4th pregnancy from 
healthy unrelated parents after 3 early miscarriages. First trimester 
was uneventful but second trimester was marked by the discovery of 
facial features during ultrasounds (right cleft of the lip and palate, flat 
fronto-nasal angle, hypertelorism). Fetal karyotype performed on am -
niotic fluid culture (AF) evoked an apparently balanced CCR involving 
the extremities of the long arms of chromosomes 2, 8 and 18. Pater -
nal karyotype was normal but the mother had CCR resembling those 
found in the fetus. M-FISH on AF culture showed an unbalanced CCR 
(distal 8q trisomy, distal 18q monosomy). However, maternal blood M-
FISH showed a more complex apparently balanced CCR with 4 break -
points leading to an insertion of 8q material on 2q, a translocation of 
2q material on 8q and a translocation of 8q material on 18q. Based 
on the maternal blood karyotype, we hypothesized a meiotic recombi -
nation event between the derivative chromosome 2 and the chromo -Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
some 8 in the fetus. Microarray confirmed the CCR with chromosomal 
breakpoints (8q23.3 and 18q21.33) and estimation of the sizes of the 
18q deletion and 8q duplication. This CCR found during a pregnancy 
was prima facie  an apparently balanced exchange between 3 chromo -
somes, but was the product of an unbalanced meiotic recombination 
from a maternal CCR.
P05.16  Reverse-hybridization teststrips for the detection 
of common cYP21A2 mutations in dried blood spots from 
newborns with elevated 17-OH progesterone
S. Nemeth1, G. Kriegshäuser1, S. Baumgartner-Parzer2, F. Waldhauser3, S. 
Riedl3, C. Oberkanins1;  
1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Internal 
Medicine III, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) comprises a group of inborn er -
rors in the synthesis of adrenal corticoid hormones. More than 90% of 
cases arise from mutations in the CYP21A2 gene encoding steroid 21-
hydroxylase. CAH occurs in severe „classical“ forms (salt-wasting or 
simple-virilizing) or mild „nonclassical“ forms. The average incidence 
of classical CAH is about 1 in 15,000 births worldwide, and newborn 
screening programs based on 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) lev -
els have been introduced in various countries. Since neonatal 17-OHP 
screening has a considerable false positive recall rate, causing a sub -
stantial economical burden and emotional stress for parents, concur -
rent genetic testing for CYP21A2 defects to corroborate or exclude 
CAH diagnosis would be desireable.
We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay for rapid and si -
multaneous analysis of common CYP21A2 mutations from dried 
blood spots. The entire CYP21A2 gene is amplified in two overlap -
ping fragments using PCR primers that will not co-amplify the highly 
homologous pseudogene. Biotinylated amplicons are hybridized under 
exactly defined stringency to a teststrip presenting a parallel array of 
allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for the following 11 mutations: 
P30L, IVS-2 A/C>G, 8 bp del (exon 3), I172N, I236N/V237E/M239K 
(„cluster“), V281L, F306 insT, Q318X, R356W, P453S and R483P. 
Specifically bound PCR products are detected using enzymatic colour 
reaction.
The new CAH StripAssay is currently being validated on DNA samples 
of known CYP21A2 genotypes. Automated instrumentation and use 
of a scanner-based software tool (StripAssay Evaluator) for recording 
and interpreting results may further contribute to making the StripAs -
say a useful tool in CAH newborn screening programs. (oberkanins@
viennalab.co.at)
P05.17  Role of genetic and iatrogenic factors in congenital 
hydronephrosis: clinical and therapeutic challenges in a 
romanian clinical setting
V. Dumitrascu1, A. Matusz2, C. Gug3, I. Cioata4;  
1“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Pharmacology 
Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2General Private Office, Timisoara, Romania, 
3Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Timisoara, Romania, 4“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Timisoara, Romania.
Congenital hydronephrosis is a serious disease occurring among new -
borns, represented by the dilatation of the renal calyces associated 
with atrophic changes in the renal parenchyma resulting from obstruc -
tion of urinary flow, caused besides the intrinsic genetic factors by in 
utero exposure to certain drugs.
Our objective was to achieve a complete postnatal evaluation of pa -
tients identified prenatally with congenital hydronephrosis in a Roma -
nian clinical setting.
In a two year longitudinal study, from January 2007 to December 2009, 
we prospectively enrolled and followed up 26 women whose fetuses 
were detected with hydronephrosis. Prenatal diagnosis of hydrone -
phrosis was achieved by echography; affected children were followed-
up and evaluated after six month.
Results: 9 women (34.61%) of the cases reported hydronephrosis in 
two (77.77%) and even three (22.22%) consecutive generations. In 17 
cases of birth outcomes (65.38%), expectant mothers were exposed 
to different drugs in the first trimester of pregnancy: analgesic drugs 
- 15 cases (88.24%) and respectively ntitussive agents (dextrometho -rphan) in 2 cases (11.76%).
These findings illustrate the complex decision-making process when 
coordinating the antenatal identification with the appropriate postnatal 
evaluation and treatment for each pediatric patient.
P05.18  Monitoring of Congenital Malformations and Efficacy of Prenatal Diagnostics in t omsk Region
L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1,2, A. Kurovskii3, S. Fadyushina1, G. Filatova4;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State 
University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Tomsk, 
Russian Federation, 4MLCPMU Municipal Hospital #3, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation.
The results of monitoring of congenital malformations in Tomsk dur -
ing nine-year period since 1998-2007 and value of efficacy of prena -
tal diagnostics of some forms of congenital malformations has been 
analyzed. Frequency of prenatally detected and interrupted congenital 
malformations during period studied varied from 0,6 to 6,3 per thou -
sand, the malformations of central nervous system made basic con -
tribution to this index. There was significant decrease in frequency of 
some malformations during the period studied, with negative correla -
tion between year of observation and malformation frequency (trans -
position of the great vessels, r = -0,86; diaphragmatic hernia, r = -0,78; 
omphalocele, r = -0,61; birth defects of central nervous system, r = 
-0,61; and Down syndrome, r = - 0,53). Dependence of reduction in 
frequency of spina bifida and Down syndrome among newborns was 
determined from frequency of induced abortions of fetuses with these 
congenital malformations. Frequency of these forms of birth defects 
among newborns significantly decreased together with increasing of 
frequency of the same forms among induced abortions(r = -0,64). So, 
this dependence may testify for effective measures of prenatal diag -
nostics in decreasing of level of congenital malformations among new -
borns. Apparently, improvement of preventive system of congenital 
malformations may significantly decrease the frequency of birth de -
fects among newborns.
P05.19  Oxidative stress and sperm DNA Fragmentation- 
Paternal role in recurrent spontaneous abortions.
M. B. Shamsi , S. Venkatesh, D. Deka, R. Dada;  
AIIMS, New Delhi, India.
Introduction: Paternal genome integrity is important in initiation and 
sustenance of viable pregnancy in both natural and assisted concep -
tions. Nicks/breaks and/or nucleotide modification caused by unregu -
lated free radical concentration due to inefficient antioxidant machin -
ery leads to sperm DNA damage. So antioxidant capacity assay and 
sperm DNA integrity assessment are imperative in analysis of preg -
nancy loss.
Material and Methods: Male partners of 77 couples [Group A (n=41) 
spontaneous conceptions; Group B (n=36) assisted conceptions] ex -
periencing recurrent pregnancy loss and 41 fertile controls were in -
cluded in study. Total antioxidant capacity (TAC) of seminal plasma 
was assessed by commercially available kits. Sperm DNA integrity 
was quantified by single cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay). Mann-
Whittney test was applied for statistical significance.
Results: Seminal TAC was reduced in patients (p=0.0017, p= 0.003 
in group A and B respectively) as compared to controls.Higher level 
of DNA damage (number of comet with increased tail length) were 
observed in both group of infertile men as compared to fertile controls 
(p=0.005 and p=0.007 in group A and B respectively).
Discussion:  Seminal oxidative stress is a major cause of sperm DNA 
damage. DNA damage leads to recurrent spontaneous abortions, 
childhood cancers, genetic and epigenetic defects in offspring. Thus 
oxidative stress assessment and DNA integrity analysis should be un -
dertaken in all couples experiencing recurrent spontaneous abortions.
P05.20  Prenatal diagnosis of Donohue syndrome 
(Leprechaunism )
M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, G. Pérez de Nanclares3, C. Velez1, M. Fenollar-
Cortés1,4, M. Martinez-García1, I. Garín3, M. Martín-Frías5, R. Barrio5, C. 
Ramos1;  
1IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 
3Molecular Genetics Department of the Txagorritxu Hospital, Vitoria, Spain, 
4Genetics Department of the Clínico San Carlos Hospital., Madrid, Spain, Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
5Diabetes Unit of the Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Donohue syndrome (OMIM: 246200) is a severe congenital insulin-re -
sistance syndrome described in 1954 that leads to death, often in early 
infancy. It is caused by mutations in the insulin receptor gene INSR 
(19p13.3-p13.2) and it is inherited as an autosomal recessive condi -
tion. Prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 1 000 000 live births.
We present a prenatal diagnosis of Leprechaunism performed in Spain 
in a non-consanguineous couple with a previous affected son. This 
patient was born after a 41 week pregnancy and showed intrauterine 
growth retardation detected from the sixth month. He died at 18 months 
due to a respiratory failure. The mutations identified were p. R1026X 
inherited from the mother and IVS19+5 g>a (p.D1176GfsX8) from the 
father. Both predict null alleles and were not previously described.
Molecular diagnosis of the new gestation was made at 11+6 weeks 
gestation in a sample of chorionic villus by automated sequencing of 
exon 17 and intron 19.
The result was a female foetus with no mutation inherited, being the 
first prenatal diagnosis made in our population.
P05.21  Prenatal diagnosis of an autosomal translocation with 
regular t risomy 21
Y. Tunca1, M. S. Deveci2, H. Kaya1, A. Koc1, I. Alanbay3, M. Dede3;  
1Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 
2Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, 
3Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
Ankara, Turkey.
The coincidence of trisomy 21 (regular Down syndrome) and a struc -
tural rearrangement is very rare. Even, it is not reported as a prenatal 
diagnosis. In this report we present an autosomal translocation carrier 
fetus with trisomy 21: 47,XX,+21,t(3;8)(p21;q24). The coexistence of 
reciprocal translocation and trisomy may be seen in reciprocal trans -
location carrier families, de novo cases are extremely rare. The pre -
sented case is diagnosed by amniocentesis which is done due to ab -
normal fetal ultrasonographic findings and increased trisomy 21 risk at 
maternal serum screening. The postmortem pathologic examination 
of the fetus revealed novel findings associated with the breakpoints 
3p21 and 8q24.
P05.22  the effects of Paracetamol and Ketonal administration, 
during embryogenesis, over the conception product
D. Iacob1, M. Boia1, R. E. Iacob2, A. Manea1, R. M. Pakai3, M. Puiu1;  
1”Victor Babeş” University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 
2SCJU - Pediatric Surgery, Arad, Romania, 3“Louis Ţurcanu” Children‘s 
Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania.
Aims: To highlight the possible occurrence of congenital malformations 
following the administration of chemical substances during embryo -
genesis, by conducting an experiment on animal model. 
Material and method: The experiment took place during 15.05.2006 
and 30.06.2006 in the Laparoscopic and Microsurgery Center, UMF 
Timisoara, on a group of 20 pregnant female white mice. After weigh -
ing, in hypogastric region was given a dose depending on weight. 
The procedure was repeated for each animal 3 days consecutively. 
At the end of pregnancy the born fetuses were examined. After birth, 
the intranatal exposed group was euthanized and macroscopic and 
microscopic examination was made on liver and kidney, compared to 
a control group. 
Results and discussion: Regarding the fertility of intranatal exposed 
animals, they had babies in a species characteristic number, which 
were apparently normal. In terms of macroscopic examination of the 
liver and kidneys, the presence of anomalies was not highlighted. Mi -
croscopic examination indicated a later suffering liver and kidney in an -
imals exposed to the intrauterine action of paracetamol and ketonal. 
Conclusions: Administration of paracetamol and ketonal during preg -
nancy in mice did not influence the evolution of pregnancy. The re -
sulted mice have had a normal morphological development compared 
with control group. Microscopic examination of liver and kidney indi -
cated the presence of pathological changes.P05.23  A familial t(15;22)(q13;q11.1), implications for prenatal 
genetic testing
A. Hegarty , J. Turner, G. Clarke, T. F. Morris, B. O’hIci, K. Meaney, A. Green, 
D. R. Betts;  
National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
Pregnancy in a familial balanced translocation carrier can pose a 
challenge to a genetics testing laboratory, particularly when the re -
arrangement is G-band subtle and involves chromosome 15. We re -
port a t(15;22)(q13;q11.1) familial translocation that while easily dis -
tinguishable at the 600 band resolution could appear to be subtle at 
lower resolution. The mother, a phenotypically normal carrier of the 
translocation, reported a family history of a Prader-Willi-like syndrome. 
To help confirm the breakpoints of the translocation, FISH analyses 
using a range of commercially available probes was undertaken, these 
demonstrated that 15q breakpoint was distal to SNRPN, while the 22q 
breakpoint was in the alpha-satellite region of 22q11. This therefore, 
resulted in the derivative chromosome 15 containing both SNRPN and 
the 22q11.2 region associated with Di George syndrome. At gestational 
week 11 a CVS biopsy was taken and sent to us for cytogenetic, MLPA 
and UPD studies. Due to the prior FISH testing, cytogenetic analysis 
could confidently define the foetal karyotype as 46,XY,+der(15)t(15;22
)(q13;q11.1),-22, thus resulting in partial trisomy of 15pter-15q13 and 
insignificant monosomy of 22pter-22q11.1. Both the MLPA and UPD 
studies were consistent with this finding. These results illustrate the 
importance of prior planning for prenatal testing of an individual with 
a family history of a balanced chromosomal rearrangement and the 
identification of the appropriate tests and markers.
P05.24  Non-invasive Bovine Fetus sex Determination Using multiplex PcR Analysis of Fetal DNA in matrnal Plasma
A. Davoudi1, A. Aleyasin2, a. salehi3, M. Mirtorabi4;  
1University of tehran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetic Dept., 
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, I.R. of 
IRAN, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3University of Tehran, tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 4Iran Animal Breeding Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background:  In order to establish a reliable non-invasive method for 
bovine fetal sex determination in routine setting the possibility of iden -
tifying the fetal X and Y-chromosomes specific sequences has been 
evaluated in maternal plasma using conventional multiplex PCR analy -
sis. The aim of this study was to provide a rapid and reliable method for 
sexing bovine fetuses. Methods:  Peripheral blood samples were taken 
from 38 pregnant heifer with gestational weeks of 12 to 38. DNA tem -
plate was extracted by phenol-chloroform method from 350 μl mater -
nal plasma. Two primer pairs for bovine amelogenin gene (bAML) and 
BC1.2 were used to amplify fragments from X and Y chromosomes. 
A multiplex PCR reaction has been optimized for amplification of 467 
bp and 341 bp producted from X and Y bAML gene respectively and a 
190 bp fragment from BC1.2 related to Y chromosome. Results:  The 
467 bp fragment was detected in all 38 samples and 341 and 190 bp 
fragments were detected only in 24 plasma samples that delivered a 
male calf. The sensitivity and specificity of test was 100% with no false 
negative and false positive results. Conclusions: The results showed 
that phenol-chloroform method is a simple and sensational for isolation 
fetal DNA in maternal plasma. The multiplex PCR is a available non-
invasive methods which is cost efficient and replicable and is easily for 
bovine fetal sexing.
P05.25  Fetal RHD genotyping from maternal plasma: Lyonnaise 
study on 196 patients
E. Guinchard , E. Mayrand, D. Rigal;  
EFS Rhône-Alpes site de Lyon-GHE, 69677 BRON Cedex, France.
RHD genotyping from maternal plasma allows to optimize the care 
of pregnant women anti-D allo-immunized and to target prevention 
through Ig anti-D currently recommended by the Collège National des 
Gynéco-obstétriciens Français during the second trimester of preg -
nancy.
Exons 4, 5 and 10 of RHD gene are analyzed by real-time PCR using 
the TaqMan technology (Minon et al 2005).
DNA is extracted manually with the QIAamp kit (Qiagen ®) and then 
amplified on the real-time PCR instrument Lightcycler 480 (Roche ®). 
After validation of witnesses (including SRY and CCR5 genes), we 
analyze the correlation of cycle Threshold obtained for the 3 exons and 
compare them to the phenotype achieved at birth.Prenatal and perinatal genetics10
The RHD gene is present in fetuses where at least 1 of the 2 Ct ob -
tained for each exon is positive. Any discrepancy between the exons 
implies, after verification of results, analysis of gene RHD on maternal 
buffy coat. Finally, each negative result found for the first time will be 
confirmed on another sample a few weeks later. A female fetus without 
RHD gene is characterized by the absence of amplification of the 3 
exons and the SRY gene control.
For 195 tests, the results show a perfect correlation with the phenotype 
of RH1 newborn regardless of gender.
On1 sample, we have demonstrated the presence of an RHD pseu -
dogene.
The use of a gene control, hyper-methylated in the fetus, currently un -
der study in our lab, would get rid of the SRY gene control, depending 
on the sex of the fetus.
P05.26  Quantitative analysis of foetal DNA in maternal 
circulation in anaemic pregnant women
M. Zamanpoor , T. Karuppiah, M. Yazid, R. Rosli;  
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Advances in molecular genetics have allowed the investigation of the 
foetal genome through analysis of circulating foetal DNA in maternal 
plasma. Cell-free foetal DNA (fDNA) in maternal plasma or serum is 
widely investigated as a source of foetal genetic materials. Increased 
amount of circulating fDNA in maternal plasma has been found in 
some adverse pregnancies. It was suggested that elevation of fDNA in 
maternal plasma could be used for early identification of adverse preg -
nancies. To date, no study has been done to investigate the fDNA in 
anaemia, considered as the more common pregnancy related compli -
cation. The aim of this study was to quantify circulating fDNA levels in 
normal healthy pregnant individuals and pregnant women with anae -
mia. In this study, fifty seven samples consisting of anaemia (n=19) 
and normal pregnant women (n=38) carrying singleton male foetuses, 
were collected. The fDNA concentrations were measured by quanti -
tative real-time PCR amplification using TaqMan dual labelled probe 
system. The SRY gene was used as a unique foetal marker. The mean 
fDNA concentration for normal pregnancy samples and anaemic preg -
nancy samples were 41.14 GE/ml and 30.96 GE/ml respectively. No 
significant differences were observed in the mean fDNA concentration 
between normal and anaemic pregnancy samples (P=0.535). In con -
clusion, anaemia does not significantly affect levels of fDNA in mater -
nal plasma. Hence, if fDNA is used as an additional marker in prenatal 
screening test in the future, the findings of this study suggests that 
fDNA quantity will not be much informative for anaemic pregnancies.
P05.27  Founder mutations in the t unisian Population: 
implications for diagnosis in North Africa and middle East
L. Romdhane , R. Kefi-Ben Atig, S. Abdelhak;  
Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis Belvédère, Tunisia.
Tunisia is a North African country of 10 million inhabitants at the cross 
road between Europe and Africa. Throughout its history, it has been 
the seat of the invasion and immigration of different ethnic groups. As 
its neighbouring and Middle Eastern countries, its population shows 
a high prevalence of consanguinity and endogamy, thus leading to 
emergence of genetic disorders at higher rates. Many factors could 
contribute to the recurrence of monogenic morbid trait expression. 
Among these, founder mutations that arise in one ancestral individual 
and diffuse through the population in isolated communities. By a re -
view of the literature, data from PubMed and other sources including 
conference proceedings, two classes of founder mutations have been 
identified in the Tunisian population. The first includes founder muta -
tions that are reported so far only among Tunisian patients, they are 
mainly the result of the high rate of consanguinity and endogamy. The 
second founder mutations are shared with other populations originat -
ing mainly from other North African or Middle Eastern countries and 
in certain cases from both shores of Mediterranean. These mutations 
have captured historical events in the region and are particularly use -
ful for the development of easy and cost effective tools for molecular 
diagnosis. P05.28  A new case of microdeletion of the FOX gene cluster on 
16q24.1 in a preterm male infant: confirmation of the severity of 
pulmonary distress
F. Zufferey1, D. Martinet1, M. C. Osterheld2, F. Niel-Butschi1, E. Giannoni3, J. S. 
Beckmann1,4, C. Shaw-Smith5, P. Stankiewicz6, C. Langston7, F. Fellmann1;  
1Service of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University 
Institute of Pathology, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Dept of Pediatrics, 
CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Dept of Medical Genetics, Unil, Lausanne, 
Switzerland, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Hinxton, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 6Dept of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, United States, 7Dept of Pathology, Texas Children’s Hospital, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Genomic and genic deletions of the FOX gene cluster on 16p24.1 have 
been recently described in the context of alveolar capillary dysplasia, 
a rare lethal developmental anomaly of the lung, and other malfor -
mations resembling VACTERL association. We report the case of a 
preterm male infant, born at 26th weeks of gestation and deceased 16 
hours after birth. During pregnancy, a cardiac malformation and bilat -
eral hydronephrosis were observed at 19th AW. Karyotype analysis was 
normal and a 22q11 microdeletion was excluded by FISH analysis. A 
Cesarean section was performed at 26th AW due to fetal distress. Fol -
lowing delivery he presented a refractory hypoxemia. An autopsy was 
performed. Growth parameters were appropriate for gestational age. 
The heart showed partial AV canal malformation. Both kidneys showed 
dilatation of the pelvocaliceal system with bilateral ureteral stenosis. 
There was an annular pancreas. Microscopic examination of the lungs 
showed the characteristic features of alveolar capillary dysplasia with 
misalignment of pulmonary veins. Some features were less prominent 
due to the gestational age. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent oligoNT 44K) 
was performed on DNA extracted from uncultured fibroblasts, show -
ing an interstitial microdeletion encompassing the FOX gene cluster in 
16q24.1. The size of the deletion is 1.57 to 1.76 Mb. Complementary 
analysis using FISH and high-resolution array-CGH are currently on -
going to confirm a possible somatic mosaicism. We confirm the early 
onset and the severity of pulmonary distress associated with 16q24.1 
microdeletions. This case also illustrates the interest of array-CGH 
analysis in prenatal diagnosis in case of fetal malformations.
P05.29  A pilot study of Fragile X carrier screening in china
X. Ji, Y. Zhou, W. Sun, X. Han, Z. J. Yang, J. Tao;  
Xinhua Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.
CGG repeat expansion in the 5’ noncoding region of the FMR1  gene 
on the X chromosome is associated with an array of disorders. Large 
expansion of over 200 repeats (full mutation) gives rise to the most 
common form of inherited mental retardation known as Fragile X Syn -
drome (FXS), whereas smaller expansion of 55-200 repeats (premu -
tation) is recently shown to be involved in autism, premature ovarian 
failure, and fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). 
More importantly, the expanded CGG repeats are unstable and can 
undergo further expansion on female transmission. Thus, screening 
for the unstable FMR1  alleles in asymptomatic women before or at 
early pregnancy is an efficient strategy for the prevention of the related 
diseases. To evaluate the feasibility of a Fragile X carrier screening pro -
gram in china, we anonymously examined 935 Chinese women from 
our obstetric clinic for the FMR1  CGG repeats status. DNA analysis 
was carried out by an enhanced PCR, coupled with capillary electro -
phoresis separation. Inconclusive results were subsequently verified 
by Southern analysis. The results showed that 72.5% of the samples 
were heterozygous for the FMR1  alleles, 29 and 30 CGG repeats were 
the most common alleles. In total, we identified 1 premutation (55-200 
CGG repeats) and 9 intermediate expansions (45-54 CGG repeats), 
no full mutation was found. The incidence of premutation (1:935) and 
intermediate expansion (1:104) in this cohort is comparable to that re -
ported in Caucasian population. Our finding indicates that implement -
ing a Fragile X carrier screening program may be practical in chinese 
population.
P05.30  Non-invazive Prenatal Diagnosis on Plasma DNA from 
RHD Negative Pregnant Women with Free DNA Fetal Kit RhD®
T. Gunel1, I. Kalelioglu2, H. Ermis3, K. Aydınlı4;  
1Istanbul University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul-Prenatal and perinatal genetics11
TURKIYE., Istanbul, Turkey, 32Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul-
TURKIYE., Istanbul, Turkey, 43Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul-TURKIYE, Istanbul, Turkey.
Hemolytic disease of the newborn is the clinical condition in which 
couples Rh blood group antigens are incompatible with each other and 
mother is negative for the antigen whereas father is positive. Fetal 
cells circulate in maternal peripheral blood. The possibility of analyzing 
fetal cells recovered from maternal plasma could provide high sensi -
tivity prenatal diagnosis. In this study using a quantitative real-time 
PCR assay, the presence of RhD gene sequences was evaluated in 
the serum of patients at the onset of pregnancy. For each fetal RhD 
genotyping analysis DNA is extracted from maternal plasma. The pres -
ence of fetal RhD gene in the plasma DNA is detected by real-time 
PCR amplification of two different segments of thr RhD gene (exon 7 
and 10). Each amplicon is revealed with specific taqman probes. Our 
current findings accuracy of fetal RhD genotyping on maternal plasma 
using a  Free DNA Fetal Kit RhD®
P05.31  Gene expression microarray analysis of amniotic fluid 
cells with trisomy 21
M. Volk , A. Maver, B. Peterlin;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Trisomy 21 is the most common cause of mental retardation, although 
the clinical picture is highly variable. The underlying mechanisms for 
the variability in phenotype remain to be determined.
Our hypothesis was that extra copy of chromosome 21 disrupts the 
normal profile of gene expression that alters the normal development 
of fetuses with trisomy 21.
We used Agilent 4x44K whole human genome microarrays to iden -
tify the measure of differences in gene expression variance between 
total RNA from 10 samples with trisomy 21 and 9 samples of euploid 
amniocytes matched with the reference RNA pooled from all above 
mentioned samples.
Analysis of data from microarray experiments has revealed significant 
differences in expression levels of 136 probes with p-values adjusted 
for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg method estimated under 
0.01. This differentially expressed set of probes defined 72 genes up -
regulated and 54 genes downregulated in samples with trisomy 21.
We compared our findings to the results previously reported by two 
studies available at the NCBI GEO repository with accession num -
bers: GSE6283 and GSE10758. Cross -study comparison identified 8 
consistenly significantly altered genes in the intersection of our results 
with the GSE6283 study. This set of candidate genes may represent 
a potential set of biomarkers for DS and will be further tested on inde -
pendent samples of fetal trisomy 21, to evaluate the prediction value 
of the biomarker set.
P05.32  should newborn screening be introduced for Pompe 
disease? Preliminary report on valuation of benefits and risks by 
the general public in the Netherlands
S. S. Weinreich1,2, M. Hagemans2, T. Rigter1,2, C. van El1,2, M. Cornel1, A. van 
der Ploeg2,3, A. Reuser4;  
1Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Lysosomal 
and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department 
of Paediatrics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background : Enzyme replacement therapy is now available for Pompe 
disease. Across the broad phenotypic spectrum of this disease, the 
better the initial condition of the patient, the greater the effect of ther -
apy. The rapidly progressive, infantile form of Pompe disease is cur -
rently diagnosed at a median age of 5 months. To shorten diagnostic 
delay, newborn screening is under consideration.
Primary screening of blood spots is sensitive for Pompe disease, but 
additional clinical and laboratory tests are needed to confirm the di -
agnosis and to distinguish severely affected infantile patients, who 
require immediate treatment, from infants who may go on to develop 
more slowly progressive symptoms, later in childhood or adulthood. 
The need for additional tests means that parents would not be able to 
opt out of learning a diagnosis of ‘probable later onset disease’.
Aim and method: Early prediction of later-onset disease is not a goal 
of newborn screening, but if it were an inevitable by-product, as in the 
case of Pompe disease, policy-makers and governments must weigh the consequences of screening for patients of all phenotypes. This 
study aims to measure the opinion of citizens on this issue, including 
valuation of benefits and harms as well as moral reasoning.
A novel, quantitative questionnaire was developed, including back -
ground information and scenarios of various screening outcomes. After 
pre-testing it has been submitted to a 1500-member consumer panel 
as well as to (parents of) patients with Pompe disease. Descriptive sta -
tistics and regression analysis of the survey results will be presented.
P05.33  Health and functional status of patients symptomatically 
diagnosed with Pompe disease .A case for earlier diagnosis 
through newborn screening?
T. Rigter1,2, S. Weinreich1,2, C. van El1,2, M. Cornel1, A. Reuser3, A. van der 
Ploeg2,4, M. Hagemans2;  
1Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Lysosomal 
and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department 
of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of 
Paediatrics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background:  Since enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe patients 
is most effective when started early and diagnostic methods on dried 
blood spots are improving, attention for newborn screening for Pompe 
disease is increasing.
Aim: Our study aims to depict the health and functional status of 
Pompe patients at the time of symptomatic diagnosis in order to illus -
trate the gains that might be achieved by early diagnosis via newborn 
screening. The outcome of this study may assist policy-makers in their 
consideration of newborn screening for Pompe disease.
Methods : Previously collected clinical data and results of the IPA/Eras -
mus MC Pompe Survey, an international patient oriented question -
naire study, were used. Cross-sectional data of 82 Pompe patients 
(age 0-62) were re-analysed to give a “snapshot” of their health status 
at time of symptomatic diagnosis. Following the ICF classification, we 
selected the following domains: body function and structure, activity, 
participation and contextual factors, taking into account that some 
damage might be irreversible.
Results:  Around time of diagnosis of patients with classic-infantile 
Pompe disease, heart function, hearing, and muscle development and 
strength are severely impaired in most if not all cases. Use of oxygen 
and/or nasogastric tube-feeding was reported in almost 50% of these 
cases.
In juvenile and adult patients, primarily muscle strength and respiratory 
function are impaired at the time of diagnosis. The majority of juvenile 
and adult patients have some form of handicap. About 15% use a walk -
ing device and/or respiratory support by the time diagnosis is made.
A more detailed description will be presented.
P05.34  maternal of Glutatione-s-t ransferase Genes 
Polymorphisms with Placental Insuficiency and Fetal Growth 
Retardation
O. A. Budjukhina1, E. I. Baranovskaya1, N. G. Danilenko2, O. D. Levdansky2;  
1Gomel medical university, Gomel, Belarus, 2Institute of Genetics and Cytology, 
Minsk, Belarus.
Placental insufficiency (PLI) is a key problem of obstetrics. The pur -
pose of research is to study polymorphic alleles of glutathione-S-trans -
ferase genes (GSTT1, GSTM1, GSTP1) at PLI. GST-genes code xe -
nobiotic-conjugating
enzymes of phase II detoxycation system.
Material and methods: 142 pregnant women were surveyed. PCR/
RFLP was used for analysis of deletion genes GSTT1, GSTM1 fre -
quencies and polymorphism of GSTP1 at PLI and control group. Gen -
otype GSTP1 D includes genotypes A/B, A/C, B/B, B/C, C/C.
Results: The frequency of deletions genotypes of GSTT1 or GSTM1 is 
significantly increased in the group with placental insufficiency (53%) 
in comparison with control group (15%). In the group with fetal hy -
poxia the GSTP1 A/C genotype was revealed statistically more often 
(P=0,01), and at intrauterine growth retardation - GSTP1 D genotype 
(p=0,015). The risk of PLI development with the GSTM1 +/GSTT1+ 
GSTP A/A genotype is 11 times lower (OR 0,09, 95 % CI 0,04-0,019). 
The risk of development of fetal growth retardation with GSTM1 +/
GSTT1 + GSTP D genotype is 5 times higher (OR 5,37, 95 % CI 1,05-
27,5).
Genotype GSTP1 A/A has a high level glutathione-S-transpherase ac -Prenatal and perinatal genetics12
tivity of placenta (p=0,029). Genotype GSTP1, which carries alleles 
B and/or C, glutathione-S-transpherase activity of placenta was de -
creased (ZT=2,37, p=0,018). Glutathione-S-transpherase activity of 
placenta doesn’t depend on genotypes GSTM1 and GSTT1. Carrying 
functionally weak alleles GSTP1 D in combination with active smoking 
during pregnancy provokes development of fetus growth retardation 
(βi=82,7, χ2=8,7, p=0,013), in consequence of decrease of glutathi -
one-dependant antioxidant detoxication in placenta.
P05.35  Espression of hsa miRNA 35 in normotensive, 
preeclamptic and HELLP syndrome patients
L. Lazar , B. Nagy, B. Stenczer, J. Rigó;  
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Objective: The aim of our study was to examine whether the expres -
sion of micro RNA 325 (miRNA 325) differs in preeclamptic, HELLP 
syndrome and patients with uncomplicated pregnancy. Study Design: 
Micro RNA was isolated from placenta tissue samples obtained from 
16 preeclamptic, 10 HELLP syndrome and 18 normotensive pregnant 
women. Micro RNA 325 was measured by real-time quantitative PCR. 
Results: Expression of miRNA325 are significantly elevated in uncom -
plicated pregnancies (median: 11.395 vs. 32.460 and 0.001 vs. 0.086 
pg/µl; P < .001), and decreased in HELLP syndrome. The expression 
of miRNA325 was significantly lower in case of preeclampsia com -
pared with HELLP syndrome, and normotensive patients. Expression 
was significantly higher in case of HELLP syndrome compared with 
normotensive patients. Conclusion: The expression of miRNA325 is 
downregulated in case of preeclampsia.
P05.36  Hydrocephaly/anencephaly-polydactyly in four siblings: 
a new locus HYLs2 on chromosome 15
A. Putoux1, M. Gonzales2, S. Thomas1, D. Buzas3, C. Bole-Feysot4, S. Patrier2, 
M. Saint-Frison5, C. Gomes1, L. Rigonnot3, F. Razavi1, N. Joye2, J. Siffroi2, M. 
Vekemans1, T. Attié-Bitach1;  
1Département de Génétique et INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie 
Médicales, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de Gynécologie-
Obstétrique, CH Sud Francilien, Evry, France, 4Plateforme Génomique, 
Fondation IMAGINE, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service 
d’Anatomie Pathologique, CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France.
Hydrolethalus syndrome (HYLS, MIM236680) is a lethal polymalfor -
mative autosomal recessive disorder. It is characterized by the asso -
ciation of postaxial polydactyly of the hands and preaxial polydactyly 
of the feet, micrognathia and central nervous system anomalies which 
are often represented by hydrocephaly with absent midline structures 
and keyhole-shaped defect in the occipital bone. The majority of fetus -
es have been described from Finland with a prevalence estimated at 
1/20000 birth in this population. A recurrent D211G mutation in HYLS1  
is responsible of the Finnish HYLS cases, with a founder effect. To 
date, no other HYLS1  mutation has been found in non-Finnish HYLS 
cases.
Recently, the  HYLS1  ortholog in C. elegans and Xenopus  was shown 
to be necessary for the apical anchoring of centrioles at the plasma 
membrane, phenomenon which is required for ciliary formation. There -
fore, HYLS has joined the group of ciliopathies despite the absence of 
renal abnormality.
Here we report 4 fetuses born from a consanguineous Algerian couple 
with a polymalformative syndrome associating hydrocephaly / an -
encephaly and polydactyly suggestive of HYLS without mutation in 
the HYLS1  gene. Homozygozity mapping using SNP chips Affyme -
trix 250K identified a new locus in this family which we define as the 
HYLS2. Further studies are under way to identify the second gene 
responsible for HYLS. A particular attention is given to genes involved 
in cilia biogenesis.
P05.37  Analysis of MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms 
in embryonic tissues from spontanous abortions
S. Stangler Herodez1, B. Zagradisnik1, A. Zagorac1, K. Zerjavic1, N. Kokalj 
Vokac2,1;  
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI-2000 
Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty, University of Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, 
Slovenia.
Introduction. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene 
C677T and A1298C polymorphisms influence homocysteine metabo -lism which in turn may contribute to the development of neural tube 
defects and unexplained, recurrent embryo losses in early pregnancy. 
In this study we have analyzed the MTHFR C677T and A1298C geno -
type distributions and their associations with compromised fetal viabil -
ity with regard to the presence of aneuploidy.
Methods. In addition to cytogenetic analysis, DNA was extracted from 
spontaneously aborted embryonic tissues and adult controls. Analysis 
included detection of C677T and A1298C mutations with allele specific 
PCR method and molecular karyotyping with multiplex ligation-depen -
dent probe amplification (MLPA).
Results. Comparison of combined MTHFR C677T/A1298C genotype 
distributions between spontaneously aborted embryos, normal and ab -
normal karyotype groups and controls is presented in table.
Conclusions. The present finding indicates decreased viability among 
fetuses carrying MTHFR mutations and a possible selection disad -
vantage among fetuses with increased numbers of mutant MTHFR 
alleles. Spontaneously aborted embryos have a unique distribution of 
MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms and their appearance is 
not related to chromosomal integrity in the abortus. Our final conclu -
sion is that combined common polymorphisms of MTHFR play a role 
in fetal demise. However, the present finding of high prevalence of 
mutated MTHFR genotypes in spontaneously aborted embryos further 
emphasizes the clinical and biological significance of this gene in foe -
tal development.
MTHFR C677T/A1298C genotype distributions
GENOTYPE  
MTHFR 
C677T/A1298CABORTIONS  
(n=333) (%)NORMAL
KARYOTYPE
(n=222) (%)ABNORMAL
KARYOTYPE
(n=111) (%)CONTROLS  
(n=100) (%)
CC/AA 48 (14.4) 31 (14.0) 17 (15.3) 19 (19.0)
CC/AC 30 (9.0) 20 (9.0) 10 (9.0) 13 (13.0)
CC/CC 26 (7.8) 18 (8.1) 8 (7.2) 10 (10.0)
CT/AA 51 (15.3) 37 (16.7) 14 (12.6) 23 (23.0)
CT/AC 53 (15.9) 33 (14.9) 20 (18.0) 16 (16.0)
CT/CC 23 (6.9) 14 (6.3) 9 (8.1) 3 (3.0)
TT/AA 41 (12.3) 29 (13.1) 12 (10.8) 15 (15.0)
TT/AC 38 (11.4) 26 (11.7) 12 (10.8) 1 (1.0)
TT/CC 23 (6.9) 14 (6.3) 9 (8.1) 1 (1.0)
chi square (all samples vs. controls) 46.64, P< 0.001 (df= 8)
chi square (normal karyotype vs. aneuploidy) 10.83, p =0.21 (df= 8)
P05.38  Approach to the study of abortions with isolated limb 
malformation or as part of multiple congenital anomalies.
M. Martinez-Garcia1,2, R. Cardero1,2, M. Rodriguez de Alba1,2, I. Lorda-
Sanchez11,2, C. Ayuso1,2, C. Ramos1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2;  
1Institute of Health Research of the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD)., 
Madrid, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Center of the Network on Rare Diseases 
(CIBERER) ISCII, Madrid, Spain.
BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformation is clinically heteroge -
neous and may manifest itself as an isolated feature or in associa -
tion with a particular syndrome. Providing accurate clinical diagnosis 
of abortions is an arduous task due to the insufficient information 
obtained from ultrasound studies or the absence of anatomical and 
pathological exams.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 15 out of a total 500 abortions referred to 
our service because of limb malformation either with or without other 
multiple congenital anomalies, were selected. Karyotype, QF-PCR, 
MLPA (subtelomeric regions and genes involved in limb malforma -
tions) testing was performed. 7 out of 15 selected DNA samples were 
analysed with the commercially available Agilent 400k microarray.
RESULTS: Numerical chromosomal aberrations were detected in 8 
cases either by Karyotype, QF-PCR or MLPA analysis. Agilent 400k 
microarray analysis showed significant genomic alterations in 5 of the 
7 remaining cases, involving microdeletions and microduplications of 
regions containing genes related to limb malformation. One sample 
was degraded and in the other one non-pathological alterations were 
found.
DISCUSSION: Our results support the discarding of numerical chro -
mosomal anomalies as the first step in the study of abortions with limb 
malformations. Microarrays assays are required for the cases in which 
chromosomal aberration is not the cause of the phenotype. In con -
clusion, both the selection process and the proposed strategy were 
suitable since genomic alterations were found in nearly all the sam -Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
ples. Nevertheless, exhaustive clinical information and further familiar 
molecular studies are essential to establish a more accurate genetic 
diagnosis.
P05.39  Determining the fetal gender and Rhesus D status by 
noninvasive prenatal method - a new approach in Romanian 
prenatal diagnosis field
A. M. Stan1, C. Dragomir1, E. Severin2, L. Savu1;  
1Genetic Lab S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
The prenatal diagnosis procedures currently employed in Romania are 
based exclusively on invasive sampling procedures of fetal cells. The 
discovery of circulating free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has provided 
an alternative to invasive procedures. Our aim was to investigate the 
possibility of using this approach to determine fetal gender and Rhe -
sus D status.
We performed a short study: ten healthy pregnant women were in -
cluded. All ten were RhD negative with RhD positive partners. Seven 
of them were carrying male fetuses. As controls, blood samples from 
RhD negative and positive healthy non-pregnant women and healthy 
males were analyzed. A peripheral blood sample was collected from 
each subject; the plasma was separated by a two-steps centrifugation 
method. The total free cell DNA was extracted using the QIAamp® 
DSP Virus kit according to the SAFE optimized protocol (Legler et al.). 
We determined the fetal gender and RhD status using both conven -
tional and Real-Time PCR by detecting the fetus-specific Y (SRY and 
DYS14 genes) and the RHD gene (exon 7) sequences respectively. 
We monitored the β-globin as a housekeeping gene to determine the 
DNA extraction efficiency.
Conclusions: this non-invasive approach of fetal gender determination 
can be used as a screening procedure in cases at risk for inheriting 
an X-linked recessive disorder; the RHD gene detection can eliminate 
the unnecessary administration of anti-D immunoglobulin to pregnant 
women with RhD negative fetuses. We are able to detect fetal DNA in 
maternal plasma, with the possibility of extending this study to single 
gene disorder detection.
P05.40  implementation of One-stop-clinic for Risk Assessment 
of chromosomal abnormalities in the first trimester in the Czech 
Republic (OscAR)
I. Dhaifalah1,2, V. Curtisova1,2;  
1Department of Human Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Fakultní nemocnice 
Olomouc, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Center of Fetal Medicine, Regional Hospital, 
Zlin, Czech Republic.
Prenatal diagnosis encompasses all measures of disease prevention 
from mass screening programs and use of new technologies to or -
ganizational and support systems used in the delivery of heath care. 
The unwillingness to depart form old and tested methods can prevent 
an introduction of new methods, even though they are proven to be 
superior to the old ones.
Czech doctors are free to select technologies for diagnosing and treat -
ing patients. The selection is usually based on recommendations pub -
lished by medical societies. The most practiced strategy for prenatal 
screening is a triple test (TT). Women with a positive TT and those 
over 35 years of age undergo amniocentesis with a possible late ter -
mination of pregnancy.
We present our experience in shifting prenatal screening of aneuploi -
dies from 2nd to the 1st trimester in a large university hospital and a 
large regional hospital in the Czech Republic. Our decision to change 
the method of screening was based on the published data and a one 
year pilot study which we run at the department. A minimum invest -
ment was made to purchase the software (Astraia) and a blood ana -
lyzer (Kryptor). We started to book pregnant women for ultrasound 
examination in the first trimester and substituted triple test with first 
trimester biochemical screening. Anomaly scan including screening of 
the heart was organized for 20-22 weeks of pregnancy. For women 
who screened positive we immediately progressed to CVS and used 
PCR for the diagnosis of aneuplodies, with results available in less 
than 36 hours. Confirmed pathological cases were terminated accord -
ing to the wishes of the women.
We started the clinic in January 2004 in the University Hospital (Olo -
mouc) and in October 2007 in the Regional Hospital (Zlin). So far we 
screened about 18.000 pregnancies and detected 51 cases of trisomy 21 and 67 cases of other chromosomal abnormalities. Our false posi -
tive rate is 3,5% and detection rate for trisomy 21 is 98%.
Shifting the strategy of prenatal screening required only minimum 
investment in terms of money, and some reorganization of existing 
resources including manpower. The new screening method is very 
well accepted by women and compares very favorably with existing 
screening methods which have much lower detection rates and much 
higher false positive rate.
P05.41  Birth of a healthy baby boy after microsatellite PcR-
based preimplantation genetic diagnosis of a reciprocal 
chromosomal translocation
S. S. Chong1,2, S. F. Loh3, E. B. Prasath3, A. S. C. Tan1,2, M. L. H. Chan3, W. C. 
Tan2, G. H. Yeo1;  
1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University 
Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 3KK Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, 
Singapore, Singapore.
Carriers of balanced chromosome translocations usually do not show 
any adverse phenotypic effects other than experiencing difficulty es -
tablishing and maintaining a pregnancy, due to the high incidence of 
unbalanced karyotypes in their gametes. Preimplantation Genetic Di -
agnosis (PGD) can improve pregnancy and live birth rates by identify -
ing only karyotypically balanced embryos for transfer. Currently, PGD 
of unbalanced translocations relies mainly on interphase fluorescence 
in situ  hybridization (FISH) of blastomeres. Limitations of this tech -
nique include overlapping signals, dual signals due to replicated DNA, 
stochastic probe hybridization failures, and lost blastomeres, result -
ing in either misdiagnosis or uninterpretable data. We describe an al -
ternative microsatellite PCR-based strategy for PGD of unbalanced 
chromosomal translocations. PGD was performed on a karyotypically 
normal woman and her husband, who carries a balanced transloca -
tion between chromosomes 12 and 22 [t(12;22)(p11.2;q11.2)]. Twenty 
oocytes were recovered after ovarian stimulation, 13 fertilized after in -
tracytoplasmic sperm injection, and 8 developed sufficiently for blasto -
mere biopsy. Blastomeres isolated from Day 3 embryos were subjected 
to a single-round multiplex-PCR amplification of microsatellite markers 
mapping to chromosome bands 12p13.2, 12q21.33, and 22q13.2. 
Three embryos were chromosomally balanced, four were unbalanced, 
and one showed discordant results in the two isolated blastomeres, 
suggestive of somatic mosaicism. Two chromosomally balanced em -
bryos were transferred on day 4 and a singleton pregnancy, with 46 XY 
normal karyotype as confirmed by amniocentesis, ensued resulting in 
the birth of a healthy baby boy. This PCR-based strategy represents a 
viable alternative to FISH-based PGD testing of chromosomal translo -
cations that may be preferred under certain situations.
P05.42  Neonatal screening for phenylketonuria in Kazakhstan
D. N. Salimbaeva , G. S. Svyatova, M. Orasgalieva, G. M. Berezina, Z. S. 
Makhmutova;  
The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan.
Since 2006 year the national program of neonatal screening for phenyl -
ketonuria (PKU) and congenital hypothyroidism was introduced in Ka -
zakhstan. In 2006-2009 years 446 348 newborns were studied for PKU. 
The middle scope of neonatal screening in Kazakhstan was 77%.
The program of neonatal screening revealed 19 newborns with PKU, 
that in further was conduct molecular-genetic researches in PAH 
gene.
The evaluation of genetic polymorphism, specters and rates of muta -
tions in PAH gene in Kazakhstan showed that our population has a dif -
ferent from other world population by mutations specter of PAH gene. 
More of PKU patients were compound- heterozygous that had more 
accepted R408W mutation  or R261Q, IVS10nt546, IVS12nt1 muta -
tions or other unknown and undefined earlier mutations. The V245V  
polymorphism was revealed in 7 exon of PAH gene (frequency of mu -
tation is 0,20), that didn’t conduct to change of PAH protein. In health 
control group R408W  and R261Q  mutations PAH gene didn’t reveal, 
that was evidence of low rate of heterozygous carriers these mutations 
in Kazakhstan population. Accounting ethnic structure of population 
frequency of PKU was 0,69 for 100 000 population by kazakh and 
1,56 for 100 000 population by russian.Consequently, reveal ethnic 
feature of alleles of PAH gene distribution in Kazakhstan allowed to 
accounting population features conduct molecular-genetic diagnostic Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
for PKU, and introduce neonatal screening allow to opportunely reveal 
and diagnose diseases before clinic manifestation.
P05.43  Do parents in ireland understand the Newborn screening 
test?
B. Ryan, K. Scully , M. Durand, S. Kimura, Y. Al Shatti, A. Murphy, J. Meehan, 
E. Roche, H. Hoey;  
Department of Paediatrics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction: The National Newborn Screening Programme was intro -
duced in Ireland in 1966. It currently screens for phenylketonuria, ma -
ple syrup urine disease, galactosemia, homocystinuria and congenital 
hypothyroidism. Almost all of the nearly 70,000 babies born annually 
in Ireland participate in the newborn screening programme, yet the 
impression is that parents in general have a limited understanding of 
the purpose of the test.
Aim: Our aim was to determine if Irish parents understand the newborn 
screening test.
Methods: A questionnaire assessing knowledge on the screening test 
was administered to 200 parents of children attending a paediatric 
hospital during October 2009. A qualitative grading system was estab -
lished and applied to assess parental knowledge:
Grading of Parental Knowledge
Grade Knowledge
0 Did not know if child was screened
1 No/inaccurate knowledge
2 Knowledge of metabolic/screening aspects of test
3 Knowledge of principles of screening & name a specific disease
4 Knowledge of principles of screening & name 3 diseases
5 Global understanding of screening & name all diseases
Results Summary
n=200
151 mothers, 49 fathers, 1 grandmother
175 Irish, 25 non-Irish
Age Ranges
Age<12
 months12-24 
months2-3 
years4-6 
years7-11 
years12-18 
years
Number 24 24 30 44 44 34
Overall Grading of Parental Knowledge
Grade % Number of Parents
0 3 6
1 75 151
2 14 29
3 6 11
4 1 2
5 <1 1
Conclusion: Despite the fact that almost every Irish parent allows their 
child to have the newborn screening test done there seems to be little 
knowledge about its significance. Does this reflect inadequate informa -
tion prior to the test, the circumstances at the time of testing or trust in 
the health care system?
P05.44  study of imprinted genes expression PHLDA2  and 
PEG10  in spontaneous abortions
S. Dória1, M. Sousa2,3, S. Fernandes1, C. Ramalho4,5, O. Brandão6, A. Matias4,5, 
A. Barros1, F. Carvalho1;  
1Dept. of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal, 2Lab 
.Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar, University of Porto, 
Portugal, 3Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, 
Portugal, 4Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital São João, Porto, 
Portugal, 5Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal, 6Departmentof 
Pathology, Hospital São João, Porto, Portugal.
Genomic imprinting is defined as an epigenetic modification that inac -
tivates one allele of a gene in a parent-of-origin-dependent manner. 
Current research on foetal control growth has focused on genes that 
display imprinted expression. Miscarriage in the general reproductive 
population is very frequent and other genetic causes beyond chromo -
somal abnormalities could be involved in spontaneous abortions (SA), 
such as variations of expression in imprinted genes particularly those related to foetal or placental growth. PHLDA2  a maternally expressed 
gene, and PEG10  a paternally expressed gene, are known to play 
roles in foetal growth and placental development.
Quantitative Real Time PCR using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays 
was performed to evaluate the gene expressions patterns of PHLDA2 
and PEG10 genes in 35 foetal/placental samples from SA. Two house -
keeping genes GAPDH and ACTB were used as controls. The results 
were analysed by REST 2009 software showed that PHLDA2  gene 
was upregulated in the first trimester and both genes were upregulated 
in the second trimester.
Data from literature has implicated PHLDA2  as a gene potentially more 
active at early gestational ages. According to the “parental conflict” 
theory, maternal expressed genes restrict growth, whereas paternally 
expressed genes enhance growth. It would be expected that in intra -
uterine growth restriction cases, PEG10 would be downregulated. The 
majority of our cases were idiopathic SA, so upregulation or downregu -
lation of a gene according to the “parental conflict” is not predictable.
As far as we know this is the first study presenting data from human 
imprinted gene expression in SA cases.
P05.45  Polymorphisms of renin-angiotensin system and the 
risk of placental insufficiency among women of the Republic of 
tatarstan
L. Sungatullina , O. Kravtsova;  
Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation.
One of the main reasons of pregnancy and birth complications, which 
can lead to perinatal morbidity and mortality, is pathology of fetoplacen -
tal complex. The most wide-spread pathology is placental insufficiency 
(PI), accompanied by hypoxia and intrauterine growth restriction and 
complicates almost all pregnancy diseases. The main mechanism un -
derlying PI involves endothelial dysfunction that leads to disbalance of 
the metabolism among fetal and maternal organisms.
We investigated the association between polymorphisms of renin-an -
giotensin system and the risk of PI among women of the Republic of 
Tatarstan. We compared 90 women with PI to 80 women with a normal 
pregnancy and evaluated them for the following genetic variants: A-
20C, M235T and T174M polymorphisms of the angiotensinogen gene 
and G2350A polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
gene.
Genomic DNA was extracted from samples of whole blood in accor -
dance with standard phenol-chloroform method. These polymorphisms 
were genotyped using RFLP-PCR analysis.
We also quantified concentrations of cell-free DNA from maternal 
plasma, newborn baby’s plasma and amniotic liquid. Cell-free DNA 
was obtained from plasma using the Lytech DNA Kit and measured 
on spectrophotometer NanoDrop 1000. It is shown that amniotic liquid 
and maternal plasma can be used as an accessible biological marker 
to research cell-free DNA with the aim of PI diagnostic.
P05.46  Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic and metabolic Disorders-the saudi Experience
A. I. Al-Aqeel ;  
Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with the first cousin 
marriages accounting for 60-70% of all marriages. Given the difficul -
ties in management of genetic disorders, reproductive option for fami -
lies affected with genetic diseases in Saudi Arabia is often limited to 
PGD which is permissible under the law and religion whereas prenatal 
diagnosis with the intent of termination of pregnancy is neither widely 
practiced nor socially accepted, although it is accepted under certain 
conditions.
KFSH&RC has been offering PGD for monogenic and chromosomal 
disorders, since 2001. A total of 45 pregnancies initiated. Of which, 25 
healthy babies were born, 13 pregnancies are ongoing and 7 pregnan -
cies were either biochemical or ended up with abortion.
In all these families PGD was undertaken using fluorescent PCR (F-
PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single cell, or Multiple 
Displacement Modification (MDA) to amplify the whole genome from 
a single cell. A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer of one het -
erozygous and one/or normal embryo and prenatal diagnosis by CVS 
confirmed a normal pregnancy. This is the first report of successful 
PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia, and the Muslim 
world.Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
P05.47  Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in 
Republic of moldova
M. L. Sprincean , V. Nour, V. Secrieru, E. A. Halabudenco, N. I. Barbova, M. S. 
Stratila;  
National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, 
Moldova, Republic of.
High frequency of chromosomal abnormalities at pregnant women 
of risk group with severe obstetrical anamnesis, recurrent abortions, 
miscarriages, stopped pregnancies in evolutions, determine early ap -
plying of non-invasive and invasive techniques of prenatal diagnosis. 
Screening tests for diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities executed 
in necessary time during pregnancy could prevent born of children with 
severe and major malformations and mental deficiencies. Prenatal di -
agnosis procedures as ultra-sonography (fetal nuchal translucency 
(NT)), biochemical screening (evaluation of maternal plasma level of 
alfa fetoproteine (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in 
maternal serum) and cytogenetic analyses, are necessary for complex 
investigation during medico-genetic counseling.
Research included a group of 1648 cytogenetically, biochemically and 
ecographically examined pregnant women in the period 2007-2009. In 
1314 cases was applied amniocentesis. Karyotyping applied in high-
risk pregnancies at 16-18 weeks represents the most informative diag -
nostic method for detecting Down syndrome and other chromosomal 
abnormalities. In 72% of examined cases were detected maternal age 
and markers for chromosomal anomalies, decreased levels of alpha 
fetoprotein. Abnormalities were detected in 9 -12 % of examined cas -
es.
Conclusion: Non-invazive prenatal diagnosis using biochemical analy -
ses (AFP) and ultra-sonographic markers (fetal nuchal translucency 
(NT) at 10 to 13(+6) weeks of gestation) during first trimester of preg -
nancy has a high sensitivity associated with a detection rate of 95% for 
a false positive rate of 5%.
P05.48  A de novo prenatal diagnosis of Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis in a 45,XY,t(Y;21) foetus: an example of a 
cytogenetic-molecular integrated laboratory.
M. Fenollar-Cortés1, M. Rodríguez-de-Alba2,3, L. Soriano-Guillén4, I. Lorda-
Sańchez2,3, B. Gil-Fournier5, J. Díez-Racasens6, C. Ayuso2,3, M. Trujillo-
Tiebas2,3;  
1Hospital Clínicos San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 2Genetics Department of the 
Institute of Health Research of the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, 
Spain, 3Biomedical Research Center of the Network on Rare Diseases 
(CIBERER) ISCII, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Pediatrics. Fundación 
Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 5Genetics Department. Hospital de Getafe., 
Madrid, Spain, 6Department of Gynecology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz., Madrid, 
Spain.
We present a case of prenatal diagnosis of a 45,XY,t(Y;21)(p11;p11).
ish der (Y;21)(p11;p11)(CEPY+,SRY+,D21Z1+) by karyotype in a am -
niotic fluid sample of a 32-year-old G1P0 woman at 21 weeks of ges -
tation because of an hyperecogenic focus in the mitral valve. Parent‘s 
karyotypes were normal. Molecular studies of SALSA MLPA P018 al -
lowed to characterize the deletion limits that encompassed the SHOX 
gene and the 3‘ SHOX region adjacent in the foetus sample showing a 
deletion from 9333-L10292 to 5648-L06218 probe (from Xptel at less 
1200kb). MLPA analyses in both parents were normal. A further study 
with microsatellite analysis (DXYS10092, DXYS10093, DXYS10096; 
DXYS233, DXYS6814) in the family confirmed and delimited the dele -
tion until 800-850pb in the foetus sample. According to these results, 
parents received a genetic counselling referred to a posible Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) in the fetus. LWD is characterised by a dis -
proportionate short stature with predominantly mesomelic limb short -
ening and Madelung deformity of the arm. Females tend to be more 
affected than males.After genetic counselling, the couple elected to 
continue with the pregnancy. A ultrasonography evaluation at 26 weeks 
revealed an abnormal position of both wrists. A boy was born sponta -
neous at 39 gestation‘s week with 53 cm, 3700g and no apparently 
skeletal abnormalities. A clinical follow up is under way. We will have 
new clinical signs in a new reevaluation by a medical endocrinologist 
in a few days when he will be 6 months old.P05.49  Cytogenetic findings in 700 consecutive amniocentesis
C. GUG1,2, G. Budau1, B. Muresan3, M. Munteanu1, V. Simedrea3, N. Hrubaru1, 
D. Chiriac1, T. Cioata1, C. Olaru4, D. Grigoras1, G. Furau5, L. Antal6, Z. Schmidt7;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 
2Genetics Medical Center „Dr. Cristina Gug“, Timisoara, Romania, 3Obstetrics-
Gynecology „Bega“ Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 4Obstetrics-Gynecology 
„Dumitru Popescu“ Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 5Department of Obstetrics-
Gynecology “Vasile Goldis” West University, Arad, Romania, 6Department of 
Obstetrics-Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oradea, Romania, 
7Obstetrics-Gynecology Private Practice, Deva, Romania.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the frequency and structure of 
prenatal detected chromosome abnormality. In this paper we report 
results of 700 fetal karyotypes performed by cultured amniocytes. The 
cytogenetic analysis with GTG banding of amniotic fluid cells revealed 
17 aneuploidies (2,42%) and 23 structural abnormalities (2.9%). Each 
cases has received genetic counseling. We found trisomy 21 (11 cas -
es) that includes omogen trisomy 21 (8 cases), mosaic trisomy 21 (3 
cases) one of them with 2 celular clones 47,XX+21/46,XX, another 
with 3 celular clones 47,XY+21/48,XYY+21/46,XY and the other of 
chimera 47,XX+21/46,XY. Other autosomal trisomies that were found 
are the following: omogen trisomy 18 (1 case), mosaic trisomy 18 (1 
case), omogen trisomy 13 (1 case) and mosaic trisomy 22 (1 case). 
Poliploidia was found in the form of the triploidy 69,XXX (2 cases). We 
found 2 Robertsonian translocations: 1 case maternal trob(13;22) and 
1 case de novo trob(21;21). We found also balanced translocations: 
maternal t(7;10)(p22;p12.1) 2 cases in the same family and mater -
nal t(17;20)(q12;q11) 1 case. Pericentric inversions were showed in 
10 cases: maternal inv(10) 1 case, maternal inv(9) 3 cases, paternal 
inv(9) 5 cases and de novo inv(9) 1 case. Other structural abnormali -
ties includes: duplication dup(10)(q22.2-ter) due to maternal balanced 
translocations (4;10)(q22.2;q22.2-ter) 1 case, ring chromosome r(6) 1 
case, marker chromosome 2 cases. We found also 4 cases of dele -
tions: del(7)(q21-ter) 1 case, del(1)(p31.2-ter) 1 case, del(1)(q32.1-ter) 
1 cases, del(X)(q26-ter) 1 case. The karyotype using classical banding 
is an informative method able to detect chromosomal abnormalities.
P05.50  Prenatal screening in the 1st and 2nd trimesters of 
pregnancy.
D. T. Tursunova , N. A. Karetnikova, V. A. Bakharev;  
Research Center for obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Objectives: A comparative analysis of the results of combined screen -
ing in the 1st and 2nd trimesters of pregnancy.
Materials and Methods: There were 304 women examined at 9-13 and 
16-22 weeks of gestation by way of booth invasive and noninvasive 
methods. The protocol of examination included ultrasound scanning, 
detection of -HCGB and PAPP-A serum markers in the 1st trimester, 
and of HCG, AFP, and estriol in the 2nd trimester, computer processing 
with Life Cycle in the 1st trimester and PRISCA in the 2nd one; invasive 
prenatal procedures.
Results: Dynamic assessment of 42 risk group patients (13.8%) in the 
1st trimester revealed four cases (9.5%) with fetal pathology: Down s 
syndrome (2), Edward s (1) and Patau s (1) syndromes. There were no 
chromosomal pathology of the fetuses of 64(21.3%) risk group women 
found in the 2nd trimester. All kariotype changes were registered in the 
1st trimester.
Conclusion: A high rate of false-positive findings testified of the fact 
that none of any noninvasive means of diagnosis of fetal chromosomal 
pathology had an absolute specificity.
Screening programmes should be applied preferably in the 1st trimes -
ter. It is not expedient to perform dynamic follow-up in low risk group. 
Noninvasive screening in the 2nd trimester must be carried out only in 
case of its absence in the1st trimester. In high risk group invasive meth -
ods must be considered in the 1st trimesters of pregnancy. At present 
only invasive methods of diagnosis are important to make a decision 
of the tactics of pregnancy management.Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
P05.51  sequential contingent screening and ultrasound - 
effective screening?
E. Saue1, R. Zordania2;  
1East-Tallinn Central Hospital, TALLINN, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children`s Hospital, 
TALLINN, Estonia.
Background: Prenatal screenings tests of pregnancy is targeted to 
select women having high risk of aneuploidy. Sequential contingent 
screening is based on I trimester screening results. According to com -
bined risk three categories can be calculated and different follow up 
tactics can be used.
Methods: Maternal serum markers were measured I (fb-hCG, PAPP-A) 
and II trimester (AFP, hCG, uE3), in keeping with at 11-13 and 15-17 
weeks of pregnancy. Gestation age, length of the fetus (CRL 45-84 
mm), nuchal translucency  (NT) - was determined during the first tri -
mester by ultrasound investigation. Serum markers were tested using 
the Immulite 2000 automated chemiluminescent immunoassay meth -
od and Prisca risk calculation software for statistical risk calculations. 
High, intermediate and low risk groups of pregnant women were se -
lected according to I trimester combined test.
Results: Retrospectively data of 1000 women (February to July 2009) 
were analyzed using I and II trimester screening results. 915 were 
younger women (<37 years) and 85 were older women (>37 years). 
About 55% of tested women in the young age group had normal I 
trimester screening results (low risk), high and intermediate risk had 
all women in the elder age group. During this period fetuses with an -
euploidy were detected in 6 of 1000 pregnancies: 4 aneuploidy in the 
young age group and 2 in the old age group.
Conclusion: The combination of sequential contingent screening with 
ultrasound of markers is flexible, cost effectiveness and implementabil -
ity of early serum screening.
P05.52  Perspectives in prenatal genetic testing
D. Vlad1, V. Dumitrascu2, C. Gug3, C. Gurban4, B. Barac2, C. Vlad5;  
1Smart Lab Diagnostics, Timisoara, Romania, 2Victor Babes University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Pharmacology Department, Timisoara, Romania, 
3Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Timisoara, Romania, 4Victor Babes University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, Romania, 5Private Dentistry 
Unit, Timisoara, Romania.
Prenatal testing has proved extremely valuable for the prevention of 
generic disorders. However, it has a number of disadvantages, such 
as invasive procedures and delayed results.
The FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridisation) method and the ampli -
fication of short tandem repeat sequences through the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) of a DNA fragment have both reduced the time of 
issuing the results from 2-3 weeks to 1-2 days.
A more recent possibility allows the results to be issued in several 
hours. Real-time multiplex PCR amplification and the quantitative am -
plification of the DNA fragment discriminate with high sensitivity the 3:2 
or 2:1 ratio between the copies of homologous chromosomes in the 
case of numerical chromosome anomalies. However, the method used 
to collect fetal tissue samples is an invasive one.
The development of techniques to isolate fetal DNA from the circulat -
ing maternal blood may eliminate the invasive procedures. Placental 
free (extracellular) DNA can be isolated from maternal plasma and 
PCR-amplified. In the 11-17 weeks of pregnancy, about 1-5% of the 
free DNA in the maternal circulation comes from the fetus, while the 
rest comes from the mother. This method has 95-100% specificity, but 
can detect only fetal DNA sequences of paternal origin, because the 
maternal sequences interfere with the maternal DNA. The fetal DNA 
sequences in maternal circulation are shorter than the total circulating 
DNA.
Prenatal screening and diagnosis methods improve the health of the 
population.
P05.53  informative value of biochemical screening tests for the 
detection of major numerical chromosomal abnormalities by 
means of QF-PCR.
C. Curcio, C. Lodrini, A. Biasi, C. Melles, D. A. Coviello ;  
Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
We report here the screening results of 1135 fetal samples (785 amni -
otic fluids and 350 chorionic villi) using Quantitative Fluorescent Poly -merase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR), a rapid assay for the detection of 
major aneuploydies of 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes.
These cases were selected according to the following indications for 
the invasive procedure: biochemical screening tests performed on ma -
ternal serum (bitest or tritest) and increased nuchal translucency.
Fifty-six women had positive biochemical screening: 36 bitest (dos -
age of hCG and PAPP-A) and 20 tritest (computer-based analysis of 
AFP, hCG, fE3 and maternal age). Our analysis revealed 2 trisomies 
21 among patients with positive bitest (PPV 5.7%) and 3 trisomies 21 
among patients with positive tritest (PPV 15%). These data highlight 
the low informative value of biochemical screenings for the detection 
of chromosomal abnormalities.
The analysis of samples with indication of increased translucency 
(measurement of the thickness of translucent area below the skin in 
the back of the fetal neck) detected 18 pathological samples with a 
PPV of 20.7%, showing less false positives compared to the biochemi -
cal screening.
All the results of QF-PCR were concordant with karyotype analysis
Our results indicate that the biochemical screening has a high number 
of false positives inducing a large number of women toward a useless 
invasive procedure.Before performing a biochemical screening every 
pregnant woman should be adequately informed about the high rate 
of false positives of the tests that need to be confirmed by an invasive 
procedure with a probable negative outcome.
P05.54  Prenatal detection of selected aneuploidies - comparison 
of a CE marked IVD commercial test kit and a home-made QF-
PcR assay
S. Andonova , R. Raynova, S. Bichev, I. Kremensky;  
National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Since 2000 more than 5000 samples were analyzed in National Ge -
netic Laboratory with QF-PCR technique. Our home-made assay in -
cludes 11 polymorphic STR markers (4 located on chromosome 21, 4 
- on chromosome 18 and 3 - on chromosome 13) which are routinely 
used in our practice. As an alternative, recently we have successfully 
tested the commercial kit for the analysis of aneuploidy by Aneufast 
TM (Genomed Ltd). In this preliminary study we have evaluated and 
compared the level of informativeness of the commercial CE marked 
in vitro diagnostic test kit and our home-made assay. To determine 
the heterozygosity of the STRs in both assays we have included the 
results from two groups of 250 prenatal samples analysed by two com -
binations of markers. We found that Aneufast was technically easier to 
use and the informativeness is high. However, the results showed that 
the home-made combination of markers is more suitable for prenatal 
detection of selected aneuploidies in Bulgaria.
Comparison of heterozigosity and
informativeness of both assays
Heterozygosity levels:
Aneufast TM kit Home-made set
Markers on: lowest highest lowest highest
Chromosome 21 68.9 % 84.3 % 71.2 % 86.8 %
Chromosome 18 67.7 % 86.0 % 63.8 % 91.2 %
Chromosome 13 78.2 % 84.6 % 76.6 % 84.5 %
Informative results for more than 
2 markers per chromosome:
Combination of markers on: Aneufast TM kit Home-made set
Chromosome 21 77.9 % 79.9 %
Chromosome 18 74.8 % 77.1 %
Chromosome 13 81.2 % 81.8 %
P05.55  indications for invasive prenatal procedures and 
aneuploidies detected by QF-PCR analysis
R. Raynova , S. Andonova, S. Bichev, Y. Petrova, S. Milusheva, I. Kremensky;  
National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Sofia, Bulgaria.
First- and second- trimester serum screening (SS) together with ul -
trasound 2D/3D are widespread non-invasive methods for antenatal 
screening for common autosomal aneuploidies. Pregnant women with 
calculated high SS risk or/and abnormal ultrasound findings are coun -
seled to proceed to amniocentesis. The amniotic fluids routinely are 
analyzed by cytogenetic or/and DNA analysis. A total of 17 229 blood 
serums from pregnant women were investigated in 2009 for first- and Prenatal and perinatal genetics17
second- trimester SS. An increased risk for chromosomal aneuploi -
dies was calculated for 1 224 (7%) of them. During the same period 
1 289 women with different indications (including increased risk from 
SS, abnormal ultrasound markers and/or advanced maternal age) 
were referred to our department for prenatal detection of chromosomal 
aneuploidies by DNA analysis. Samples were investigated by QF-PCR 
assay on automatic sequencer. We have found pathological results 
for 46 samples (3.5%): 22 were found to be with trisomy 21, 11 with 
trisomy18, 2 with trisomy 13, 3 with XXX, 4 with XXY, 2 with XO and 2 
with triploidy. Positive SS was indication for amniocentesis in 23 (50%) 
of the pathological cases, abnormal ultrasound findings - in 14 (30%), 
advanced maternal age - in 7 (15%) and positive family history - in 2. 
Our 10-years experience shows that DNA analysis for chromosomal 
aneuploidies is appropriate when the indications for invasive prena -
tal diagnosis are positive maternal serum screening or/and abnormal 
ultrasound markers. When advanced maternal age or positive family 
history for chromosomal disorders is present DNA analysis should be 
combined with cytogenetic analysis
P05.56  the use of a novel Real-time PcR assay for rapid 
prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome
M. Behrooz Aghdam1,2, A. R. Kamyab2, M. Hashemi1, E. Shamsian1, F. 
Shakrokhi2, R. Mahdian2;  
1Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Trisomy 21 is one of the common chromosomal abnormality with fre -
quency of 1/700-1/1000 live birth. Complete trisomy 21 is seen in 95% 
of case. Current diagnosis methods are based on karyotype and FISH 
technique. But these methods have some limitation, such as availability 
of live fetal cells and the need of high technical expertise. Final results 
are achieved in 2-3 weeks. In this study, we have successfully used a 
novel real time PCR assay (TaqMan probe based) for rapid diagnosis 
of trisomy 21. DNA was extracted from 20 normal samples and 25 
trisomy 21 samples using salting out method. A target gene (DSCAM) 
on chromosome 21 critical region and a reference gene (PMP22) on 
chromosome 17 were selected for gene dosage analysis. The primers 
and probes were designed according to ABI guideline using Primer Ex -
press® software. For each sample, the difference between the thresh -
old cycle of DSCAM and PMP22 genes (ΔCt) were determined. Then, 
calibrated ΔCt value (ΔΔCt, sample ΔCt - normal control ΔCt) was 
calculated. The ratio (2 - ΔΔCt) of target gene to reference gene for nor -
mal individuals (1±0.01) and for 21 trisomy cases (1.67±0.16) clearly 
discriminated the two groups. The result of the real time PCR analysis 
was confirmed by the result of karyotyping. Therefore real time PCR is 
a reliable and accurate technique for rapid diagnosis of trisomy 21.
P05.57  Foetal presentation of five Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome 
cases with cREBBP alterations
P. Fergelot1, S. Whalen2, G. Lancelot1, T. Attié-Bitach3, S. Blesson4, S. Charfi5, 
B. Demeer6, B. Doray7, C. Fallet-Bianco8, R. Favre9, M. Gonzales10, N. Joyé10, 
J. Martinovic3, A. Philippe4, M. Portnoï10, F. Razavi3, L. Taine1, B. Arveiler1, D. 
Lacombe1;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale GH Pellegrin CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 
France, 2Département de Génétique GH Pitié-Salpétrière APHP, Paris, France, 
3Service d’Histologie, Embryologie, Cytogénétique GH Necker- Enfants 
Malades APHP, Paris, France, 4Foetopathologie Service de Génétique CHU 
de Tours, Tours, France, 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologique Hôpital Nord 
CHU Amiens Picardie, Amiens, France, 6Génétique Clinique Hôpital Nord 
CHU Amiens Picardie, Amiens, France, 7Fédération de Génétique Hôpital 
de Hautepierre Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 
8Laboratoire de neuropathologie Centre Hospitalier Saint-Anne, Paris, France, 
9Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique CMCO-SIHCUS, Schiltigheim, France, 
10Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie Médicales Hôpital Armand Trousseau 
APHP, Paris, France.
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; OMIM 180849) is an autosomal 
dominant developmental disorder characterised by facial dysmorphism, 
broad thumbs and halluces associated with mental retardation. RSTS 
is caused by mutations in the closely related CREBBP  (60-65%) and 
EP300  genes (3%). About 10% of CREBBP  alterations are deletions. 
RSTS is often diagnosed at birth or during early childhood.
We report on 5 cases of well-documented foetal RSTS. Two cases were 
examined after death in utero at 18 and 35 gestation weeks (GW) and 3 cases after ultrasound abnormalities and termination of pregnancy at 
26, 33+4 and 35 GW. A large gallbladder was detected in 2 cases and 
an unusual severe prenatal microcephaly was seen in one case. Fetal 
autopsy showed that all foetuses had large thumbs and 4 had facial 
dysmorphism. A whole gene  deletion was found in one case. Molecular 
analysis in the 4 remaining cases showed an amino acid deletion in 
exon 30, 2 splicing variants around exon 22, and one frameshift muta -
tion in exon 25. In the latter case, we also identified a duplication of 
at least 50 kilobases extending into the 3’flanking region of  the gene. 
Parent’s DNA sequencing was in favour of de novo  variants.
In conclusion, CREBBP  alterations in foetal RSTS are similar to those 
found in typical RSTS diagnosed in childhood. This report will contrib -
ute to a better knowledge of particular features in foetal RSTS and to 
improvement of this clinical diagnosis in antenatal cases. It shows the 
interest of genotyping, allowing reassuring genetic counselling.
P05.58  Evaluation of 31 selective abortions after counseling
N. Ghasemi1, M. Nasimsobhan2, E. Papary3, S. Miratashi4;  
1Research and Clinical centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences 
university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Forensic Medicine Organization, 
Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Yazd SS medical sciences university, Yazd, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shahed University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
In Iran, induced abortion is a criminal offence except to save the life 
of the mother or keep the family away from OSR and Haraj. OSR and 
Haraj is a condition was explained by the law as “any big problem 
and suffer for Family”. The parliament now gave the list of diseases 
which pregnant women could have an abortion by order of forensic 
medicine.
Two to three percent of infants were born with congenital abnormal -
ity, which mostly now caused by genetic problem. However, investiga -
tion preformed after sonographic detection of central nervous system 
or skeletal anomalies had highest diagnostic yield. From 31 selective 
abortions in Yazd forensic medicine organization from 2006 till now, 
11 cases had fetal severe abnormally and the rest because of mother 
safety. Seven of these 11 cases were diagnosed by sonography and 4 
others by genetic test in amniocentesis. These results show prenatal 
screening is very important even only by sonography and it as one 
of the non-invasive prenatal diagnostic techniques should be used in 
every pregnancy.
P05.59  Neonatal silver-Russell syndrome With the Unique combination of maternal UPD 7 and mosaic t risomy 7
F. Abdelhedi1, A. Lebbar1, L. Cuisset2, V. Tsatsaris3, G. Viot3, A. Menard1, J. 
Sauto1, L. Druart4, J. M. Dupont1;  
1UF de Cytogénétique; APHP, Hôpital Cochin; Université Paris Descartes, 
Paris, France, 2Service de Biochimie Génétique; APHP, Hôpital Cochin; 
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Maternité Port Royal; APHP, Hôpital 
Cochin; Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire Biomnis, Paris, 
France.
Trisomy 7 mosaicism has been diagnosed at least eleven times during 
the prenatal period by amniocentesis. Among these cases, three were 
associated with minor phenotypic abnormalities that can be observed 
in Silver-Russel syndrome (SRS). Only one of these cases had mater -
nal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (UPD7).
We present the second case of prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 7 mosaic 
fetus associated with UPD7 (10% of SRS). A 43-year-old woman un -
derwent amniocentesis at 19 weeks’ gestation because of advanced 
maternal age. Fourteen percent of the colonies (8 colonies out of 17) 
analyzed displayed trisomy 7 (47,XY,+7); whereas 86% of the colo -
nies demonstrated a normal karyotype. Maternal UPD7 was not tested 
during prenatal period. Sonographic examination noted intra-uterine 
growth retardation at 23 weeks’ gestation. The parents were counseled 
and they were informed about the risk of SRS and they nevertheless 
decided to continue with the pregnancy. The medical examination at 
birth noted dysmorphic facial features of SRS without body asymmetry, 
hypotonia and hypospadias. DNA analysis with polymorphic markers 
showed a maternal heterodisomy of chromosome 7. Chorionic villus 
tissue culture showed trisomy 7 in forty percent of analysed cells. The 
karyotype obtained from lymphocytes was normal (46,XY). Analysis of 
urinary cells showed a mosaic trisomy 7 (16% of cells). These findings 
suggest that mosaic trisomy 7 may have been overlooked in some 
cases of UPD7. In this regard the urinary cells represent one tissue 
that can be easily studied, looking for this mosaic trisomy.Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
P05.60  molecular genetic and cytogenetic analysis of whole 
genome amplified rare single cells in a setting mimicking 
microchimerism
T. Kroneis , J. B. Geigl, M. Auer, E. M. Hoffmann, T. Schwarzbraun, P. Ulz, G. 
Dohr, P. Sedlmayr;  
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
Strategies for single cell analysis in cell based non-invasive prenatal 
diagnosis have to meet two purposes: first, the unambiguous identifi -
cation of the respective cell and second, the analysis of the target of 
interest. Current strategies rely on various combinations of immunocy -
tochemistry, immunofluorescence, and fluorescence in situ  hybridiza -
tion (FISH) or PCR for assignment of the status of candidate fetal cell. 
Despite recent methodical refinements these techniques are restricted 
to either fetal trisomic or male cells or few DNA loci specific for the 
fetal genome.
To overcome the limitations resulting from analysing the DNA of a single 
cell we implemented isothermal whole genome amplification (iWGA) 
on the single cell level for subsequently enabling both molecular and 
cytogenetic analysis from one and the same cell. An aliquot of cells of 
the colon carcinoma line HT-29 spiked into periperal blood mononu -
clear cells was immunostained for cytokeratin, nuclear counterstaining 
was done using TO-PRO-3 for establishing a group of double-positive 
candidate fetal cells. Single candidate cells were microdissected and 
forwarded to low-volume on-chip iWGA. Aliquots of the iWGA products 
were forwarded to DNA fingerprint analysis for confirmation of the ge -
nomic identity, sequencing, and metaphase comparative genome hy -
bridization (mCGH). DNA profiles, sequencing, and mCGH data prove 
our iWGA method to be compatible with analytical methods of a wide 
range of resolution.
P05.61  Genome wide 250k sNP array analysis for diagnosing 
pregnancies with ultrasound anomalies
B. H. W. Faas , R. Pfundt, I. van der Burgt, A. J. A. Kooper, J. Hehir-Kwa, A. P. 
T. Smits, N. de Leeuw;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
To explore the application of the Affymetrix 250k SNP array platform 
in prenatal diagnosis, we performed array analyses on DNA from 69 
patients with prenatally identified anomalies. DNA was isolated from 
(un)cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi, fibroblasts or blood cells. 
Analyses were performed after TOP (N=35), IUFD (N=15), during 
pregnancy (N=1), or postnatally (N=18). Prenatal karyotypes were re -
ported normal (N=54), balanced (N=1) or unbalanced (N=3) and in 11 
cases culturing was not possible. Parental samples were available to 
study inheritance patterns.
Array analysis revealed de novo (mosaic) CNVs (N=14) or UPDs 
(N=2) in sixteen cases, interpreted as highly likely clinically relevant. In 
three of these, the abnormality had already been reported after routine 
cytogenetic analysis, in nine normal or balanced prenatal karyotypes 
had been reported and in four culturing of cells had not been possible. 
Aberrations inherited from a healthy parent and most likely not clini -
cally relevant were noticed in five cases and CNVs with unclear clinical 
relevance in two cases.
In summary, in 9/55 (16%) cases with normal or balanced prenatal 
karyotypes and in 4/11 (36%) cases with unknown karyotypes, ge -
nome wide SNP array analysis enabled the detection of clinically rel -
evant aberrations that otherwise would have remained undetected, 
whereas in two cases, the clinical relevance of an aberration remained 
unclear. Moreover, in 3/3 cases already identified aberrations could be 
characterized in further detail. We conclude that genome wide SNP 
array analysis is a powerful tool that might replace routine karyotyping 
in diagnosing babies with ultrasound anomalies.
P05.62  molecular karyotyping using sNP-array analysis in 100 
cases of prenatal diagnosis
M. S. Rocca1, L. Esposito2, P. Gasparini1,3, V. Pecile1;  
1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2CBM SCRL, Area Science Park, Trieste, 
Italy, 3Department of Reproduction and Development Science, Trieste, Italy.
Karyotype analysis of cultured cells has been regarded as the gold 
standard for prenatal diagnosis for over 30 years. Since the first ap -
plication of this technique to prenatal testing in the early 1970’s, this 
procedure has proved to be highly reliable for identifying aneuploidies 
and structural rearrangements in foetal cells obtained invasively by ei -ther amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). Although highly 
reliable to identify aneuploidies, as well as large chromosomal rear -
rangements, a significant limitation of this technique is the resolution 
that is > 5-10 Mb. Currently, prenatal diagnosis is reliant on cell culture 
and the reporting of results represents a time of great anxiety for par -
ents during a pregnancy.
In our laboratory we have collected, previous informed consensus, 100 
samples of amniotic fluid for the following indications of examination: 
advanced maternal age, positive screening test, ICSI, eco-evidenci -
ated markers / malformations.
We have used 20 ml of amniotic fluid, taken at 17 week of gestation, 
of which 15 ml were used for karyotype analysis and 5 ml were used 
for SNP-array analysis. The SNP-array analysis has been performed 
with HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip of Illumina. The data have been 
analysed with KaryoStudio software.
In our cohort of 100 samples, the Illumina SNP platform detected these 
imbalances: one duplication >1Mb, three duplication 1Mb,eleven dele -
tions <500 Kb.
We compare the data obtained using SNP-array analysis with karyo -
type analysis.
P05.63  carrier screening for spinal muscular atrophy in t aiwan 
on 107,611 pregnancies during 2005-2009
C. C. Hung1,2, Y. N. Su1,2, S. Y. Lin3,4, C. N. Lee4;  
1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
Background Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most common neu -
romuscular autosomal recessive disorder. The American College of 
Medical Genetics has recently recommended routine carrier screening 
for SMA because of the high carrier frequency (1 in 25-50) as well as 
the severity of the genetic disease. Large studies are needed to deter -
mine the feasibility, benefits, and costs of such a program.
Methods A prospective large population-based cohort study of preg -
nancies was investigated in 25 counties of Taiwan during a 4.5-year 
period, January 2005 through June 2009. Two different validated plat -
forms were used for parallel SMN1 /SMN2  gene quantification: dena -
turing high-performance liquid chromatography and multiplex ligation-
dependent probe amplification. 
Results We found 2,262 individuals with one copy of the SMN1  geno -
type, recognized to be SMA carriers, among the 107,611 pregnancies 
screened. The carrier rate in our population was approximately 1 in 
48 (2.10%). Of these individuals, 47 couples were at high risk for hav -
ing offspring with SMA after testing of partners or spouses 2,038 who 
were also determined to be SMA carriers. Prenatal diagnoses were de -
termined for 43 pregnancies (91.49%), of which 12 (27.91%) fetuses 
were diagnosed with SMA; the prevalence of SMA in our population 
was 1 in 8,968.
Conclusions The main benefit of this program of SMA carrier screen -
ing was to reduce the burden of birth of an affected child. Additionally, 
we determined carrier frequency and genetic risk  to clinical research 
and providing carrier couples genetic services, knowledge as well as 
generic counseling for health care.
P05.64  Prenatal DNA testing of monogenic diseases with a late 
onset in Yakutia
O. G. Sidorova1, S. K. Kononova1, V. L. Izhevskaya2, E. K. Khusnutdinova3;  
1Yakut Research Center of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of 
RAMN, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics 
of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and 
Genetics,Ufa Research centre of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) and myotonic dystrophy (MD), 
neurodegenerative and neuromuscular monogenic diseases with late 
onset, are widespread in the Yakut population (frequency 38.6:100 
000 and 21.3:100 000 respectively). Genetic counseling of 62 preg -
nant women at risk for SCA1 or MD (43 with SCA1 and 19 with MD) 
was carried out in 2002-2009 years. During this period 25 procedures 
of prenatal DNA testing for SCA1 were carried out, in 13 cases results 
of DNA tests were negative and in 12 - were positive. 10 women with Prenatal and perinatal genetics1
positive prenatal DNA test for SCA1 expressed a desire to terminate a 
pregnancy, and 2 women refused to terminate a pregnancy with SCA1 
mutation fetus. 10 procedures of prenatal testing for the MD have been 
carried out; in 7 cases the results of DNA tests were negative. Two 
women from three with positive result of DNA testing refused to termi -
nate a pregnancy and children with congenital form of MD were born 
in both cases.
P05.65  structural chromosomal aberrations in early 
spontaneous abortions
I. Tonkovic Djurisevic , K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, R. Lasan, L. Letica, 
D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
About 15% to 20% of pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion, most -
ly in the first trimester. It is accepted that approximately 50% of early 
fetal loss results from chromosome abnormalities.
Cytogenetic examination was performed by the direct preparation 
method using chorionic villi. Among the 321 karyotyped abortions be -
tween 4 and 13 weeks of gestation, 53,6% chromosomally abnormal 
specimens were found and majority of chromosomal anomalies (90%) 
were numerical.
Structural aberrations of the chromosomes were responsible for 
3,43% of early miscarriages and parental karyotyping is required. In 
6 of 11 habitual abortions with structural changes a familial balanced 
rearrangement was established, that result in an increased recurrence 
risk in future pregnancies. The structural chromosomal abnormalities 
that we encountered were divided into reciprocal chromosomal trans -
locations (4), Robertsonian translocations (4), deletions (2) and iso -
chromosome (1). The subsequent pregnancy outcomes for the three 
women having a reciprocal translocation was normal karyotype after 
amniocentesis. The mean maternal age was 29,8 years and there was 
no positive correlation of advanced maternal age with structural chro -
mosomal aberrations.
Structural chromosomal imbalances were also independent on ges -
tational age, depending of specific chromosomes invoved, genes and 
size of the contained segment.
Cytogenetic analysis of the first trimester spontaneous abortion is use -
ful to identify the reason for the miscarriage and prenatal diagnosis 
should be offered to carriers of a balanced chromosomal rearrange -
ment because it may predispose to offspring with an unbalanced 
karyotype.
P05.66**  Adverse effects of trichothiodystrophy DNA repair and 
transcription gene abnormalities on human fetal and placental 
development
R. Moslehi1, C. Signore2, A. Dzutsev2, J. Troendle2, A. Morgun2, A. Kumar1, J. 
Mills2;  
1State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY, United States, 2National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
Effects of abnormalities in DNA repair and transcription genes in hu -
man prenatal life have never been studied. Based on novel clinical 
observations, we conducted a genetic epidemiologic study to inves -
tigate gestational outcomes associated with abnormalities in TTD 
nucleotide excision repair (NER) and transcription genes, namely, 
XPD, XPB, TTD-A  and TTDN1 . We compared pregnancies resulting 
in TTD-affected offspring (N=24) with respect to abnormalities during 
their antenatal and neonatal periods to population reference values. 
We also analyzed the expression patterns of the four TTD genes in 
normal human tissues. Significantly higher incidence of several se -
vere gestational complications was noted in TTD-affected pregnan -
cies. Compared to reference values, TTD-affected pregnancies were 
significantly more likely to be complicated by hemolysis, elevated liver 
enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome (RR=35.7,95%CI:7.6-
92.5,P=0.0002), elevated mid-trimester maternal serum human chori -
onic gonadotropin (hCG) levels (RR=14.3,95%CI:7.0-16.6,P<0.0001), 
small for gestational age (SGA)<3rd percentile (RR=13.9,95%CI:7.4-
21.1,P<0.0001), preterm delivery (<32 weeks) (RR=12.0,95%CI:4.9-
21.6,P<0.0001), pre-eclampsia (RR=4.0,95%CI:1.6-7.4,P=0.006), and 
decreased fetal movement (RR=3.3,95%CI:1.6-5.2,P=0.0018). Abnor -
mal placental development may explain the constellation of observed 
abnormalities. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the expression pat -
terns of the four TTD genes in normal human tissue. We found high expression of TTD genes in human placenta, above the mean of their 
expression in all organs. Temporal analysis suggested that while XPD, 
XPB and TTDN1  were consistently expressed from 14 to 40 weeks 
gestation, expression of TTDA  was strongly negatively correlated (r=-
0.7,P<0.0001) with gestational age. Our results indicate an important 
role for XPD, XPB, TTDA  and TTDN1  gene products during normal 
human placental and fetal development.
P05.67  A rare association of holoprosencephaly with triploidy in 
second trimester pregnancy-case report
F. M. Nedelea , V. Varlas, L. Turculet, L. Popescu, M. Iliescu, M. Bari, A. Stana, 
G. Peltecu;  
Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania.
Triploidy is one of the most frequent chromosomal aberrations found in 
first trimester spontaneous abortions. Although majority of triploid con -
ceptions are lost in first trimester, few will still survive into the second 
trimester and even rare in third trimester and leads to intrauterine or 
neonatal death. Increased maternal age is not a risk factor. More likely 
diandric fetuses survive to the second trimester.
We present a case of prenatal diagnosis of triploidy into the second tri -
mester (20 weeks of gestation) trough CVS. It is an adolescent mother, 
17 years old and the referral reason for prenatal test was ultrasound 
anomalies, characterized by severe IUGR, holoprosencephaly, cardiac 
septal defects and kidneys chists. Also enlarged placenta was present 
allowing only CVS procedure. The karyotype found was 69,XXX.
It is a rare case when pregnancy survive into the second trimester and 
also holoprosencephaly is associate with triploidy.
The recurrence risk for future pregnancy is low, about 1%. The oppor -
tunity of a future prenatal test is not specifically indicated. It is recom -
mended mother monitoring of hCG because of small risk of malign 
transformation.
P05.68  Application of quantitative Real-time PCR technique with 
sYBR Green i dye on amniocyte samples for prenatal diagnosis 
of trisomy 21
F. Shahrokhi , A. R. Kamyab, E. Shamsian, M. Behrooz Aghdam, R. Mahdian;  
Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Trisomy 21 syndrome (Down syndrome) is the main 
causes of mental retardation and one of the most common chromo -
somal abnormalities (1 in 700-1000 births), Therefore diagnosis and 
prevention of live-born affected fetus is a health care priority.
Objective: Diagnostic Value of Real time PCR technique for prenatal 
diagnosis of trisomy 21 was evaluated.
Method and Material: Amniocentesis was performed on 59 pregnant 
women who had the high risk criteria of having fetus with trisomy 21. 
15-20 milliliter of amniotic fluid was used for cytogenetic analysis and 
DNA extraction. Quality and quantity of DNA was measured by the 
optical absorbance. DYRK1A and DSCAM genes (target genes) and 
PMP22 (reference gene) were selected and specific primers for these 
genes were designed. After determining of standard curve and PCR 
efficiencies for each gene, the target/reference genes ratio was calcu -
lated using comparative cycle threshold method CΔΔ) t).
Results: The results of target/reference genes ratio in trisomy 21 and 
normal fetus was 1.61 ± 0.09 and 1.03 ± 0.05, respectively that showed 
statistically significant difference between two groups.
Conclusion:  Currently, the methods which are based on cytogenetic 
analysis are used to detect trisomy 21. These methods are generally 
time-consuming and also need cultured live cells. In contrast, Real-
Time PCR is a high throughput molecular technique with none of the 
above mentioned limitations. Therefore, Real-Time PCR technique 
can be used as a rapid and reliable method for prenatal diagnosis of 
trisomy 21.
P05.69  Rapid Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome using quantitative Real-t ime PcR on chorionic Villus samples
E. SHAMSIAN1,2, A. R. Kamyab2, F. Shahrokhi2, M. Behrooz Aghdam1, R. 
Mahdian2;  
1Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran, 
TEHRAN, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Trisomy 21 syndrome (Down syndrome) is an intricate neurodegener -
ative disease caused by a chromosomal aberration with the frequency Prenatal and perinatal genetics10
of about 1 in 800 births. Thus, prenatal diagnosis and termination of 
pregnancies with affected fetus is a health care priority. To this end, we 
have developed a  novel quantitative Real-Time PCR method for pre -
natal diagnosis of Down syndrome. Chorionic  Villus Samples (CVS) 
was obtained from 25 pregnant women who had the high risk of hav -
ing fetus with Down syndrome in preliminary screening. Blood sam -
ples from 6 Down syndrome patients were used as positive controls. 
Genomic DNA was extracted using a commercial kit and quality and 
quantity of the DNA was measured by spectrophotometry. DYRK1A22, 
DSCAM (on chromosome 21) and PMP22 (on chromosome 17) genes 
were selected as targets and reference gene, respectively. Specific 
primers were designed and PCR efficiencies were determined for each 
gene. Gene dosage study was performed using quantitative Real-Time 
PCR and target /reference genes ratio was calculated according to the 
2-ΔΔct formula.  The results of gene dosage analysis showed the target/
reference genes ratio of 1.56±0.09 and 1.02±0.11 in trisomy 21 and 
normal samples, respectively. The assay was able to demonstrate the 
presence of three copies of target genes in affected samples. DSCAM 
/ PMP22 and DYRK1A22 / PMP22 ratio were significantly higher in 
trisomy 21 cases (1.5 times). Therefore quantitative Real-Time PCR 
technique can be used as a sensitive, accurate and reliable technique 
for rapid and prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21syndrome.
P05.70  Confined placental mosaicism of 22 trisomy with normal 
prenatal echosonography and normal eutrophic babyborn : 
trisomy rescue demonstrated by presence of fetal uniparental 
isodisomy.
E. Ginglinger , e. montoya, c. cordier, E. jeandidier;  
Emile Muller Hospital, Mulhouse, France.
A chorionic villous sampling (CVS) performed at 11 weeks of gestation 
show at direct examination a trisomy 22 but after culture only a mosa -
icism (mos46,XX[15]/47,XX+22[5]) was detected. The US was strictly 
normal, without the classical IUGR leading to new investigations.
Cytogenetic analysis from amniotic fluid and fetal blood sample show 
normal 46,XX karyotype.
Molecular analysis show a maternal isodisomy (meiosis II) involving 
trisomy rescue, usual incrimined but rarely demonstrated.
At birth the baby was a clinically normal healthy little girl. As in earlier 
reports, Chromosom 22 seems not to show any apparent imprinting 
effect.
When there is clinical and biological discordance during pregnancy, 
Genetic counselling must be cautious and precise.
P06 cancer genetics
P06.001  correlation of p53, p16, p21 and mDm2 protein 
expression in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
N. Taghavi1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Sotoudeh2, M. Abbaszadegan3, H. Khademi4, 
O. Moaven3, R. Malekzadeh2;  
1National institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Digestive Disease Research Center (DDRC), Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33. Division of 
Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, 
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 41. Digestive Disease Research Center (DDRC), Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Backgrounds: Tumor suppressor genes p53, p21Waf1/Cip1 and 
p16INK4a and the proto-oncogene MDM2 are considered to be essen -
tial cell cycle regulatory proteins whose loss of function is associated 
with esophageal esquamous cell carcinogenesis [ESCC]. This study 
was conducted to investigate the immunohistochemical expression of 
these proteins in 80 ESCC patients in the northeastern Iran in which 
ESCC has the highest incidence of cancer, well above the world aver -
age.
Methods: Expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins in both the RB 
and p53 pathways was investigated Immunohistochemically, on tu -
mor tissues of 80 ESCC patients and 60 available paraffin-embed -
ded blocks of adjacent normal specimens of cases, along with normal 
esophageal tissues of 80 healthy subjects.
Result: Abnormal accumulation of the p53 protein along with p21 over-
expression and p16 negative expression, but not MDM2, was signifi -
cantly higher in the tumor tissue. (P < 0.001) Moreover, P53 positive expression was observed in 10% of normal tissues adjacent to tumor, 
compared to none in the noncancerous control group.
Conclusion: These results suggest that disruption of the RB and p53 
pathways may play a critical role in the development of ESCC among 
high-risk population of northeastern Iran. Moreover,detection of abnor -
mally accumulated p53 in the morphologically normal tissue adjacent 
to tumor may be a predictor of future recurrence of tumor in these 
patients.
P06.002  mutation analysis of the AATF  gene in breast cancer 
families
M. Haanpää1,2, M. Reiman1,2, H. Erkko1,2, K. Pylkäs1,2, R. Winqvist1,2;  
1Oulu University/ Biocenter, Oulu, Finland, 2Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, 
Finland.
Background: About 5-10% of breast cancer is due to inherited disease 
predisposition. Currently known genes account for less than half of the 
hereditary cases. AATF (apoptosis antagonizing transcription factor 
alias CHE1) plays an important role in the DNA damage response and 
cell-cycle checkpoint control. Many previously identified susceptibility 
factors act in similar functional pathways as AATF, suggesting possible 
involvement of AATF in heritable breast cancer susceptibility.
Methods: We have screened affected index cases from 124 Finnish 
breast cancer families for germline defects in AATF  by using confor -
mation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). All alterations seen were 
characterized by direct sequencing with the Li-Cor IR2 4200-S DNA 
analysis system.
Results: Altogether seven different sequence changes were observed. 
To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting the mutation screen -
ing of the AATF  gene in familial breast cancer.
Conclusions: The identification of novel susceptibility factors offers ex -
citing challenges, because more than 70% of the genetic predisposi -
tion to breast cancer remains unexplained. The result of our current 
study indicates that germline alterations in the AATF  gene do not sig -
nificantly contribute to the risk of getting breast cancer.
P06.003  t ranslocation detection in iranian patients with Acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia
L. Yektamaram , H. Loghmani Khouzani, P. Rostami, E. Shirvani, H. Imanian, 
S. Valizadegan, H. Najmabadi;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fast-growing cancer of white 
blood cells. Lymphocytes are a type of WBC that the body uses to fight 
infections. In ALL, the bone marrow makes abnormal amounts of un -
formed cells called blasts that normally develop in lymphocytes. How -
ever, the blasts are abnormal. They do not develop and cannot fight 
infections. ALL is the most common cause of leukemia in children with 
an annual incidence of 3.5 cases per 100,000 children below 15 years 
of age. 60% of ALL is diagnosed in children below 15 years of age, and 
about 7% are diagnosed in young adults of 15-20 years of age.
In this study we analyzed leukemic patients by nested multiplex re -
verse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for rapid diagnosis and screening, 
for 4 chromosomal translocation; t(1;19) (q23;p13) , t(12;21) (p13;q22), 
t(4;11) (q21;q23) and for t(9;22) (q34;q11).
Blood samples from the patients admitted to our genetic center were 
subjected to RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis. To achieve maximal 
sensitivity nested PCR protocol was used and a housekeeping gene 
was considered as an internal positive control.
We investigated 123 patients and the following results were obtained: 
8 (6.5%) were positive for t(12;21) (p13;q22) , 6 (4.8 %) had t(4;11) 
(q21;q23) , 11 (8.94%) were positive for t(9;22) (q34;q11), which among 
them 3 (27.27%) had the ‘b2a2’, 5(45.45%) ‘b3a2’ and 3(27.27%) 
‘e1a2’ breakpoint. Non of the patients had t(1;19) (q23;p13).
Our results were in concordance with other researches performed in 
different countries.
P06.004  the correlation pattern of acquired copy number 
changes in 164 EtV6/RUNX1-positive childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemias
H. Lilljebjörn1, C. Soneson2, A. Andersson1, J. Heldrup3, M. Behrendtz4, 
N. Kawamata5, P. H. Koeffler5, F. Mitelman1, B. Johansson1, M. Fontes2, T. 
Fioretos1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Cancer genetics11
Lund, Sweden, 2Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden, 3Department of Pediatrics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden, 4Department of Pediatrics, Linköping University Hospital, 
Linköping, Sweden, 5Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.
The ETV6/RUNX1  fusion gene, present in 25% of B-lineage childhood 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), is thought to represent an initiat -
ing event, which requires additional genetic changes for leukemia de -
velopment. To identify additional genetic alterations, 24 ETV6/RUNX1 -
positive ALLs were analyzed using 500K single nucleotide polymor -
phism arrays. The results were combined with previously published 
data sets, allowing us to ascertain genomic copy number aberrations 
(CNAs) in 164 cases. In total, 45 recurrent CNAs were identified with 
an average number of 3.5 recurrent changes per case (range 0-13). 
Twenty-six percent of cases displayed a set of recurrent CNAs identi -
cal to that of other cases in the data set. The majority (74%), however, 
displayed a unique pattern of recurrent CNAs, indicating a large het -
erogeneity within this ALL subtype. As previously demonstrated, alter -
ations targeting genes involved in B-cell development were common 
(present in 28% of cases). However, the combined analysis also iden -
tified alterations affecting nuclear hormone response (24%) to be a 
characteristic feature of ETV6/RUNX1 -positive ALL. Studying the cor -
relation pattern of the CNAs allowed us to highlight significant positive 
and negative correlations between specific aberrations. Furthermore, 
oncogenetic tree models identified ETV6 , CDKN2A/B , PAX5 , del(6q), 
and +16 as possible early events in the leukemogenic process.
P06.005  NPM1 , FLT  and c-KIT  genes mutations in childhood 
AmL in Russia
Y. E. Yatsenko1, O. V. Kalennik1, E. Y. Osipova2, T. V. Nasedkina1;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Federal Research Center for Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and 
Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous clonal 
disorder characterized by the accumulation of acquired somatic ge -
netic alterations in hematopoietic progenitor cells. Approximately 50% 
of patients with AML exhibit a normal karyotype. Somatically acquired 
mutations affecting transcription and signal transduction were identi -
fied in cytogenetically normal AML in the nucleophosmin 1 ( NPM1 ), 
the fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ( FLT3 ), and the tyrosine kinase c-KIT 
genes, which makes the mutations important prognostic markers.
In present study we investigated the frequency of mutations in child -
hood AML in Russian population. Genomic DNA was extracted from 
130 samples from patients with AML. FLT3  gene mutations of the in -
ternal tandem repetition ITD and activation loop FLT3/D835Mt, NPM1  
gene mutations of exon 12 and c-KIT gene mutations of exons 8 and 
17 were examined by PCR and direct sequencing. In parallel, the sam -
ples were analyzed for the presence of translocations using diagnostic 
biochip.
We have found NPM1  mutations in 7 of 130 patients (type A tctg - 3, 
type B catg - 2, type D cctg - 1 and type Qm tcgg - 1). The FLT3/ITD 
mutation appeared in 9 of 130 patients, the length varied from 11 to 
110bp,  whereas other FLT3  and c-KIT mutations were not found. The 
rates of mutations are significantly lower in childhood AML as com -
pared with adult AML (published for Japanese and Italian populations):
NPM1  gene mutations - 5.4% (7/130) against 25-52%, FLT3/ITD - 
6.9% (9/130) against 18.9%. The work was supported by the Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 08-04-01480).
P06.006  Frequency of mutations in NPm1 and FtL3 genes 
and there impact on prognosis in patients with acute myeloid 
leukemia (AmL) and myelodysplastic syndromes (mDs) in 
Russia.
V. Y. Aksenova , M. V. Moskalenko, I. S. Martynkevich, S. V. Gricayev, M. P. 
Ivanova, S. A. Tiranova, K. M. Abdulkadirov;  
Russian Research Institute of Hematology and Transfusiology, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Mutations of the nucleophosmin (NPM1) and Fms-like tyrosine kinase 
3 (FTL3) genes have recently been described as the most frequent 
mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syn -
dromes (MDS). Frequencies of these mutations and their impact on 
clinical course have been determined around world, but not in Rus -
sian population. Our aim was to investigate frequencies and prognos -tic relevance of NPM1 and FLT3 mutations in patients with AML and 
MDS in Russia. We have studied blood samples from 44 patients with 
secondary and de novo MDS and 43 patients with AML. It was shown 
that most of the patients with de novo MDS carried NPM1 mutations in 
contrast to the patients with secondary MDS, and both groups had low 
frequency of FLT3 mutations. However FLT3 mutations were found to 
be predominant in patients with AML. It was shown that total frequency 
of FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD and NPM1 4 bp insert mutations was 37,2% 
of all studied AML cases where FLT3-ITD mutation was the major 
(13,9%). Taken together our results allow us to conclude that muta -
tion in NPM1 gene in MDS patients with normal karyotype leads to 
favorable prognosis for disease outcome; FLT3-ITD mutation in AML 
NPM1- patients with normal karyotype leads to poor prognosis.
P06.007  Identification of regulatory genetic variation in 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
A. Kiialainen1, J. Nordlund1, O. Karlberg1, L. Milani1, A. Lundmark1, U. 
Liljedahl1, G. Lönnerholm1,2, A. Syvänen1;  
1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2For the Nordic Society of Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology (NOPHO), Sweden.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common form of child -
hood cancer. Although treatments for ALL currently exist, some pa -
tients do not benefit from them, while others suffer from unnecessary 
side effects. In order to gain insight into regulatory genetic variation 
that affects drug response in ALL, we have previously measured the 
allele-specific expression (ASE) levels of over 8000 genes in RNA-
samples from 197 ALL patients whose in vitro drug responses against 
ten anti-cancer drugs are known (Milani et al. Genome Research 
2009). Guided by the allele-specific differences in gene expression, 
we chose a subset of 56 genes displaying ASE for re-sequencing. We 
are sequencing the whole genes, including exons, introns, and some 
of the 5’ and 3’ non-coding sequence making up a target region of 
3.1 megabases in total, in order to find the regulatory variants. We 
have used Nimblegen sequence capture arrays and Agilent’s Sure -
Select method for preparing sequencing libraries from DNA samples 
from ALL patients. Using the Illumina Genome Analyzer, we have se -
quenced libraries prepared from 63 ALL samples. We have used BWA 
for sequence alignment and the Samtools package for further analysis 
of the sequencing data and called up to 3500 SNPs per sample. We 
are now selecting the regulatory variants discovered by sequencing 
for genotyping in a larger set of patient samples. We will correlate the 
genotypes with the allele-specific expression levels as well as with the 
drug response patterns of the patient cells.
P06.008  Androgen receptor CAG polymorphism and breast cancer risk in macedonian women
S. Madzunkova1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, G. Kondov2, Z. Spirovski2, G. D. 
Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic for Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Faculty of 
Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Androgens have been hypothesized to influence risk of breast cancer 
through several mechanisms, including their conversion to estradiol or 
their binding to the estrogen receptor and/or androgen receptor (AR) 
in the breast. Androgenic stimulation may oppose breast cell prolifera -
tion, that it is mediated by AR. The first exon of AR gene contains a 
translated polymorphic CAG (poly-glutamine) repeat (from 8 to 35 in 
normal population), and its’ length is inversely correlated to the trans -
activation power of the receptor. Longer CAG repeats have been as -
sociated with increased risk of breast cancer. The aim of this study 
was to examine whether AR-CAG repeat lengths are related to breast 
cancer susceptibility in Macedonian patients with breast cancer. We 
studied 71 patients with breast cancer and 76 controls. The CAG re -
peat number was determined by fluorescent polymerase chain reac -
tion (PCR) amplification of exon 1 of the AR gene and capillary elec -
trophoresis on ABI3130 Genetic Analyzer. Comparisons were made 
for mean allele length, and separately for the shorter and the longer 
alleles. Dichotomous categories for CAG repeats were generated at 
all possible cut-points. The AR CAG repeat ranged from 10 to 34 in all 
tested women. The mean number of the repeats was not statistically 
different between patients (22.32 +1.96) and controls (21.81 +1.97). We 
found a significantly higher percentage of longer alleles ≥25 repeats in 
breast cancer patients than in controls (p=0.0002, O.R. (1.87-8.32). Cancer genetics12
This finding suggests that women with longer allele ≥ 25 CAG repeats 
may be at increased risk of breast cancer.
P06.009  Antimutagenicity and Anticancer effects of Citrus 
Limon
M. Entezri1, M. Hashemi1, A. Majd2, M. Sedigheh2;  
1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran North Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Background:Currenthy cancer is considered as one of the main factors 
of mortality globally. Many chemicals in our environment can cause ge -
netic mutations and are potentially responsible for millions of cancer-
related deaths. The scientist are nowadays looking for food materials 
which can potenthially prevent the cancer occurrence. The purpose of 
this research is to examine antimutagenicity and anticancer effect of  
Citrus Limon  fruit juices.
Material and methods:In present study Human Astrocytoma cancer 
cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco),supplemented with 10% fetal calf 
serum,peniciline-streptomycin,L-glutamine and incubated at 37 ºC for 
2 days.In addition cancer cell line were treated by Citrus Limon  fruit 
juice and Cellular vital capacity was determined by MTT. The Citrus 
Limon  fruit juice was subsequenthy evaluated in terms of antimuta -
genicity and anticancer properties by a standard reverse mutation as -
say (Ames Test).
Results:During MTT, human Astrocytoma cell line revealed to have a 
meaningful cell death when compared with controls(p<0.01). In Ames 
Test the fruit juices prevented the reverted mutations and the hin -
drance percent of half-ripe  Citrus Limon  was 71.7% and ripe Citrus 
Limon  was 34.4% in Antimutagenicity test and this value in anticancer 
test was 83.3% and 50% in half-ripe Citrus Limon  and ripe Citrus Li -
mon respectively
Conclusion: This is the first study that have revealed  antimutagenicity 
and anticancer effect of Citrus Limon  fruit juice and the effects were 
higher in half-ripe Citrus Limon  in comparison to the riprned one.
P06.010  splicing mutations of the APc gene in the czech FAP 
families
L. Schwarzová , M. Florianová, J. Štekrová, K. Hirschfeldová, V. Kebrdlová, J. 
Kotlas, K. Veselá, M. Kohoutová;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine and General 
Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syn -
drome with almost 100% risk of colorectal cancer. The typical FAP is 
characterized by hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous 
polyps and by extracolonic manifestations. An attenuated form of FAP 
(AFAP) is characterized by less than 100 adenomas and later onset 
of the disease.
We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 386 FAP/AFAP 
patients. Mutation screening was performed using DGGE. DNA frag -
ments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern were se -
quenced. All APC-mutation-negative probands were screened for large 
deletions of the APC gene using multiplex ligation dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA). Analysis of mRNA variants followed in probands 
with possible splicing mutation. This analysis was performed by PCR 
amplification of target site flanking exons and sequencing the normal 
and aberrant products.
We identified 88 germline mutations among 144 unrelated probands 
including large deletions. 11 germline APC mutations detected last two 
years have not been reported yet, which gives evidence of great vari -
ability of mutations.
At all, 15 of the mutations would possibly cause splicing errors. Analy -
sis of mRNA of nine of these patients showed exon skipping in 6 cas -
es, change of the amount of alternatively spliced product in one case, 
and no effect in two cases. Several previously unknown alternative 
splicings of APC gene were also revealed in normal controls.
This reserch was supported by the VZ MSM0021620808 of the Czech 
Republic.P06.011  study of cloned gene-related protein Vp2 of infectious 
Bursal Disease Virus- induced apoptosis in human B cell 
lymphoma in vitro
M. Hashemi1, A. Gharshi2, K. Parivar3, M. Shamsara2;  
1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 2Departmemt of Virology,National Institue for genetic engineering 
and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad 
University,Science and research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background:Apoptosis or programmed cell death (PCD) is an impor -
tant mechanism in both development and homeostasis in adult tissue 
for the removal of superfluous cells that its inducing is a effective cure 
of cancer.The aim of the present study were to evaluated the effect of 
cloned gene-related protein Vp2 of Infectious Bursal Disease Virus in 
human lymphoma B cells.
Material and methods:In present study after cloning the Vp2 gene in 
Pichia pastoris system,the Vp2 protein was expressed. Cellular vital 
capacity was determined by MTT. Then effect of Vp2 protein in human 
lymphoma B cells was examined by Hoechst staining and Flowcytom -
etry techniques , respectively.
Results:During MTT, human lymphoma B cell lines revealed to 
have a meaningful apoptosis at 1μg and 5μg protein concentrations 
when compared with controls(p<0.01).Apoptotic bodies appeared by 
Hoechst staining apoptosis was induced suitably after 48 hours by 
Flowcytometry assay.
Conclusion: The present study is the first study that have revealed the 
gene-related protein Vp2 induced apoptosis in human lymphoma B 
cells in vitro.
P06.012  Genetic diagnostics of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor 
in children in slovakia.
L. Rotikova1, B. Piackova1, M. Cermak1, Z. Szaboova1, B. Rychly2, D. 
Ilencikova1;  
1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cytophatos, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
Introduction:
Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is an aggressive type of em -
bryonal tumor - WHO Grade IV. Most frequently it occurs in children 
under age 2. Due to its morphological variability, AT/RT is often falsely 
misdiagnosed for a primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) or me -
dulloblastoma. For the majority of AT/RT cases is characteristic either 
deletion, or chromosome 22 monosomy - loss of the hSNF5/INI1  gene, 
which is localized on 22q11.2.
Methodology and results:
We examined paraffin embedded tumor tissue samples by a method 
of fluorescent in situ hybridization in three child patients diagnosed 
in 2008-2009. In order to assess diagnosis we used the IGL probe 
(22q11), by way of which we indirectly confirmed gene INI1 deletion . 
Gene INI1 deletion was directly validated by the proposed BAC probe 
RP 11-80O7 (22q11.23).
A 2-year-old patient was diagnosed with AT/RT CNS at the age of 1, 
and one year later, a renal rhabdoid tumor was diagnosed in the very 
same patient. We assumed the presence of gene hSNF5/INI1  consti -
tutional inactivation (rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome).
Only scarcely a literature reference is found on metachronal renal 
rhabdoid tumor formation following an AT/RT of the brain.
Examining the patient’s peripheral blood by the sequential meth -
od of molecular genetics revealed mutation of c.395_396insCC 
p.Val132ValfsX12 in exon 4 of the hSNF5/INI1 gene, which so far has 
not been described in NCBI, nor HGMD database. Further peripheral 
blood examination in patient’s parents and sibling revealed no germline 
mutation in exon 4 of the hSNF5/INI1 gene that was being monitored.
P06.013  Optimisation and standardisation of sample 
preparation with the Bead-beating technology in genomics 
research
R. Verollet ;  
Bertin Technologies, Montigny le Bretonneux, France.
In the context of sample preparation and cell lysis, Bertin Technologies 
(France) has developed a technology dedicated to the homogeniza -
tion and grinding of soft to hard materials. The goal is to improve the 
first critical step in any molecular biology process and follow the latest 
requirements of analysis equipments which have radically improved in 
terms of throughput, reproducibility, detection limits and linearity.Cancer genetics1
Following specific mechanical engineering studies of bead beating 
technology, a high speed figure-8 multidirectional motion gives shak -
ing energy to the beads that grind/homogenize samples in sealed vi -
als (2mL or 7mL). This patented solution Precellys24 plays a large 
part in the analyse chain of rapid method to extract full length DNA, 
stable RNA, native state proteins or drug compounds out any sam -
ples. Thanks to Cryolys option, temperature inside Precellys24 tubes 
is maintained at an optimal level during homogenization.
Bertin and its partners have been investigating mechanical lysis with 
the Precellys bead beater vs. manual, chemical or sonicator methods. 
Several applications on DNA and RNA extraction from human or ani -
mal tissues illustrate the contribution of this equipment to the improve -
ment of genomics research.
Bead beating technology was successfully evaluated in these applica -
tions and satisfied users in term of efficiency without degradation of the 
material, reproducibility, time and labour saving that are mains items 
to consider.
P06.014  Molecular evidence supporting field effect in recurrent 
and primary multiple superficial bladder cancers
A. Babayan1,2, Y. Andreeva3, D. Zaletaev1,4, M. Nemtsova1,4;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Institute of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany, 3Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, 
Russian Federation, 4Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
High recurrence rate is a common phenomenon in superficial bladder 
cancer (SBC). Recurrences, as well as primary multifocality, might be 
explained with monoclonal theory, suggesting that all coexisting/fol -
lowing tumors arise from a single malignant transformed cell, which 
proliferates and spreads throughout the urothelium or might be spread 
during the intravesical manipulations. Another theory explains multifo -
cality/recurrences as subsequent events secondary to a field-cancer -
ization effect, so tumors are expected to be genetically non-identical. 
The question weather recurrent/coexisting tumors arise from the same 
tumor clone or develop independently has a great clinical relevance to 
surgery and treatment approaches. Molecular analysis of alterations 
patterns in each of coexisting/recurrent tumors may give us an an -
swer.
We examined 86 tumor samples from 19 patients with recurrent SBC 
(RSBC) (primary tumor and 1-4 relapses) and 8 patients with primary 
multiple SBC (MSBC) (2-5 tumors/patient). Genomic DNA samples 
were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. Our 
panel included LOH analysis at 9p21 and 17p13  (microsatellite assay), 
promoter hypermethylation of  RASSF1A, P16, DAPK (methyl-sensi -
tive PCR).
Fifteen of 19 (79%) patients with RSBC showed different molecular 
alterations pattern between primary and recurrent tumors as well as 
7 of 8 (88%) patients with MSBC. Moreover, relapses from the same 
patient also had different alteration patterns. Four of 19 (21%) patients 
with RSBC and one of 8 (12%) patients with MSBC demonstrated con -
cordant alteration pattern between primary and subsequent/coexisting 
tumors.
Our results show that the relapses and coexisting multiple tumors in 
many cases of SBC arise from independently transformed urothelial 
cells.
P06.015  t esting the antitumor effect of hemocyanins on 
genomics and proteomics level
O. S. Boyanova1, P. Dolashka-Angelova2, L. Yosifova3, S. Zaharieva3, L. 
Velkova2, I. Dimitrov2, D. Toncheva1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
2Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phitochemistry, BAS, Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 3Institute of Experimental Pathology and Parasitology - Bulgarian 
Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Urinary bladder cancer is the 7-th most common cancer worldwide 
and is a socially significant healthcare problem. Risk factors such as 
DNA mutation and environmental factors: tobacco smoking, infection 
by Schistosoma haematobium, diet and the aging of the world popula -
tion may be responsible for its pathogenesis. One of the approaches 
for bladder cancer therapy is the use of Keyhole limpet hemocyanins 
(KLH).The hemocyanins are copper-containing respiratory proteins 
and serve as oxygen-carriers in the blood of some arthropods and mollusks. Our laboratory investigates hemocyanins and their deriva -
tives from the species: Helix lucorum (HlH) and Rapana venosa (RvH 
) and their clinical use. The aim of our study is to examin their effect on 
genetic level against bladder cancer.
Three different hemocyanin isopolypeptides, named β-HlH, αD-HlH 
and αN-HlH, were isolated from the hemolymph of the Helix luco -
rum and were identified by their N-terminal sequences and molecular 
masses. The molecular masses were determined by PAGE and size 
exclusion chromatography. The mass of the β-HlH was found to be 
1068 kDa and the masses of αD-HlH and αN-Hc - 1079 kDa.
The anti-tumour effects were investigated on 647-V, T-24 and CAL-29 
bladder tumor Gene expression profiling and Microarray CGH analy -
ses of the tumor cells before and after haemocyanins treatment, and 
studies on the gene sequences of the haemocyanins isoformes will be 
disscused.
P06.016  stUDY OF GENE EXPREssiON iN sUPERFiciAL 
tRANsitiONAL cELL cARciNOmAs
J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, V. Soukup2, C. Guelly3, J. Duskova4, A. Horinek5, 
M. Babjuk6;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical Faculty, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center for Medical Research, 
Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Institute of Pathological Anatomy, 
1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute of 
Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 6Clinic of Urology, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
Treatment of bladder superficial tumours is dependent on the risk of 
recurrence and it is therefore clinically important to identify bladder 
cancers with a high risk of intravesical recurrence after transurethral 
bladder tumour resection. To improve the accuracy of tumour progres -
sion prediction various molecular markers have been evaluated by 
gene expression microarrays but to date no relevant molecular mark -
ers have been used in clinical practice.
For the improvement of recurrence prognosis we have applied gene 
expression microarray analysis to two groups of bladder tumours (su -
perficial bladder tumours with no or late recurrence during the period 
of two years versus early recurrence ones).
Data from microarrays containing 29,019 targets (Applied Biosystems) 
were subjected to a panel of statistical analyses to identify bladder 
cancer recurrence-associated gene signatures.  Initial screening using 
the GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a putative 
set of about 50 genes differing in gene expression in both groups. After 
validation significant differences were observed by ARHGEF4, NINJ1, 
PRICKLE1, PSAT1, TM4SF1 and TNFSF15 genes. Besides, we inte -
grated the microarray dataset with additional background knowledge, 
in order to algorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in 
terms of the Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known 
regulatory pathway memberships.
Our results indicate that it may be possible to identify patients with a 
high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage using a molecular 
profile present already in the superficial tumours.
Research was supported by MSM 0021620808
P06.017  Rt -PcR Analysis of putative BRcA1/2 splice Variants
R. D. Brandao1,2, K. van Roozendaal1, D. Tserpelis1, E. Gómez García1, M. J. 
Blok1;  
1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2GROW - School 
for Oncology and Developmental Biology, University Maastricht, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
Introduction: A subset of the unclassified variants (UVs) found in the 
BRCA  genes may affect splicing. Twelve putative BRCA1/2  splice vari -
ants prior selected upon in silico  analysis were studied experimentally 
using RT-PCR.
Methods: The variants selected were: in BRCA1 c.693G>A and in 
BRCA2  c.68-7T>A, c.425G>T, c.794-11T>C, c.6935A>T, c.6842-3T>C, 
c.6943A>G, c.7976+3del2, c.8350C>T, c.8953+13A>G, c.8662C>T 
and c.8754+3G>C. We performed short-term lymphocyte cultures, in 
the absence or presence of puromycin, a nonsense mediated mRNA-
decay inhibitor. PCRs using primers flanking the region of interest 
were performed to look for aberrant cDNA. This was followed by allele-
specific PCRs in order to analyze the contribution of each allele to the Cancer genetics1
relative expression of the wild-type and aberrant transcripts found.
Results: The variants BRCA2  c.425G>T, c.7976+3del2, and 
c.8754+3G>C result in aberrant splicing, i.e. exon 4, exon 17 skipping 
and retention of 46bp of intron 22, respectively. The BRCA1  variant 
c.693G>A results in exon 11 skipping, which is a normal isoform in 
breast- and ovarian tissue but not in lymphocytes. BRCA2  variants 
c.68-7T>A and c.6935A>T induce higher expression of the BRCA2 Δ3 
and BRCA2 Δ12 isoforms, which are also expressed in controls, 
whereas the level of expression of the full-length transcript is the same 
as from the WT allele. For the other variants no splice aberrations were 
detected.
Conclusion: The BRCA2  variants c.425G>T, c.7976+3del2, and 
c.8754+3G>C could be classified as pathogenic. The clinical relevance 
of variants that induce higher expression of normal isoforms is difficult 
to evaluate as their function is currently unknown.
P06.018  Two deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a 
spanish family.
M. Infante , M. Durán, D. Sanz, L. Pérez-Cabornero, A. Acedo, E. Lastra, L. 
Hernández, N. Martínez, C. Miner, E. Velasco;  
IBGM, Valladolid, Spain.
Double heterozygote (DH) families for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations 
are a rare event mostly found in populations with founder mutations. 
To date nearly 29 families have been described worldwide; most of 
them harbouring at least one of the three Ashkenazi mutations, whilst 
only three families are not associated with known founder mutations. 
Here we describe the first DH Spanish family without founder muta -
tions. The index case was a woman with breast cancer (onset age 
48 years) that carried the nonsense BRCA1 -c.153C>T (p.Q12X) and 
the novel BRCA2 -1815delTinsCA mutation. Other tumours observed 
in this family were ovarian, colorectal and three gastric cancer cases. 
Intriguingly, the daughter with ovarian cancer at 34 years only inherited 
the BRCA1 mutation. Other unaffected relatives were a 30 years-old 
son that carried both mutations and a 46 aged nephew that inherited 
only the BRCA2 mutation. Breast cancer lifetime risks of 12.8% and 
6%, respectively, were previously established with BRCAPRO, thus, 
the former patient was included in the surveillance program. This is 
the only double heterozygote found in 860 families scanned for BRCA 
mutations until now (0.12 %), a frequency similar to those reported in 
other European countries.
Whereas  BRCA1 -c.153C>T mutation has 13 records in BIC mutation 
database, BRCA2 -1815delTinsCA is a new mutation present in two 
more unrelated families of our series. Haplotype analysis of twelve 
polymorphic markers linked to BRCA2  suggested a common origin for 
this mutation.
P06.019  BRcA1 and BRCA2 mutation in iranian breast cancer 
patients 
H. Soltanzadeh ;  
Young researcherchers club. Bonab of Azad University. National Institute for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology ., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: BRCA1  mutations are responsible for a significant propor -
tion of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families. BRCA1 
is responsible for more than 50 % of HBOC families with at least four 
cancer cases .Penetrance may be modified by other risk or protec -
tive genes or environmental factors.. Mutations in BRCA1 may play 
an important role in evaluation of sick risk, earlier diagnosis and gene 
therapy of breast cancer in Iranian populations
We conducted a study investigating BRCA1/2 among 60 Iranian breast 
cancer patients with a personal or family history suggestive of heredi -
tary predisposition to breast cancer .Total genomic DNA was extracted 
from 60 idiopathic breast cancer Patients and 40 cases of healthy peo -
ple. Primers were designed to amplify the 20 hot exones .The entire 
BRCA1 coding sequence was amplified by PCR with primers espe -
cially designed for comprehensive mutation screening by single-strand 
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. analysis and alterations 
were confirmed by DNA sequencing
The distribution of the breast cancer mutation in the control samples 
matched the distribution reported for control samples by others . The 
analysis of our sample shows no difference between the analysis of 
exon 11gene from 60 DNA samples of breast cancer patients showed 
no mutation.Our results suggest that (1) BRCA1/2 mutations are seen 
in low -risk Iranian women with breast cancer. However this does not exclude the association of the gene in breast cancer but it needs more 
investigation. Also it is necessary to test the other exones of the gene
P06.020  the comprehensive molecular-genetic analysis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome: BRcA1 and 
BRcA2 genes
M. Konecny1, M. Milly1, K. Zavodna1,2, E. Weismanova1, Z. Bartosova1,2, I. 
Mlkva3, D. Ilencikova4, J. Kausitz1;  
1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute 
of Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre of Clinical 
Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4National Cancer Institute, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for 
the majority of hereditary breast ovarian cancer (HBOC) cases. The 
analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 376 Slovak HBOC families 
revealed in 70 families a presence of relevant mutations, what repre -
sents 18.6%. We observed that the best clinical criterion for BRCA1 
analysis is familiar occurrence of disease and diagnosis of breast can -
cer at the age around 40 years together with the presence of ovarian 
cancer diagnosed at the age around 50 years in the family. In BRCA2 
analysis it is an exclusive presence of breast cancer without any ovar -
ian cancer diagnosed at the age over 45 years in the family. We have 
identified three novel, probably Slovak specific pathogenic mutations 
c.80+3del4 and c.1166delG in BRCA1 gene and c.6589delA in BRCA2 
gene and also the presence of a very rare large genomic rearrange -
ment affecting complete BRCA1 allele, deletion of exons 1 to 24 re -
spectively.
Increasing the effectiveness of the analysis may be enriched by en -
largement of analysed sequence of BRCA genes and by more strin -
gent selection of HBOC families directed for BRCA1/2 analysis.
P06.021  Acceptability of breast cancer medical prevention by 
letrozole in post- menopausal women with a BRcA1/2 mutation in the LiBER trial
P. Ppujol1, S. Mijonnet2, K. Baudry1, P. berthet3, C. Nogues4, A. Martin2;  
1oncogenetique CHU, INSERM- CRCM Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France, 
2FNCLCC, Paris, France, 3GGC FNCLCC, Caen, France, 4GGC FNCLCC, 
Paris, France.
Women carrying a germline BRCA1/2 mutation have a life-time risk of 
developing breast cancer of 56 to 80%. Prophylactic bilateral mastec -
tomy provides a valid option to reduce breast cancer incidence, but 
greatly affects the quality of life. There is therefore an urgent need to 
evaluate medical preventive alternative.
The major breast cancer prevention trials using tamoxifen showed 
an approximately 50% incidence reduction in high risk women. Adju-
vant trials comparing aromatase inhibitors (AI) to tamoxifen revealed 
a higher preventive efficacy of AI for contralateral cancer with fewer 
thromboembolic side effects.
The French federation of cancer centres („FNCLCC“) has developed 
a randomized phase III study to determine the efficacy of letrozole 
to prevent breast cancer in postmenopausal BRCA1/2 carriers. The 
„LIBER“ study is a double-blinded, letrozole versus placebo study in -
volving 32 centres. The study opened for recruitment in march 2008. 
Here we present data reflecting the acceptability of this preventive trial. 
Twenty-one centres replied toan inquiry. 690 women were eligible. Out 
of 485 women informed by letter, 217 (44%) came to consultation and 
62 (13 %) entered the study. The main concerns of women while con -
sidering to enter the trial were: the potential side effects, the probability 
to receive the placebo and the lack of support from other practitioners. 
For post-menopausal women bearing a BRCA1/2 genetic predispo -
sition, prevention of breast cancer risk by letrozole could provide a 
precious alternative to bilateral mastectomy. The acceptability of this 
phase III randomized double-blinded letrozole versus placebo trial by 
patients who received oral information is 28%.
P06.022  the large BRcA1 new deletion revelation among 
Russian families with breast/ovarian cancer.
N. V. Apanovich1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, P. V. 
Apanovich1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Blokhin Cancer Centre, Moscow, Cancer genetics1
Russian Federation.
Inherited predisposition to breast/ovarian cancer is mainly due to 
BRCA1/2 gene mutations. The methods for point mutation determi -
nation cannot detect large deletions or insertions that include one or 
more exons. Meanwhile, a frequency of such gene rearrangements 
may have significant portion from a frequency of point mutation and 
may be different among populations. Large rearrangements are more 
frequent in BRCA1 gene. In present work large rearrangement finding 
was conducted among families with inherited breast/ovarian cancer 
by analysis of SNP haplotypes, following gene alteration studing by 
RT-PCR and sequencing in the deletion vicinity. Among 58 hetero -
zygous on BRCA1 haplotype B samples one deletion was revealed 
(1,7%). The deletion is unique and was not found earlier in the other 
populations. The deletion encompasses exons 14-17 and has a size 
11327 bp. The 5‘ breakage point is disposed in AluSp that is in com -
position of four Alu tandem. In this tandem disposed also the breakage 
point of BRCA1 exons 14-20 known deletion. The 3‘ breakage point is 
disposed in AluSg near of which (100 b.p.) is Alu containing the break -
age point of BRCA1 exons 17 known deletion. It is possible that these 
regions are hot-spot of recombination.
P06.023  Identification of a unique de novo BRCA1 mutation in a 
patient diagnosed with breast and ovarian cancer in her fifties
K. Claes1, K. De Leeneer1, I. Coene1, J. Simkens1, B. Stragier2, A. De Paepe1, 
B. Poppe1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 
2Medical Oncology, H Hartziekenhuis, Roeselare, Belgium.
Germline BRCA1&2 mutations confer high risks for breast and ovar -
ian cancer and are most prevalent in patients with a family history for 
the disease. De novo BRCA mutations are rare and more frequently 
reported in BRCA2 (6 cases) than in BRCA1 (1 case), all in patients 
with tumors occurring before the age of 40. The case presented below 
illustrates that de novo mutations do not only occur in patients with 
early onset disease.
We analysed the complete coding region of BRCA1&2 in 169 sporadic 
breast and/or ovarian cancer patients with early onset or bilateral or 
multifocal tumors. In 16 (9.5%) a germline BRCA1/2 mutation was 
identified; in three patients these were potentially de novo, unfortu -
nately, parental DNA was not available for 2 of them. Here, we report 
a patient (diagnosed with breast cancer at 52 yrs and ovarian cancer 
at 53 yrs) and heterozygous for a novel BRCA1 mutation c.3494_
3495delTT (p.Phe1165fs). This mutation was absent in her parents 
(paternity confirmed) and 8 sibs as verified by Sanger sequencing, 
but was transmitted to 2 of her sons. To investigate possible mosa -
icism, the relevant amplicons were deep sequenced with 454 am -
plicon sequencing. The mutation in the patient was detected in 43% 
of the reads at 157 times coverage, but was absent in the maternal 
and paternal sample both covered 1840 and 2780 times respectively, 
consistent with the de novo occurrence (although germline mosaicism 
cannot be ruled out). Studies to determine if the mutation originated 
on the maternal or paternal allele are ongoing.
P06.024  Prevalence of BRcA1 mutation in Greek high-risk 
ovarian cancer patients
A. V. Stavropoulou1, M. Pertesi1, M. Tsitlaidou1, F. Fostira1, D. Yannoukakos1, 
G. Fountzilas2, I. Konstantopoulou1;  
1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, N.C.S.R. „Demokritos“, Aghia Paraskevi, 
Greece, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Papageorgiou Hospital, University 
of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes contribute to the 
majority of hereditary ovarian cancers and comprise 10-18% of total 
cases. The lifetime risk for ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation car -
riers ranges from 15% to 40%. A variable incidence of mutations has 
been reported for these genes in different populations. In some popula -
tions, a wide spectrum of different mutations in both genes is present, 
whereas in other groups certain mutations are seen at higher rates. In 
the Greek population, specific mutations in BRCA1 account for 71% of 
all mutations detected in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. This study 
aimed to determine the prevalence of BRCA1 mutations in a Greek 
cohort of ovarian cancer patients, selected for a strong family history, 
early age of onset or metachronous breast cancer. 81 patients with 
ovarian cancer were screened for all the BRCA1 mutations previously 
identified in the Greek population. Of these, 24 carried a deleterious BRCA1 mutation (30%), while an unclassified variant was identified 
in 2 patients (2.4%). Identifying a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 
genes among breast and/or ovarian cancer families is important, as 
it enables carriers to take preventive measures. Currently, bilateral 
salpingo-oophorectomy is the most effective way to reduce the risk 
of ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Further studies are 
warranted to determine the prevalence of mutations in the BRCA1, as 
well as in the BRCA2 gene, in both high-risk and unselected ovarian 
cancer cases in the Greek population.
P06.025  Haplotype analysis of two recurrent genomic 
rearrangements in BRcA1 gene suggests that they are founder 
mutations for the Greek population
M. Pertesi , I. Konstantopoulou, D. Yannoukakos;  
Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, N.C.S.R. „Demokritos“, Athens, Greece.
The deletion of 4.4kB and 3.2kB identified in exons 24 and 20, re -
spectively, are two of the four most common mutations in the BRCA1  
gene in Greek breast cancer patients. The exon 24 deletion includes 
both exon 24 as well as the 3’ UTR, while the exon 20 deletion starts 
within exon 20 and extends into intron 20. They have been reported 
9 and 6 times, respectively, in unrelated families of Greek origin. In 
order to characterize these recurrent mutations as founder mutations, 
it is necessary to identify the disease-associated haplotype and prove 
that it is shared by all the mutation carriers, suggesting that it occurred 
only once in a common ancestor.
Genomic DNA was isolated from 19 breast cancer patients and 66 
healthy individuals. Ten Short Tandem Repeat (STR’s) markers lo -
cated within and flanking the BRCA1 gene locus, spanning a 5.9 Mb 
interval, were used for the haplotype analysis.
The results indicate that all carriers of the exon 24 deletion share a 
common core haplotype ‘4-7-6-6-1-3’ between markers D17S951 and 
D17S1299, for a stretch of 2.9Mb. The common haplotype shared by 
carriers of the exon 20 deletion is ‘6-7-4-2-6-7-1-3’ between markers 
D17S579 and D17S1299, for a stretch of 3.9Mb. Haplotype conserva -
tion ended between markers D17S1299 and D17S800 and between 
D17S951 and D17S1861.
Both genomic rearrangements in BRCA1  gene are Greek founder 
mutations, as all carriers share the same, for each group of mutation 
carriers, disease-associated haplotype, suggesting the presence of a 
distinct common ancestor for both of the mutations.
P06.026  Haplotype characterization of BRcA1 gene in North-
Eastern Romania
L. Negura1, N. Uhrhammer2, A. Negura3, V. Artenie3, E. Carasevici1, Y. J. 
Bignon2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr. T. Popa, IASI, Romania, 2Centre 
„Jean Perrin“, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3University „Alexandru Ioan Cuza“, 
IASI, Romania.
Introduction: BRCA1  is major cancer predisposition gene, respon -
sible for a large percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer 
(HBOC) families. BRCA1  alleles are ascribed almost completely to 
10 canonical haplotypes defined by 14 prevalent SNPs. Two of these 
haplotypes (H1 and H2) predominate and account for up to 78 % of 
alleles in Europeans and North-Americans. The frequency and type of 
BRCA1  haplotypes varies widely, depending on the geographic and/
or the ethnic distributions.
Patients and methods: We investigated 26 patients from 17 unrelated 
HBOC families in north-eastern Romania. All patients agreed by writ -
ten informed consent. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. The 
entire coding sequence was analysed using dideoxy sequencing. 
BRCA1  haplotypes were assigned using 11 common single nucleo -
tide polymorphisms previously described.
Results: We identified five BRCA1  variations, including novel, recur -
rent mutations or unclassified variants. We identified seven different 
haplotypes in our population: five previously described, and two other 
haplotypes containing an additional SNP, IVS7-34C>T (H1-n and H6-
n). Haplotype frequencies appeared to be similar to those reported in 
other European populations. Five haplotypes were not observed in 
our population.
Some mutations could be easily assigned to haplotypes. c.2241dupC 
was assigned to H1, both carriers of the mutation being homozygous for 
this haplotype. Cys61Gly was observed in association with IVS7-34C>T, 
and could be assigned to either the H1-n or the H6-n haplotype.Cancer genetics1
Conclusions: This study lays the groundwork to investigate BRCA1 
haplotypes in eastern populations in more detail, with the aim of com -
paring groups within Eastern Europe or with western populations.
P06.027  Novel BRcA2 gene frameshift mutation detected in a 
woman with multiple primary cancers
E. Kurvinen1,2, T. Kahre3,4, K. Kirotar5, R. Žordania1, N. Tõnisson3,5;  
1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Estonia, 2National Institute for Health Development, 
Tallinn, Estonia, 3Dept. of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia, 4Dept.of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Molecular 
and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonia.
Women with BRCA2 gene germline mutations have approximately 
80% lifetime risk of breast cancer and 10-20% risk of ovarian cancer. 
In males, BRCA2 mutations are associated with 14% prostate cancer 
and 10% male breast cancer risks. In addition the risks of lymphomas, 
gastric, pancreatic, thyroid and gallbladder malignancies are increased 
in individuals with BRCA2 mutations.
In this report we present the germline NM_000059.3:c.8405_8406insC 
(p.L2803fs) mutation in exon 19 of the BRCA 2 gene, which manifests 
itself as a premature stop codon. The mutation has not been previ -
ously reported at Breast Cancer Information Core (BIC) database.
This mutation was first found in a woman who had been diagnosed 
with breast cancer at the age of 62 and two years later with stomach 
and kidney malignant tumours. The patient has a complicated family 
history: Her twin sister had died at the age of 32 of breast and ovarian 
cancer and her elder sister had died of breast cancer at 50.
Cascade screening of her close relatives is in process in the time of 
abstract submission.
P06.028  BRCA2 N372H polymorphism and breast cancer risk
I. Maleva1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, G. Kondov2, Z. Spirovski2, G. D. Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinic for Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Faculty of 
Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Truncating mutations in BRCA2 gene cause a substantial increase 
in risk of breast cancer, but such mutations are found only in small 
number of breast cancer patients. Low penetrance alleles, such as 
polymorphic variants in strongly predisposing genes, such as BRCA2, 
are candidates for inherited susceptibility to breast cancer. The N372H 
polymorphism is common variant in BRCA2 gene that was suggested 
to affect BRCA2 structure and function and to moderately increase 
the risk of breast cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
possible association of this polymorphism and breast cancer risk 
in Macedonian patients. The study included 76 patients with breast 
cancer and 75 controls from the general population. The N372H poly -
morphism was screened by single strand conformation polymorphism 
(SSCP) method. In selected samples, the results were confirmed by 
direct DNA sequencing. The BRCA2 N372H allele frequency in pa -
tients with breast cancer was estimated at 25.7% and was similar to 
that observed among controls (28.7%). There was no difference in the 
BRCA2 N372H genotype frequencies between patients with breast 
cancer (52.6% NN, 43.4% NH and 4.0% HH) and controls (48.0% NN, 
46.7% NH and 5.3% HH). No difference was detected also when pa -
tients were stratified according to the age of diagnosis and family his -
tory. In one male patient with breast cancer the N372H polymorphism 
was found in cis to the BRCA2 D2723G mutation. In conclusion, our 
study has failed to support the association between N372H polymor -
phism and breast cancer risk.
P06.029  Breast cancer genetics: Lobular histology is a negative 
predictor of BRcA mutations
C. D. DeLozier1,2, E. Ubias1;  
1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2Saint Agnes 
Medical Center, Fresno, CA, United States.
Lobular breast cancer represents 10-20% of all breast malignancies. 
Constitutional mutations in cadherin, a cell-adhesion molecule, result 
in a high risk of lobular breast and diffuse gastric cancers.
However, BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 are the genes most frequently impli -
cated in hereditary predisposition to breast cancer. Soon after clinical 
testing for BRCA mutations became available, a flurry of publications 
appeared comparing the histological characteristics of breast cancers 
in patients with BRCA-1 vs. BRCA-2, vs. patients negative for BRCA 
mutations (BRCA-X). The next wave of publications was epidemio -logical, whereas the current focus is molecular profiling of breast can -
cers.
In the interim, histology has been displaced as a consideration in ge -
netic risk assessment. We believe that lobular histology may be as 
important a negative predictor of  BRCA status as pre-menopausal di -
agnosis is a positive predictor. Although infrequently considered, there 
is some data from the literature to support this idea. Our experience 
is as follows:
We have counseled and tested 150 breast cancer patients at signifi -
cant risk of carrying a BRCA mutation, for whom histology was avail -
able/adequate and BRCA results were unequivocal. Lobular breast 
cancer was under-represented (8/150, 5.3%). Of these150 patients:
• 20 (13.3%) had a BRCA1-2 mutation; three had bilateral disease. All  
23 tumors were of ductal histology; none were lobular.
• 130 patients (86.7%) were negative for BRCA 1-2 mutations. All of 
the lobular breast cancer patients were in this group.
Histological analysis is an integral part of every cancer patient’s evalu -
ation. Why not take it into consideration in genetic risk assessment?
P06.030  Hypermethylation in promoter region of E-cadherin 
gene is associated with tumor metastasis in breast cancer 
carsinoma
S. Alizadeh Shargh1, M. Mohaddes Ardebili2, M. Sakizli3, J. Gharesouran2;  
1Medical Science institute, Medical Laboratory Department, Islamic Azad 
University, Chalous, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics & biology Department, Health Institute, 9 
eylul University, Izmir, Turkey.
Reduced or lost E-cadherin expression is associated with methylation 
of CpG sites and has a direct relation with breast cancer metastasis 
status. The authors analyzed the methylation status by bisulfate se -
quencing and determining its pattern in 10 CpG site (50 cancerous 
and 50 adjacent normal breast tissues). Data analyses was performed 
using spearman rank regression statistical methods with SPSS.13 
with ( p<0.05 ) criteria for assessing significant variations between tu -
mor (50% partial, 44% full methylation) versus normal tissue (76% 
non-methylated)(p=0.00). The methylation pattern was also shown 
to be significantly different in normal and tumor tissues (892, 940 & 
879, 887 respectively). An adverse correlation was observed between 
tumor metastasis and the pattern of methylation in 863, 865, 879, 
887, 892,901, 920 CpG islands while the 873, 918 and 940 islands 
showed a direct relation (the highest significancy was observed in 940, 
P=0.074). No significant linkage was detected between 940 island and 
chemotherapy. According to the results obtained from present study, it 
can be concluded that methylation of CpG sites can be seen in normal 
tissues which means that methylation is not necessarily depends on 
blocking of gene expression. Significant difference was detected be -
tween methylation pattern in normal and tumor tissues in 892 and 940 
islands that reveal the specificity of tumor methylation pattern.
P06.031  Evaluation of methylation in the 5‘UtR Promoter 
Region of DBC2  Gene in 50 Breast cancer individuals and 
comparing with the Normal controls in iranian Patients
M. Hajikhan Mirzaei1, A. Bidmeshgipour1, H. Karbasian2, Y. Shafeghati3, M. 
Noruzinia4,3;  
1Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Department of Surgery, Day General Hospital, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women 
Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Hematology, Faculty 
of Medical Science, Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies affecting wom -
en worldwide. Around 10 percent of every woman would be affected 
through her life. It is caused by a number of genetic and epigenetic 
factors.
Aberrant hypermethylation of promoter regions in specific genes is a 
key event in the formation and progression in some cancers. Recently 
DBC2  was found to participate in diverse cellular functions, such as 
protein transport, cytoskeleton regulation, apoptosis and cell cycle 
control. DBC2  has been identified as a candidate tumor-suppressor 
gene for breast cancer. Different studies showed that DBC2  is being 
inactivated through epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation in its 
promoter region, may facilitate proliferation of tumor cells. Inversely Cancer genetics17
reactivation of it usually suppresses the growth and expansion of the 
tumors.
There are different techniques to detect the methylation pattern. Mety -
lation specific PCR is an accurate technique. This technique relies on 
alteration that sodium bisulfate induces in DNA sequences and cause 
difference between methylated and unmethylated cytosine, by deami -
nation of unmethylated cytosine. Methylation pattern can be detected 
by using the specific primers set in two separate PCR reactions.
In this study, we evaluated methylation status of DBC2 in 50 breast 
cancer samples from 50 Iranian affected women and 5 normal tis -
sues.
The results showed that 23% of patients have methylated bands and 
70% are hemimethylated. We also found that 80% of normal tissues 
are hemimethylated and one normal sample has methylated band.
P06.032  Estrogen receptor α gene mutations in Exon 4 and 
intron 1 polymorphisms in a cohort of Breast cancer patients 
from india
V. Bhavani1, G. Raju2, Y. R. Ahuja3, G. Hasan4;  
1Department of Genetics, Vasavi Hospital and Research Centre, Lakdi-ka-
pool., Hyderabad, India, 2Department of Surgical Oncology, Nizam’s Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Panjagutta, Hyderabad, India, 3Department of Genetics, 
Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Masab Tank, Hyderabad, India, 
4Department of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, Kamineni Hospitals, L.B.Nagar, 
Hyderabad, India.
Purpose: Estrogen receptor (ER) mutations and polymorphisms are 
possible risk factors implicated in the initiation and development of 
Breast Cancer (BC). Hence, sporadic BC patients from a cosmopoli -
tan city of South India were assessed for ERα gene mutation in exon 
4 and both PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in intron 1. Methods: Ge -
nomic DNA was isolated from 310 sporadic BC patients and 210 sex 
matched healthy controls to evaluate an earlier reported A908G ERα 
exon 4 mutation by PCR - SSCP and Pvu II and XbaI polymorphisms 
in intron 1 by PCR - RFLP. Results: The expected ER exon 4 mutation 
was not identified in any of the samples, however, three BC patients 
showed a novel C975G mutation in the same exon. Results from the 
analysis of ER polymorphisms indicate that, PvuII PP genotype is sig -
nificantly associated with BC [OR 1.999, 95%CI -1.099-3.636], while 
XbaI polymorphism has no association in the cohort studied. Conclu -
sion: The functional significance of the novel exon 4 ER α gene C975G 
nucleotide change identified in 1.2% of the BC patients needs to be 
assessed. Unlike XbaI genotypes the ER alpha PvuII PP genotype 
confers a twofold higher risk of BC and may be used as a biomarker 
for Asian Indians
P06.033  Estrogen metabolism, hormone replacement therapy 
use and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer
J. Černe1, V. Stegel2, Ž. Frković-Grazio3, M. Pohar-Perme4, S. Novaković2, K. 
Geršak1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia, 2Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Pathology, Institute of Oncology 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Institute for Biostatistics and Medical 
Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Association between long-term hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT) use and increased risk of breast cancer is still under 
debate. Functionally relevant polymorphisms in genes involved in es -
trogen metabolism may alter exposure to exogenous sex hormones 
and affect risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. We evaluated as -
sociations of common polymorphisms in genes involved in estrogen 
metabolism, duration of HRT use, and their interactions with breast 
cancer risk in a case-control study of postmenopausal women.
Patients and methods: We studied 530 incident breast cancer cas -
es and 270 controls matched by age and ethnicity. Genotyping was 
conducted for COMT Val108/158Met, GSTP1 Ile105Val and MnSOD 
Val-9Ala polymorphisms by TaqMan® allelic discrimination method. 
Duration of HRT use was ascertained from a validated questionnaire. 
Adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated 
using logistic regression analysis.
Results: None of the polymorphisms studied was, by itself, statistically 
significantly associated with breast cancer risk. HRT use was signifi -
cantly associated with decreased breast cancer risk. Statistically sig -
nificant interaction between MnSOD Val-9Ala (pinteraction = 0.049) and HRT use was observed. The increased risk of breast cancer as -
sociated with long-term HRT use was greater among women with at 
least one variant allele of MnSOD Val-9Ala polymorphism.
Conclusions: Our results suggests that specific polymorphisms in 
genes involved in estrogen metabolism may modify the effect of long-
term HRT use on breast cancer risk.
P06.034  Polymorphism in mitochondrial DNA D loop region 
of iranian breast cancer patients: is it one of the reasons for younger iranian patients?
M. Akouchekian ;  
Department of Genetic and Molecular Cell Biology, Iran University of Medical 
Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is the most important malignancy for women in the 
world. In Iran breast cancers incidence is growing and the Iranian pa -
tients are 10 years younger than their western counterparts. Defects in 
mitochondrial function are suggested to contribute to the development 
and progression of cancer. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is particularly 
susceptible to damage by environmental carcinogenesis.
The displacement loop or D-loop is non-coding region in mtDNA and 
contains essential transcription and replication elements; hence muta -
tion in this region may serve as a potential sensor for cellular DNA 
damage and cancer development.
Aim of this study is to scan the mutation frequencies in hypervariable 
regions of mitochondrial D-Loop in breast cancer patients. The results 
of our investigation are summarized in the following table. When each 
polymorphism is tested individually using the fisher exact test the fre -
quency of one single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) was found to 
be significantly different between the breast cancer patients and con -
trols ( p≤0.05).
In this work the fact that the Iranian women who expose to breast can -
cer are approximately 10 years younger than their western counter -
parts is investigated. We think that existence of some SNPs in mtDNA 
in contribution with other genetics and environmental factors may be 
one of the reasons that cause the mentioned phenomena.
Fisher’’s Exact 
Test p valueControl cases 
(n=150)Breast cancer 
cases (n=25)SNPs
% Positive % Positive
0.99 4 6 48 12 G16145A
0.99 7.3 11 60 15 C16261T
0.008 43 64 72 18 T16529C
P06.035  molecular characterization of mesenchymal stem cells and the involvement in t umor Growth and metastases.
C. Glait-Santar , D. Benayahu;  
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are present in a variety of tissues 
like bone marrow stroma. MSCs can differentiate to various lineages 
includes the osteogenic lineage. Breast metastatic process displays 
organ specificity, one of the main targets is the bone. The molecular 
cross-talk between tumor components may enable synergy in its pro -
motion.
We focused on a novel cell adhesion molecule named SVEP1. SVEP1 
plays a role in cell adhesion and in breast cancer cells homing to bone 
niches. We characterize SVEP1 transcriptional regulation in MSCs 
(MBA15) versus breast cancer cells (DA3).
TSS-SVEP1 promoter is transcriptionally regulated by DNA methyla -
tion. By using Methylated Specific PCR method, this region is highly 
methylated in DA3, but less methylated in MBA15 cells. SVEP1 is tran -
scriptionally upregulated by TNF alpha and Estradiol treatments both in 
transient transfections, using SVEP1 promoter luciferase reporter plas -
mid and at the mRNA level. ChIP assay performed with MBA15 cells 
revealed increased ER alpha and NFkB binding to SVEP1 promoter 
following TNF alpha or Estrogen treatments. In contrast, increased 
binding of ER alpha and NFkB was found in DA3 cells stimulated with 
TNF alpha, but not following Estrogen stimulation. TNF alpha and Es -
trogen also regulate SVEP1 promoter through affecting its methylation 
status. We present differential expression of SVEP1 alternative spliced 
forms in MSCs versus Breast carcinoma cells which in turn can add 
another level of regulation.
SVEP1 and its spliced forms can be used as molecular diagnostic 
marker to isolate tumor initiating as well as metastatic cells and be 
potential therapeutic target.Cancer genetics1
P06.036  the correlation between E-cadherin protein 
and estrogen receptor alpha c promoter methylation, in pathogenesis of iranian patients with breast cancer
H. Loghmani Khouzani1,2, M. Noruzinia1,2, B. Samareh Abolhasani1;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Research 
Center (SARC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer among women. Most of 
breast tumors originate from mammary epithelial cells and are estro -
gen dependent. Estrogen exerts its effects through at least two nuclear 
receptors, ERα and ERβ, which have an important role in proliferation 
and differentiation of normal epithelial cells in breast tissue.
It has been shown that, receptor positive cells in breast cancer can be -
come estrogen negative. However the exact mechanism of estrogen 
receptor negativeness in breast cancer needs to be clarified. Promoter 
methylation at the ‘CpG islands’ in ERα has been investigated as an 
appealing mechanism of gene silencing.
On the other hand, E-cadherin is a cell-cell adhesion protein, with a 
prominent role in epithelial differentiation. Data suggest that E-cad -
herin is also a tumor suppressor in breast cancer.
In this research, we investigated the role of ERα C promoter methyla -
tion in Iranian patients with breast cancer, by Methylation Specific PCR 
in 40 blood and tissue samples in comparison with the percentage of 
E-Cadherin obtained by histopathological data from patients’ medical 
records. Primers were selected to be specific for a known CpG island 
in C promoter of ERα, either for methylated or unmethylated status.
Finally Statistical analysis were done between E-Cadherin percentage 
and the methylation patterns of ERα C promoter and a significant cor -
relation was found (p-value =0.04). This result was in concordance to 
those reported in the literature, which show a role of ERα methylation 
and E-Cadherin protein percentage in pathogenesis of Iranian breast 
cancer patients.
P06.037  Homozygous BUBR1 mutation and susceptibility to 
multi-site gastrointestinal neoplasia
T. Rio Frio1, J. Lavoie2, N. Hamel1, C. Capelli3, M. Tischkowitz4, V. A. Marcus2, 
W. D. Foulkes4,5;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of Pathology, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Zoology, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genetics and 
Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Program in Cancer Genetics, Departments 
of Oncology and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
A 67 year old male was diagnosed with an ampulla of Vater adeno -
carcinoma at age 34, followed by multiple adenomas and carcinomas 
of the stomach and colon in a setting of an unrecognized form of mo -
saic variegated aneuploidy (MVA). He was found to have a very high 
degree of premature chromatid separation (PCS) and chromosomal 
abnormalities. A homozygous mutation causing an intronic de novo 
splice site was found in BUBR1, a cause of MVA. All heterozygous 
relatives had intermediate levels of PCS. Functional analyses indi -
cated that homozygosity for this mutation causes a dramatic reduc -
tion in the amount of functional BUBR1 protein. This down-regulation 
caused mitotic abnormalities: PCS, aneuploidy, cell cycle dysfunction, 
and multiple cellular abnormalities (micronucleated cells, centrosome 
amplification). Immunohistochemistry revealed a decreased amount 
of BUBR1 in both normal and tumoral tissues in colon and stomach 
from proband compared to controls. Loss of functional APC (Adeno -
matous polyposis coli) is one of the major causes of colorectal cancer. 
We demonstrated that the interaction between the APC protein and 
BUBR1, previously reported as crucial for APC activation, was weaker 
in cells from the proband. Stable expression of BUBR1 cDNA in cells of 
the proband rescues the PCS phenotype, the cell cycle abnormalities, 
and the interaction between APC and BUBR1. Screening of a control 
population revealed that the mutation is a rare variant. This makes 
BUBR1 a strong candidate for mutation screening in cases of multiple 
gastrointestinal cancers and highlights the possibility of deregulation of 
SAC genes as a cause of gastrointestinal cancers.P06.038  The inverse ratio of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene 
expression in ovarian cancer tissue and in tumour environment.
V. P. Shubin1, A. N. Loginova1, A. N. Gritsay2, A. U. Kashurnikov2, A. V. 
Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We investigated BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene expression in samples of 
ovarian cancer tissues, in tissues of tumour environment and distant 
from tumour regions. The BRCA1/2 gene expression was determined 
comparative to expression of GAPDH gene by RT-PCR using Applied 
Biosystems TaqMan kits. The BRCA1 gene expression in tumour com -
parative to distant region was decreased in more than half of samples. 
Approximately the same result was obtained for BRCA2 although si -
multaneous decreasing of both gene expression was characteristic 
only for 30% of patients. In tumour environment tissue BRCA1 gene 
expression was decreased in comparison with tumour tissue for 60% 
of cases. For the same cases BRCA2 expression ratio in tumour and 
environment tissues was inverse comparative to BRCA1 expression 
ratio. In the cases when BRCA1 expression level was less in tumour 
than in environment tissue BRCA2 expression was inverse also. Thus 
for the first time it is revealed BRCA1 and BRCA2 participation in tu -
mour and environment tissue interplay. This is important in the light of 
data about microenvironment influence on the processes of malignant 
tumor onset and development and may be necessary for therapy cre -
ation.
P06.039  is mitochondrial genome cell’s Achilles’ heel of 
carcinogenesis?
A. M. Czarnecka1,2, A. Klemba1,2, K. Plak2, T. Krawczyk3, A. Semczuk4, M. 
Zdrozny5, J. Lubinski6, J. A. Petros7,8, E. Bartnik2,9;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Oncology, Military Institute of 
Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Clinical Pathology Laboratory, 
Monument Institute of Polish Mothers Health Center, Lodz, Poland, 42nd 
Clinic and Ward of Gynecology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 
5Department of Oncological Surgery and Breast Diseases, Monument Institute 
of Polish Mothers Health Center, Lodz, Poland, 6International Hereditary 
Cancer Center, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Szczecin, Poland, 7Department of Urology, Emory University School 
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 8The Atlanta VA Medical Center, 
Atlanta, GA, United States, 9Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, the Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
Objectives: Investigation of the role of mtDNA inherited polymorphisms 
in breast cancer and endometrial adenocarcinoma development.
Methods: mtDNA D-loop sequence and haplogroup distribution analy -
sis were performed in the cohorts of cancer patients, centenarians and 
woman with cancer free history. Two tailed non-directional Fisher-Irwin 
test has been used to verify the mutation probability difference be -
tween cohorts and general Polish population.
Results: In endometrial cancer cohort haplogroup H is under-rep -
resented if compared with healthy population (p = 0.001). Negative 
Predictive Value of T7025C RFLP test=0.581 and Relative Risk Re -
duction=0.725. Inheritance of 7028T results in increased risk of endo -
metrial cancer development as high as 350% in comparison to 7025C. 
Other mtDNA polymorphisms in particular 16223C (p =0.005), 16126C 
(p = 0.025) and 207A (p = 0.027) are abundant in endometrial cancer 
population.
Breast cancer patients in comparison to cancer free control group 
abundantly carry 10398G (p< 0.001). This polymorphism is cancer 
development factor with odds ratio=9.510 and RR=7.576. A10398G 
RFLP test has high sensitivity=0.769 and specificity=0.740. Moreover 
in breast cancer population A1811G and A4529T are overrepresented 
(p=0.001) if compared with centenarians.
Conclusions: 10398G polymorphism inheritance may predispose to 
breast cancer development, while 1811A and 4529A may protect from 
it. Carriers of T7028C seem to be protected for endometrial adenocar -
cinoma development, but inheritance of 16223C 16126C and 207A is 
a risk factor. mtDNA polymorphisms establish a specific genetic back -
ground for cancer development and may enable selection of popula -
tions at high cancer risk and support the process of prevention and 
early diagnosis.Cancer genetics1
P06.040  Nature of untargeted mutations in the polymerase-
tautomer model of ultraviolet mutagenesis
H. A. Grebneva ;  
Donetsk Physical and Technical Institute NAS of Ukraine, Donetsk, Ukraine.
Delayed and untargeted mutations are two features of genomic insta -
bility, the main cause of cancer. It is common hypothesis that they 
induce mutations at non damaged sites. The polymerase-tautomer 
model for ultraviolet mutagenesis is based on formation of rare tauto -
meric bases in cis-syn  cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and DNA bases 
[1], and that fact that during error-prone or SOS synthesis the induced 
DNA polymerase inserts canonical bases opposite the dimers in a 
complementary way in contrast to uncomplementary one in the con -
ventional models [2]. Potential mutagens correspond to 5 basic types 
of rare tautomeric conformations of thymine and adenine [1] and 7 of 
cytosine and guanine. Potential untargeted mutation is rare tautomer 
of guanine - cytosine pair, when protons in first and second hydrogen 
bonds were simultaneously sent to the partners on hydrogen bonds. 
They will be stable and can cause transition or homologous transver -
sion. In the case of closely located dimers in the both strands, the ad -
enines or guanines that are in rare tautomeric states can be a source 
of untargeted mutations. The third source is bases in rare tautomeric 
state localized in small vicinity of dimers. They may result in transi -
tion, transversion and frameshift mutations under error-prone or SOS 
synthesis.
1. H. A. Grebneva. J. Mol. Struct. - 2003. Vol. 645. P. 133-143.
2. H. A. Grebneva. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. - 2006. Vol. 47. P. 733-
745.
P06.041  Germline mutations of the CBL gene define a 
new genetic syndrome with predisposition to juvenile 
myelomonocytic leukemia (JmmL)
B. Pérez1,2, B. Isidor3, N. Philip4, J. Derain-Court4, B. Leheup5, F. Mechinaud6, A. 
Salmon7, C. Galambrun8, N. Ben Romdhane9, B. Cassinat2, J. Lachenaud1,2, S. 
Kaltenbach1, O. Fenneteau10, A. Baruchel11, H. Cavé1,2, A. Verloes1,12;  
1AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Département de Génétique, Université Paris7 
Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 2INSERM U940, IUH, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, 
France, 3Service de Génétique, CHRU, Nantes, France, 4Service de Génétique, 
Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5Service de Génétique, CHRU, Nancy, 
France, 6Service d’Oncologie Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHRU, Nantes, France, 
7Service d’Onco-Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHRU, Nancy, France, 8Service 
d’Hématologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 9Service 
d’Hématologie, Hôpital La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 10AP-HP, Hôpital Robert 
Debré, Service d’Hématologie Biologique, Paris, France, 11AP-HP, Hôpital 
Robert Debré, Service d’Hématologie Pédiatrique; Université Paris7-Denis 
Diderot, Paris, France, 12INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Background: CBL missense mutations have recently been associated 
with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), an aggressive myelo -
proliferative and myelodysplatic neoplasm of early childhood charac -
terized by excessive macrophage/monocyte proliferation. CBL, an E3 
ubiquitin ligase and a multi adaptor protein, controls proliferative sig -
naling networks by downregulating the growth factor receptor signaling 
cascades in various cell types.
Methods and results: CBL mutations were screened in 65 patients with 
JMML. A homozygous mutation of CBL was found in leukemic cells of 
4/65 (6%) patients. In all cases, copy neutral loss of heterozygosity 
of the 11q23-qter chromosomal region, encompassing the CBL locus, 
was demonstrated. Three of these 4 patients displayed additional fea -
tures suggestive of an underlying developmental condition. A hetero -
zygous germline  CBL  p.Y371H substitution was found in each of them 
and was inherited from the father in one patient. The germline mutation 
represents the first hit, with somatic loss of heterozygosity being the 
second hit positively selected in JMML cells. The 3 patients display 
a variable combination of dysmorphic features, hyperpigmented skin 
lesions and microcephaly that allow us to tentatively delineate a “CBL 
syndrome”. Learning difficulties and postnatal growth retardation may 
be part of the phenotype.
Conclusion: We report germline mutations of CBL in 3 patients with 
JMML, confirming the existence of an unreported inheritable condition 
associated with a predisposition to JMML.P06.042  mutation screening of CDKN2A  gene in malignat 
melanom a families from the slovakia.
M. Milly1, M. Konecny1, K. Zavodna1, E. Weismanova1, D. Ilencikova2, I. Mlkva3, 
J. Kausitz1;  
1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Oncological 
Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Germline mutations in the CDKN2A  gene have been linked to inherited 
predisposition to malignant melanoma. Variable frequencies of CDK -
N2A germline mutations were reported in different polulations. High 
percentage of the mutations were observed only once and are family 
specific. There is also an increased risk of pancreatic cancer in a sub -
set of families with mutaions.
We have screened 32 high-risk melanoma families from Slovakia us -
ing a direct sequencing technique. There was examined the entire cod -
ing region of the p16 and p14 gene, including exons 1α, 1β, 2 and 3, 
flanking exon/intron junctions, and portion of the 5´untranslated (UTR) 
region of the gene.
Analysis of CDKN2A  gene showed presence of 2 novel missense mu -
tations, one mutation c.100G>C (Ala34Pro) was identified at exon 1α 
in a two different melanoma families. The second mutation c. 150G>C 
(Gln50His) was detected in one familie at the some exon. Both sub -
stitutions was not previously described, and have undetermined 
pathogenic effect. There was also observed common polymorphism 
Ala148Thr and frequent variants C/G in the 3´UTR at the postion 29 
after stop codon.
In summary, within 32 Slovak melanoma families, we identified 3 fami -
lies (9,4%) with two types of novel CDKN2A  mutations, which has not 
been reported yet. These new substitutions will need additional exami -
nation of functional impact to gene CDKN2A .
P06.043  constitutional genomic imbalances in children with 
cancer and congenital anomalies
M. C. J. Jongmans , R. P. Kuiper, P. M. Hoogerbrugge, E. Kamping, L. Hilkens, 
M. J. L. Ligtenberg, A. Geurts-van Kessel, N. Hoogerbrugge;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Congenital malformations are present at higher frequencies in children 
with cancer than in age-matched controls. Constitutional genomic 
imbalances may underlie these clinical manifestations. We set out to 
identify such anomalies using a high resolution genomic profiling ap -
proach. To this end, twenty-seven patients with a pediatric malignancy 
and a congenital anomaly were analyzed on a SNP array platform (Af -
fymetrix). In two of these patients submicroscopic imbalances were 
found. The first patient was a girl with acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL) and polysyndactyly of the toes. She harbored a intragenic germ -
line deletion of the THADA  gene. This gene is considered to play a role 
in apoptosis. Interestingly, THADA  deletions have previously been en -
countered in sporadic paediatric ALLs. In the second patient, a girl with 
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and a congenital heart defect, we de -
tected a microduplication of the chromosome 22q11.2 region. This mi -
cro-duplication appeared to be inherited from the mother who suffered 
from meningioma. This same region is typically deleted in patients 
with velocardiofacial syndrome. In addition, a 22q11.2 microduplica -
tion syndrome has recently been recognized. As yet, however, these 
syndromes have not been associated with tumor predisposition. Our 
results indicate that high-resolution genomic profiling of patients with a 
childhood malignancy and a congenital anomaly may hold promise as 
an approach to identify novel cancer predisposing genes.
P06.044  Deregulation of proapoptotic genes in skull base 
chordoma
L. Ferrari1, M. Stroppi1, A. Calastretti2, N. Boari3, P. Mortini3, P. Riva1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Farmacologia, Chemioterapia 
e Tossicologia Mediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 
3Dipartimento di Neurochirurgia, Università Vita-Salute S.Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
Chordoma is a rare tumour arising from remnants of notochord, char -
acterized by local invasiveness and variable tendency to recurrence. 
Given the implication of apoptosis in notochord regression, we stud -
ied in 21 tumours the expression by RT-PCR of 8 proapoptotic genes 
mapping in 1p36, region showing loss of heterozigosity in most chor -
domas (83%). TNFRSF8 and TNFRSF9 were found to be differently 
expressed in 45% of tumours in comparison to the control nucleus 
pulposus, while DFFA, DFFB, CASP9, TNFRSF1B, TNFRSF14 and Cancer genetics170
TP73 were occasionally observed differently expressed in comparison 
to the control. The expression profile of each tumour was compared 
to that of the control and none of them but one, overlaps the control 
expression profile. As the apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS-FASL is 
involved in notochord regression, we studied their expression in 34 tu -
mours and in 3 chordoma cell lines. Since most chordomas expressed 
FAS but not FASL, we treated a chordoma cell line, expressing FAS 
but not the ligand, with the soluble FASL at different times and con -
centrations. By FACS analysis following apoptotic assay, we observed 
apoptosis induction after soluble FASL administration. The expression 
of TP53, involved in the intrinsic apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS-
FASL, was also investigated by Real-Time PCR in 23 chordomas: 
upregulation was detected in 53% of tumours. A correlation study be -
tween the expression profiles of proapoptotic genes and the patients’ 
follow up will be carried out to search for prognostic markers, while the 
possible pharmacological effect of FASL will be investigated in primary 
chordoma cell cultures.
P06.045  Detection of BcR-ABL breakpoints in iranian patients 
with chronic myelogenous Leukemia
P. Rostami , H. Loghmani Khouzani, L. Yektamaram, E. Shirvani, H. Imanian, 
S. Valizadegan, H. Najmabadi;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disor -
der characterized by increased proliferation of the granulocytic cell line 
without the loss of their capacity to differentiate. Translocation between 
the BCR locus on chromosome 22 and the ABL locus on chromosome 
9 generates a chimeric gene, BCR-ABL. The protein product of this 
chimeric gene exhibits an altered tyrosine kinase activity which is im -
plicated in the progression of CML.
In this study, peripheral blood samples from the patients admitted to 
Kariminejad- Najmabadi gentic center were subjected to RNA isola -
tion and cDNA synthesis. To achieve maximal sensitivity nested PCR 
protocol was used and a housekeeping gene was considered as an 
internal positive control.
We have studied 715 patients and the following results were ob -
tained: as from 715 CML patients, 266 of them were positive for t(9;22) 
(q34;q11), and among them 151 (56.76%) had ‘b2a2’, 113 (42.48%) 
‘b3a2’ and 2 (0.75%) had the ‘e1a2’ breakpoints.
Most of our patients showed ‘b2a2’ fusion gene (56.7%), while the re -
maining showed one of the transcripts of ‘b3a2’ or ‘e1a2’. The rate of 
coexpression of the ‘b3a2’ and ‘b2a2’ was 5%. In contrast to other re -
ports, we did not see any coexpression of p210/p190.  According to this 
experiment ‘b2a2’ breakpoint is more common among Iranian popula -
tion which is in contrary with other literature, indicating ‘b3a2’ break -
point as the most common one. To be able to find the most common 
breakpoint in Iranian population we need to continue the experiment in 
a larger scale and among different ethnics.
P06.046  Research and clinical importance of Duplications in Various chromosomal Regions in Addition to Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myeloid Leukemia
T. Sever1, C. Kılıçarslan1, M. Pehlivan2, L. Kaynar3, M. Yılmaz2, B. Eser3, V. 
Okan2, F. Kurnaz3, M. Çetin3, S. Pehlivan1;  
1University of Gaziantep, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, 
GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Medical Faculty, Department 
of Hematology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3University of Erciyes, Medical Faculty, 
Department of Hematology, KAYSERI, Turkey.
It was aimed to investigate the chromosomal aberrations in Chronic 
Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and particularly the aberrations in the chro -
mosomal regions, which carried 67 genes pertaining to oncogene, 
transcription factor, signal transmission, cytokine, immune system, 
tumor suppressor and apoptosis, in addition to Philadelphia (Ph+) 
chromosome by MLPA method and to compare them with clinical pa -
rameters. In this study, we were investigated with MLPA method in 48 
patients, who were diagnosed with chronic phase CML or were under 
treatment process and in 15 healthy controls. The obtained results 
were compared both among each other and with clinical parameters 
and their effects on survival were evaluated. Seventy patients were 
male whereas 31 of them were female. The median age was 43 (20-
74). Duplication was detected in FGFR1 gene of 2 patients, IMPDH1 
gene of 4 patients, PMS2 gene of 1 patient, NFKBI of 5 patients and LMO2 gene of 1 patient. In multivariate analysis, it was observed that 
only the duplications in IMPDH1 and FGFR1 genes were the most 
important factors that affected event-free survival (p=0.028). Duplica -
tions in 4 genes in CML patients, who used imatinib, were detected for 
the first time. The duplications in IMPDH1 and FGFR1 genes, located 
in chromosomes 7 and 8 and being in charge of signal transmission, 
particularly had negative effects on event-free survival. In conclusion, 
this study puts forward that chromosomes 7 and 8 should particularly 
be investigated in more detail in addition to Ph+ chromosome in the 
determination of prognosis and selection of treatment alternatives.
P06.047  the isotherm of joint binding of different types of 
ligands with DNA
A. Arakelyan ;  
Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia.
Cis-DDP is frequently used as an anti - tumor drug. That is why it is 
very important to investigate the binding parameters of the cis-DDP 
with DNA. The special method has been developed for study of cis-
DDP bound to DNA irreversibly.The essence of the proposed method 
is to obtain the information about the irreversible binding of cis-DDP 
with DNA on the basis of isotherm of adsorption of the reversibly bind -
ing lingand (EtBr) on DNA in presence of cis-DDP. The adsorption 
of ligands has been considered in case of small amount of both ir -
reversibly and reversibly binding matter. With taking into account the 
existence of two regions with different binding features in DNA, the 
adsorption isotherm and dispersion has been calculated. The isotherm 
of adsorption of EtBr on DNA has a linear form in Scatchard coor -
dinates at low degrees of occupation. It was shown that irreversible 
binding of cis-DDP on DNA results to transformation of the linear in 
Scathcard coordinates isotherm of adsorption into non-linear isotherm. 
It was shown also that comparison with experimental isotherm of re -
versibly binding ligand permits to estimate such important parameters 
as binding constant, number of binding sites on DNA per ligand, and 
the fraction of DNA molecules have been changed their features under 
influence of irreversible binding of cis-DDP with DNA.
P06.048  Prognostic significance of interstitial del(14)(q) with deletion iGH(c) in patients with cLL.
R. Ruzbacky , P. Novakova, M. Cermak, M. Matuskova, D. Ilencikova;  
National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction: Deletions of long arm of chromosome 14 are recurrently 
observed in malignant B- cells and are often detected in patients with 
CLL. We wanted to answer following questions:
What is CLL biology and genetics with deletion of IgH (C)?
Which characteristics have patients with CLL and patients with this 
change?
Does del IgH (C) have an influence for patient´s surviving?
Methods: We have identified patients with deletion of IgH (C) by the 
method FISH with LSI IGH Dual color, Brak apart probe (Vysis) and 
consequently, we have examined these patients by the method ar -
rayCGH for specification of size of this deleted region. Array CGH 
results were validated by FISH with BAC probes 14q24.1(ZFP36L1), 
RP11-204K16sg (179,9 Kb) a 14q32.1, RP11-79J20so (168,2 Kb) 
(Pentagen Ltd.).
Results and Conclusion: We have identified interstitial 
del(14)(q24.14q32.33) in 5 patients by the method arrayCGH. We 
have found out the extent of IgH (C) deletions as well as the additional 
chromosomal aberrations.
Deletions of IgH (C) refer to assumption of interstitial deletions 
of 14q with breakpoint located proximally from Eμ (enhancer). 
Del(14)(q24.1q32.33) are occurring recurrently and in this region gene 
ZFP36L1 is located, which possibly plays a role in disease pathogen -
esis.
Correlation of incidence del(14)(q24.1q32.33) with surviving in 5 pa -
tients refers to the fact, that isolated del(14)(q24.1q32.33) was asso -
ciated in patients with good surviving independently of age, clinical 
phase, IgH (V) mutation status.
That all points to: participation on disease development, but not as a 
significant prognostic marker associated to a bad prognosis.Cancer genetics171
P06.049  AHI1  Gene Expression Levels and BCR-ABL1  t315i 
mutations in chronic myeloid Leukemia Patients
T. Bulakbasi Balci1, F. I. Sahin1, S. Karakus2, H. Ozdogu2;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of 
Hematology, Ankara, Turkey.
With the availability of molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL1 and the use 
of imatinib, therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) now targets its 
molecular pathology. While in time a group of patients would acquire 
resistance to imatinib, alternative tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been 
developed in this aspect. In this study, 83 samples taken at different 
time points from 38 CML patients; were subjected to gene expression 
analysis of AHI1 ; a novel gene that is thought to have a role in both 
BCR-ABL1 mediated leukemic transformation via the JAK/STAT path -
way and response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In the same samples, 
the presence of T315I mutation was investigated. Only one patient 
(2.63%) harbored the T315I mutation. While no significant difference 
in AHI1  expression was observed between newly diagnosed CML 
samples and non-CML controls; CML samples under imatinib therapy 
had levels significantly higher than both newly diagnosed samples and 
controls. In the first 6 months of imatinib therapy, AHI1  expression was 
found to increase, then decrease gradually in time. There was no sig -
nificant difference between imatinib responders and non-responders, 
while cases on dasatinib had significantly lower AHI1  levels. It is pro -
posed that the change in AHI1  expression during CML therapy might 
be under the control of mechanisms independent from BCR-ABL1. 
AHI1  mediated signaling could be better understood by analyzing 
AHI1  gene expression levels in a greater number of patients and con -
currently investigating the JAK/STAT and Src family kinase pathways.
P06.050  First evidence for digenic inheritance in hereditary 
colorectal cancer by mutations in the base excision repair genes
M. Morak1,2, T. Massdorf1, H. Sykora1, E. Holinski-Feder1,2;  
1University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Campus Innenstadt, 
Munich, Germany, 2MGZ - Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany.
Biallelic mutations in the base excision repair gene MUTYH are re -
sponsible for variable recessively inherited phenotypes of polyposis. 
Beside MUTYH, the proteins OGG1 and MTH1 (or NUDT1) are also 
involved the repair of 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxo-G). So far, pre -
vious studies only found missense mutations in either MTH1 or OGG1 
with additional heterozygous mutations in MUTYH.
To investigate the role of a defective 8-oxo-G repair we performed a 
germline mutation screening in the genes MUTYH, OGG1 and MTH1 
in 81 patients with a clinical phenotype ranging from attenuated or 
atypical adenomatous polyposis coli including hyperplastic polyps to 
HNPCC syndrome without microsatellite instability in their tumours 
and no germline mutation detectable in mismatch repair genes MLH1, 
MSH2 and MSH6 or APC.
We describe here the first pathogenic germline mutation in OGG1, 
a splice site mutation affecting exon 1 which was inherited from the 
father, in combination with a maternal MUTYH missense mutation 
p.Ile209Val in a female patient with synchronous colon cancer at age 
of 36 years pointing towards digenic inheritance for colorectal cancer 
predisposition.
Monoallelic missense mutations in MTH1 (3), OGG1 (2), or MUTYH 
(3) were identified in 11 patients, of those, four mutations were novel. 
Our findings indicate that other genes of the 8-oxo-G repair beside 
MUTYH might be involved in hyperplastic polyps, attenuated polyposis 
and colorectal cancer predisposition, either as single heterozygote or 
double heterozygote mutations.
P06.051  Genetic biomarkers spectrum and molecular tools 
utility in metastatic colorectal cancer diagnostics in patients of 
Polish origin.
A. Tysarowski , L. Wyrwicz, J. Oledzki, J. Siedlecki;  
The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center And Institute of 
Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
K-RAS gene encodes G-protein involved in EGFR-induced cell sig -
naling. Mutations in K-RAS are found in about 40% of metastatic 
colorectal cancers and are connected with lack of response for novel 
therapeutic agents targeting the EGFR signal pathway. Estimation of 
mutational status of K-RAS is necessary for the selection of patients, 
who should be treated with targeted therapies, however only subset of patients without K-RAS mutation are good responders for the agents. 
This is why mutations in others genes involved in EGFR signal path -
way (e.g. BRAF and PIK3CA) are necessary to investigate in routine 
molecular diagnostics. Another issue is lack of validated and standard -
ized methods for mutation detection in the highly heterogenic material 
isolated from paraffin blocs, which may lead to false negative or false 
positive results.
The aim of our study was: 1) to analyze the mutational status in K-
RAS, BRAF and PIK3CA in group of 300 Polish patients with meta -
static colorectal cancer 2) to compare preanalytic and analytic phases 
tools in order to propose recommendations for molecular testing.
Molecular analysis is still proceed, thus final conclusions and summa -
ries will be presented after completion of the study.
Supported by N-403289136
P06.052  involvement of distinct molecular mechanisms in 
development of proximal and distal sporadic colorectal cancers
M. Hiljadnikova Bajro1, T. Josifovski2, N. Jankulovski2, A. J. Dimovski1;  
1Faculty of Pharmacy, University „SS. Cyril and Methodius“, Skopje, 
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Clinic for Abdominal 
Surgery, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Published data suggest existence of two hystologically and genetically 
distinct subtypes of colorectal cancers in regards to the site of origin, 
with implications for the tumor prognosis and employment of thera -
peutic regimens. Our study aims at comparing the clinicopathological 
and molecular profiles between colon cancers located proximally and 
distantly to the splenic flexure among patients from the Republic of 
Macedonia. A total of 420 sporadic CRC were evaluated for the pres -
ence and extent of microsatellite instability and loss of heterozygos -
ity using fluorescent multiplex PCR and capillary gel electrophoresis. 
Patients with a history of CRC in the family were excluded from the 
study. The obtained results indicate that significant majority (70%) of 
CRC detected in the Republic of Macedonia are located distally to the 
splenic flexure, develop at an older age (61.05ys) predominantly in 
female population (p=0.0159, OR=1.742 CI 95%=1.11-2.74) and show 
loss of heterozygosity at 18q (p=0.0454, OR=1.72,CI 95%=1.0-2.93), 
as well as tendency towards allelic loss at 8p, 1p and 5q. Proximal 
tumors develop in younger (59.45 ys) men and show significantly 
higher frequency of microsatellite instability (p=0.000037, OR=7.67, 
CI 95%=2.69-21.87) in comparison to the distal CRCs. Our data 
clearly support the hypothesis for involvement of different molecular 
mechanisms in development of proximal and distal sporadic colorec -
tal cancers, ongoing prospective studies should elucidate the possible 
prognostic differences as well as the predictive value of the underlying 
molecular mechanisms for establishment of effective therapeutic ap -
proach.
P06.053  the Use of multifactor Dimensionality Reduction to 
Detect Epistasis Among Potential causal Genes of colorectal cancer
M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, L. 
Belusica3, N. Panduru4, C. Serafinceanu4, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Prof. Dr. Dimitrie Gerota” Hospital, Bucharest, 
Romania, 4Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases “N. 
Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania.
Aims/hypothesis. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a complex genetic dis -
ease, which results from interactions between multiple genes and en -
vironmental factors without any single factor having strong indepen -
dent effects. This study was done to identify gene to gene interactions 
which could be associated with the risk of CRC. The multifactor-dimen -
sionality reduction (MDR) method has been shown to be effective for 
detecting and characterizing gene to gene interactions in case-control 
studies with relatively small samples.
Methods. We genotyped 14 different polymorphisms in 9 candidate 
genes for disease in 180 unrelated CRC patients and 60 control sub -
jects. We analyzed gene to gene interactions among 14 polymorphic 
loci using the MDR method.
Results. We identify a tree-locus model between DCC (rs714), ACE 
(rs4291) and IGF2 (rs680) that have a maximum CV consistency of 
7 out of 10, and a four-locus model between ACE(rs4646994), VDR 
(rs2228570), MTHFR (rs1801133) and IGF2 (rs680) that have a maxi -
mum CV consistency of 5 out of 10.Cancer genetics172
Conclusions/interpretation. Using the MDR method, we showed a tree-
locus interaction between the DCC, ACE and IGF2 among 9 candi -
date genes of CRC. The determination of such genotype combinations 
contributing to CRC could provide a new tool for identifying high-risk 
individuals.
Study supported by grant CNCSIS-TD 51/2008.
P06.054  Association of polymorphisms in the hmLH1 gene with 
sporadic colorectal cancer risk
f. ghaderi , B. Noori Nayyer, f. fallahian, p. rostami;  
Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases,Taleghani Hospital , 
Shahid Beheshti Univer, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mismatch repair (MMR) genes are among of the most important genes 
associated with colorectal cancer. Numerous polymorphisms (mainly 
SNPs) have been identified for DNA repair genes, although no study 
of association between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) of 
hMLH1 gene and Iranian sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC) is avail -
able. To address this issue,we examined 4 reported single-nucleotide 
variants that have rarely been verified in a population-based study 
to identify SNPs and the genotype-phenotype association in Iranian 
populations of 100 healthy individuals and 174 SCRC patients. We ex -
tracted the genomic DNA from the blood of these individuals and used 
Pyrosequencing technology to determine these SNPs. All 4 single-nu -
cleotide variants of hMLH1 gene examined in this study were identified 
as SNPs . Whereas rs1799977and rs4986984 did not seem to affect 
SCRC risk, rs2308317( OR, 6.085; 95% CI, 2.706 -13.681;  P <0.001 
)and rs2020873(OR,  6.026; 95% CI, 2.261 , 16.062;  P <0.001 ) did 
show statistically significant differences between cases and controls
P06.055  multiple primary malignancies and subtle 
mucocutaneous lesions in patient with cowden syndrome (cs)
P. Vasovcak1, M. Senkerikova2, J. Hatlova3, A. Krepelova1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Medical 
School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department 
of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, 
3Fingerland’s Department of Pathology, Charles University Medicine Faculty, 
Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
Cowden syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder charac -
terized by multiple benign polyps called hamartomas and an increased 
risk of developing tumours, mainly breast, thyroid and endometrial 
carcinoma. Almost all (99%) CS patients present mucocutaneous le -
sions by their thirties. Macrocephaly, Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD), 
gastrointestinal polyps and goitre are another features commonly pre -
sented in CS patients.
We examined a 58 year-old woman with subtle mucocutaneous lesions 
and multiple primary malignancies. She had been followed up for a pe -
riod of 23 years, when she developed gradually thyroid, ovarian, stom -
ach, colon and benign meningiomas. Mutation analysis of the PTEN  
gene revealed a novel germline mutation (c.438delT, p.Leu146X) in 
the patient (submitted).
Although breast and thyroid cancer are predominant malignancies in 
CS, it should be emphasized that benign and/or malignant tumours 
may also develop in GI tract from pre-existing polyp, in genitourinary 
tract or in brain. Most papers dealing with cancer in CS patients do not 
show the lifetime risk of malignancy in CS because of the relatively 
young age of the patients. We suppose that meningioma and GIT can -
cers, although occurring rarely, should be a part of the definition of CS 
and the physician who might encounter the disease should be aware 
of this neurological and/or GI manifestation.
Grant support: MZOFNM2005
P06.056  Beta-catenin gene mutation analysis in saudi diagnosed Endometrial cancinoma Patients
I. Alabdulkareem1,2, M. Al Balwi1,3,2, W. Al Harbi1, M. Balloee1, F. Alsafi4, A. 
Almulham4, A. Alkushi3,2;  
1KAIMRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences, College of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 
4Obstetrical and Gynecology Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most frequently diagnosed gynecologi -
cal malignancy reported worldwide with an estimated incidence of 15-
20 cases per 100,000 women per year. Beta-catenin (CTNNB1) gene plays a role in regulating normal cell growth and behavior. Mutation of 
CTNNB1 gene has been reported in colon carcinomas, medulloblas -
toma and ovarian carcinoma. The aim of this study was performed to 
investigate the CTNNB1 gene mutation in EC pathologically diagnosed 
cases. Presence of these molecular markers may elucidate better un -
derstanding of CTNNB1 gene behavior in our EC diagnosed patients. 
Genomic DNA was extracted from paraffin embedded sections of tumor 
and normal tissue from 73 patients with EC (59 endometrioid and 14 
non-endometrioid). CTNNB 1 mutations in exon 3 were assessed with 
direct DNA sequencing using ABI 3130xl Genomic Analyzer. CTNNB1 
mutations were identified in 20 ECs (33.9%), all of them endometrioid 
carcinomas (20 of 59; 33.9%). The results of this study may add more 
insight into the molecular mechanisms of CTNNB1 gene in endome -
trial tumorigenesis process occurs in Saudi Arabia patients.
P06.057  The Determination of FAS and TNF-α and IL-6 Gene Polymorphisms in Early stage mycosis Fungoides
G. Saydam1, H. Ak Celik2, H. H. Aydin2, I. Ertam3, I. Kilinc3, F. Sahin1, C. 
Sezgin4, A. Berdeli5, G. Ozturk3;  
1Ege University School of Medicine Department of Hematology, Izmir, Turkey, 
2Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biochemistry, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Ege University School of Medicine Department of Dermatology, Izmir, 
Turkey, 4Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, 
Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege University School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, 
Izmir, Turkey.
Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common of primary cutaneus 
lymphomas. Although, environmental and occupational exposure to 
solvents and chemicals has been implicated in the etiology of the dis -
ease, the cause and risk factors of MF are still unclear.
In this study, we have aimed to determine the FAS (-670 A > G, 
rs1800682) and TNF-α (-308 G > A, rs 1800629), interleukin-6 (IL-
6) (-174 G > C, rs1800795) gene polymorphisms in early stages of 
MF patients (n=25) and compared them with control subjects (n=95) 
to clarify the potential role of these polymorphisms in MF. We found 
significant increases in IL-6 CC genotype (Odds ratio: 36.55, p < 0.01) 
and C allele frequency (Odds ratio: 3.35, p < 0.01) in MF group. Nev -
ertheless, not any significant change determined for FAS and TNF-α 
polymorphisms.
P06.058  Analysis of DICER1 gene dosage in hematological 
malignancies
K. Zerjavic1, B. Zagradisnik1, L. Lokar2, M. Glaser Krasevac3, N. Kokalj Vokac1;  
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, 
Slovenia, 2Department of Transfusiology, University Medical Center Maribor, 
Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Hematology and Hematological Oncology, 
University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
Ribonuclease Dicer is the key enzyme required for the biogenesis of 
microRNA and is essential for both mammalian development and cell 
differentiation. Recent evidence indicates that Dicer may also play an 
important role in cancer. Although the expression patterns of DICER1 
in different types of tumors were studied so far, the influence of DIC -
ER1 gene dosage on the progress of cancer remains largely unex -
plored. Therefore, in this study we investigate whether DICER1 gene 
dosage is altered in patients with hematological malignancies.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral venous blood and bone 
marrow. For gene dosage analysis, real-time PCR quantification of 
DICER1 and HFE1 as a reference gene was carried out, using SYBR 
Green I as a dsDNA saturating dye. Relative DICER1 gene dosage 
was calculated using the two standard curve method.
We included 114 patients with hematological malignancies (clinically 
confirmed MPNs, AMLs or CMLs) and 78 apparently healthy individu -
als as a control group. We found no difference in DICER1 gene dosage 
relative to the reference gene in patients with hematological malignan -
cies. Additionally, HFE1 gene dosage was not altered in any tested 
individual.
We conclude that DICER1 gene dosage is not altered in the majority 
of patients with MPNs and AMLs/CMLs. Any potential change in the 
expression of DICER1 in these types of malignancies is therefore not 
caused by the alteration of gene dosage. The copy number polymor -
phisms of both DICER1 and HFE1 genes may be too rare in the gen -
eral population to be detected in the limited number of individuals.Cancer genetics17
P06.059  Analysis of frequency NFKBiA gene polymorphism 
(rs696) in Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer
M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, S. Hryhorowicz2, D. Rakowski2, 
O. Zakerska1, K. Ziemnicka3, J. Sowiński3, R. Słomski1,2;  
1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 
2University of Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Department of Endocrinology 
and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine sys -
tem with growing up frequency. The most often occurs papillary and 
follicular thyroid cancer, which belong to group of well prognoses tu -
mors with slow progress and low benignity. Very serious problem are 
recurrences and regional or remote metastasis. Progression from well 
differentiated thyroid cancer to malignant anaplastic carcinoma is pos -
sible also.
In this focus, very important seems to be searching for molecular 
markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and response on 
medical treatment as well. It is expected that SNP polymorphisms re -
search in genes demonstrating association with neoplastic diseases 
will be helpful in understanding of molecular mechanisms of thyroid 
gland tumors development and allow to better diagnosing.
We analyzed c.*126G>A polymorphism (rs696) in NFKBIA gene. 
Groups of 273 patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and 186 in -
dividuals from population group were examined. Sequence variants 
were determined by pyrosequencing.
There were observed differences in allele and genotype frequencies. In 
patients with thyroid cancer allele G was present with frequency 0,579 
and allele A with frequency 0,421, compared with 0,521 and 0,478 in 
population group respectively. The differences were more significant 
when considerate men and women separately. Allele G in males with 
DTC was observed with frequency 0,651 comparing with males popu -
lation control 0,533; allele A with frequency 0,349 in patient males and 
0,467 in males population.
Regarding lower frequency of the disease in males, detected differ -
ences may indicate on association of allele G with thyroid cancer risk.
P06.060  the association between CDKN2A /p16 aberrant 
DNA methylation with few risk factors such as obesity and 
occupational airborne exposures in esophageal cancer patients
S. Mohammad Ganji1,2, E. Miotto3, E. Callegari4, F. Rastgar-Jazii1, K. 
Sayehmiri5, F. Fereidooni6, M. Yazdanbod7, M. Negrini2, M. Negrini2;  
1Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dipartimento di Medicina 
Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3DDipartimento di Medicina 
Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca 
sul Cancro, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina 
Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro, Università di Ferrara,, Ferrara, Italy, 5Department of Epidemiology and 
social medicine, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 6Department of Pathology. Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospitals 
Complex, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Surgery 
Department, Shariati Hospital, Medical University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
There are some risk factors for increasing of squamous cell carcinoma 
of esophagus such as obesity and occupational dust exposure which 
we tested whether these factors could also affect aberrant DNA meth -
ylation. For this reason, we studied for methylation at the CDKN2A /p16 
gene promoter by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction as -
say (MSP) on DNAs extracted from 44 fresh tumor tissues and 19 
non-tumor adjacent normal tissues, obtained from 44 patients affected 
by squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus (SCCE) in Iran. Statisti -
cal analysis were used to assess association of promoter methylation 
with bio-pathological, clinical and personal information data, including 
obesity and airborne exposures. The results showed that in 27.2% (12 
out of 44) of tumor samples, Methylation at the CDKN2A /p16 gene 
promoter was detected but none of the non-tumor tissues exhibited 
the aberrant methylation.moreover, the results confirmed previously 
described significant association with low tumor stage (P=0.002); in 
addition, we found that obesity (P=0.001) and occupational exposure 
(P=0.008) were both significantly associated with CDKN2A /p16 pro -
moter methylation. This study provides evidence that obesity and oc -
cupational exposure increase the risk of developing esophageal can -
cer through an enhancement of  CDKN2A /p16 promoter methylation.P06.061  Detection of EGFR mutations from cytologic specimens 
of Non-small cell lung cancer in slovak Republic
K. Hlinkova1, D. Ilencikova1, P. Babal2;  
1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Pathological 
Anatomy, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Objective: Lung cancer is the leading cause of death in the Slovak Re -
public. Lung cancer includes small cell lung cancer and non-small cell 
lung cancer. NSCLC accounts for approximately 80% of lung cancer. 
Chemotherapy for NSCLC remains marginally effective with a 5-year 
overall survival in 5-18%. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib was 
approved in Slovak Republic for the treatment of NSCLC. Gefitinib is a 
selective EGFR inhibitor that binds to the ATP binding pocket of the ki -
nase domain and blocks downstream signaling pathways. Mutations of 
the EGFR, in-frame 15bp deletional mutation (delE746_A750) in exon 
19 and L858R in exon 21 correlated with a clinical responsiveness to 
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Material and methods: We established methods for detecting delE746_
A750 and L858R mutations from cytologic materials by a high resolu -
tion melting analysis and a mutant-enriched PCR. The results were 
compared with direct sequencing. We analyzed 60 archivated cyto -
logic specimens from patients with NSCLC.
Result: Mutations of EGFR were detected in 13 cases. In-frame dele -
tion in exon 19 were detected in 15% and L858R mutation in exon 
21 in 9,4% cases. The results of the mutant-enriched PCR and high 
resolution melting analysis were consistent. However one mutant case 
in exon 21 and two cases in exon 19 were not detected by direct se -
quencing. The pathological findings of these specimens showed a 5% 
fraction of tumours cells.
Conclusion: Our results indicated that mutant-enriched PCR and high 
resolution melting analysis are the same sensitive methods for the de -
tection of EGFR mutations from cytologic specimens. 
P06.062  Genetic analysis on EGFR prior treatment with tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors on patients with non-small lung cancer (NscLc)
Å. Nilsson ;  
Inst. of Laboratory Medicine, Dep of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion 
Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Aim: To develop methods for EGFR mutation screening with high sen -
sibility for selection of lung cancer patients who will benefit from treat -
ment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
Background: Lung cancer is the most common cancer related cause 
of death in the western world, including both men and women. The 
mortality is high, less then 15% are living 5 years after diagnosis. The 
main reason for the poor prognosis is that the majority of patients are 
diagnosed with metastasis. Therefore, it is of great importance to have 
effective treatment to decrease the mortality among these patients. 
During the last couple of years new ways of treatment, using tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (Gefitinib, Erlotinib), have successfully evolved. How -
ever, best drug response is observed in patients with specific muta -
tions within the gene encoding the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 
(EGFR). This gene plays a major role in the regulation of tumour cell 
proliferation. Therefore, genetic analysis of the tumour DNA should be 
performed prior treatment of patients.
Method: We will develop methods for specific mutation analysis of exon 
19 and 21 in the EGFR gene. This includes fragment analysis on ABI 
3130 and quantitative Taqman based PCR. Genetic analysis of genes 
downstream in the EGFR signalling pathway, including KRAS, BRAF 
and PIK3 will also be performed with these techniques to search for 
additional mutations/amplifications that might correspond to improved 
treatment.
Significance: Genetic analysis of treated NSCLC patients will help us 
find biomarkers in order to better predict patients who will benefit from 
anti-EGFR-treatment.
P06.063  the analysis of mutations in the EGFR  and K-ras  genes 
using LNA-clamp PcR and hybridization with biochips
M. A. Emelyanova1, F. A. Amossenko2, A. V. Chudinov1, T. V. Nasedkina1;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Medical Genetic Center, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine ki -
nase whose activation leads to aberrant signaling and cell proliferation 
in lung adenocarcinomas and colorectal cancers, is a main subject of Cancer genetics17
new targeted therapies, such as anti- EGFR monoclonal antibodies 
(cetuximab and panitumumab) or tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib 
and erlotinib). Somatic mutations in the EGFR  gene and K-ras  gene, 
coding the downstream GTPase, are associated with the sensitivity to 
these drugs.
A biochip has been developed for the analysis of mutations in codons 
12 and 13 of the K-ras  oncogene, mutations in codons 858, 719, 790 
and deletion in exon 19 of the EGFR  gene. An approach represents 
a combination of two-round multiplex PCR and hybridization with im -
mobilized oligonucleotide probes complementary to wild-type and 
mutated sequences. For specific amplification of mutant fragments in 
a large excess of wild-type DNA the blocking (clamping) of wildtype 
sequences with a synthetic nucleotide analogue, locked nucleic acid 
(LNA) was used. The amplified fragments were labeled via incorpora -
tion of fluorescently labeled triphosphate during the second round of 
PCR. To prove the feasibility of the method the clinical samples from 
patients with pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma and colorectal 
cancer were analyzed.
We consider the biochip-based approach with LNA-clamp PCR as a 
useful tool for the screening of mutations in the K-ras  and EGFR  genes 
to identify patients who will have a response to anti-EGFR targeted 
therapies.
The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re -
search (projects no. 08-04-01480 and 08-04-01371).
P06.064  circulating free RNA in NscLc - a promise for clinical 
application
R. Cherneva1, B. Rukova2, O. Georgiev1, D. Toncheva2;  
1Internal Medicine Department, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical Genetics Department, 
Sofia, Bulgaria.
Background: The evidence of circulating nucleic acids in cancer pa -
tients is of paramount clinical importance because it provides chances 
for early diagnosis and better outcomes.
Aim:The aim of this study was to explore the clinical utility of EGFR  
and hTERT  mRNA expression as markers for diagnosis of NSCLC.
Methods: RNA was isolated with TriZOL from 3ml plasma of 45 NSCLC 
patients and 40 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pa -
tients. A preamplification reaction with gene specific primers preceded 
the qPCR. TaqMan gene expression Assays for EGFR  (Hs 00193306_
m1) and hTERT (Hs 00972650_m1) were used. β-actin (Hs 9999903_
m1) served as endogenous control. A TaqMan MGB probe (FAM) was 
used.
Results: The gene expression level of each gene was calculated and 
given as a relative quantity - RQ. EGFR  expression was found in all 
lung cancer patients - mean RQ = 29.39. hTERT mRNA was detected 
in 88% of the patients - mean RQ=17.31. Only 50% of the high risk 
patients were positive for EGFR  - mean RQ = 2.09. hTERT  mRNA was 
detected in 17 (42.5%) patients of the high risk COPD group - mean 
RQ=1.02. A statistically significant difference in EGFR  and hTERT  
mRNA expression could be observed between the two groups of pa -
tients - p=0.0001
Conclusion: EGFR  and hTERT mRNA are potential markers for NSCLC 
diagnosis, whose clinical significance should be replicated in a larger 
cohort of patients.T he premplification reaction with gene specific prim -
ers enhances the sensitivity and detection of free circulating RNAs in 
plasma of cancer patients.
P06.065  Association between the UGt1A1 polymorphism, 
dyslipidemia and endometrial cancer risk
A. Hirasawa , T. Akahane, S. Matsumura, T. Tsuruta, K. Bannno, K. Makita, N. 
Susumu, D. Aoki;  
Gyne/Obst, Tokyo, Japan.
A close association exists between endometrial cancer and dyslipid -
emia, in our previous study. Uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransfer -
ases (UGTs) are a family of phase II-metabolizing enzymes involved in 
glucuronic acid conjugation of sex steroid hormones. UGT1A1 encodes 
the critically important bilirubin UGT and involved in the conjugation 
and elimination of estrogens. Bilirubin is an antioxidant that suppress -
es lipid oxidation and retards atherosclerosis formation. An inverse 
association between serum bilirubin and coronary heart disease has 
been reported. Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic 
neoplasm in Western countries and has been increasing over the past 
several decades in Japan. One of the risk factor of endometrial caner is the exposure to endogenous and exogenous estrogen throughout 
life. We hypothesized that UGT1A1 variants may be associated with 
bilirubin levels and risk of dyslipidemia in endometrial cancer. We stud -
ied 312 ceses of endometrial cancer ,202 cases had dyslipidemia and 
110 cases had nomal value of the lipid, with no history of congenital 
or acquired liver dysfunction. The assays for genotyping the polymor -
phisms in the UGT1A1 gene were based on either Invader® assay or 
direct sequencing. We conducted a case-control study to investigate 
the associations between UGT1A1 polymorphisms and risk of dyslip -
idemia in endometrial cancer. Polymorphism of UGT1A1*28 and *60 
carriers with higher serum bilirubin concentrations exhibit association 
with lower risk of dyslipidemia. There is a possibility that the UGT1A1 
polymorphism involved in individual variation of conjugation and elimi -
nation of estrogens to diffrence of serum bilirubin levels.
P06.066  Detailed analysis of the independent tumor suppressor 
loci telomeric to tp53 suggests skip and myo1c as novel tumor 
suppressor gene candidates in this region
C. Hedberg1, S. Nilsson2, D. Dios1, A. Linder1, A. Behboudi1,3;  
1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2University of Chalmers, 
Gothenburg, Sweden, 3University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
Several lines of evidence indicate an independent, commonly deleted 
region distal to the TP53 locus with a potential tumor suppressor activ -
ity in a variety of human tumor types. In a recent study, we reported 
a comparable finding in a rat tumor model for endometrial carcinoma. 
Using FISH data, we developed a deletion map and narrowed the 
candidate region to 700 kb, harboring 19 genes. In the present work, 
we adopted a candidate gene approach to characterize this candidate 
region further using a set of well-characterized experimental endome -
trial carcinomas (ECs). We performed real-time qPCR analysis of the 
19 genes in a panel of EC tumor and control samples and identified 
Hic1, Skip  and Myo1c  as the best candidates. No mutation in cod -
ing sequences of Hic1, Skip  and Myo1c  was detected, and thus low 
expression levels suggested a haploinsufficient mode of function for 
these potential tumor suppressor genes. Both Skip and Myo1c  were 
significantly down regulated at mRNA and/or protein levels, which 
could be rescued in gene expression restoration assays. This could 
not be shown for Hic1. There is no earlier report on the potential tu -
mor suppressor activity of Skip and Myo1c . However, they both show 
an overlapping role in PI 3-kinase/Akt signaling, which is vital for the 
growth and survival of cancer cells. Moreover, there are reports on 
tumor suppressor activity of other members of the gene families that 
Skip and Myo1c  belong to. Functional significance of these two genes 
in cancerogenesis remains to be investigated.
P06.067  Hereditary mosaic gene inactivation by promoter 
methylation in colorectal cancer susceptibility
M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, R. P. Kuiper2, R. Venkatachalam2, D. Bodmer2, I. D. 
Nagtegaal3, J. H. J. M. van Krieken3, A. Geurts van Kessel2, N. Hoogerbrugge2;  
1Departments of Human Genetics and Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
3Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
We have described 3’ end deletions of the EPCAM  gene as a novel 
cause of Lynch syndrome (also known as Hereditary Non-Polyposis 
Colorectal Cancer) . EPCAM  is located directly upstream of MSH2 , a 
well known mismatch repair gene that is frequently mutated in Lynch 
syndrome patients. Deletions of the 3’ exons of EPCAM  lead to tran -
scriptional read-through across the MSH2  promoter, thereby inducing 
allele specific methylation and inactivation of MSH2  in tissues express -
ing EPCAM . Thus a mosaic pattern of epigenetic inactivation of MSH2  
is established, that can be inherited over generations. Together with 
several international partners, we have thus far identified 43 indepen -
dent families with a 3’ end deletion of EPCAM , which leaves the pro -
moter region of MSH2  intact. In these families 18 different deletions 
have been characterized, all including the two most 3’ exons contain -
ing the transcription termination signal of EPCAM . All deletions appear 
to have arisen by Alu-repeat mediated recombination events. Methyla -
tion of the MSH2  promoter has been confirmed in mutation carriers 
from 15 families for which tissue was available. These results show 
that deletions of the 3’ end of EPCAM  are a recurrent cause of Lynch 
syndrome. Recently, we obtained additional evidence for an epigenetic Cancer genetics17
silencing scenario caused by transcriptional read-through of another 
gene involved in colorectal cancer, suggesting that this phenomenon 
may be more prevalent than previously thought.
P06.068  Loss of EPS8 expression in a subset of colorectal 
carcinoma and adenoma
W. M. Abdel-Rahman1,2, S. Ruosaari2, S. Knuutila2, P. Peltomäki2;  
1University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, 2University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
EPS8 has a conserved actin barbed-end capping function that is re -
quired for proper apical morphogenesis and maturation in the intestinal 
cells. Recent data showed that EPS8  was overexpressed in advanced 
stage colon cancers. Our expression microarray analysis of colon 
cancer cell lines confirmed this overexpression but there were strik -
ingly low levels of EPS8  in RKO. In our genome wide LOH analysis 
of colon tumors, we observed considerable LOH at the EPS8  gene 
locus. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that EPS8 is constitutively 
expressed at normal colonic mucosa with a dot-like supranuclear cy -
toplasmic localization. The staining was stronger towards the luminal 
surface suggesting that EPS8 plays a role in epithelial differentiation. 
Compared to matching normal mucosa, 19 colon tumors (4 adenoma, 
15 carcinoma) out of 51 (37%) showed strikingly tumor specific EPS8 
protein loss. Of the remaining tumors, 5/51 (2 adenoma, and 3 carcino -
ma, 10%) showed marked overexpression, while 27/51 tumors (53%) 
showed retained expression. Mutation analysis revealed a missense 
mutation (c.794C>T , p.R265C) in exon 8 in RKO. EPS8  promoter was 
also methylated in RKO but there was no significant methylation in oth -
er cell lines or carcinoma specimens studied. The clear loss of EPS8 
expression in the presence of few genomic alterations in adenomas 
and carcinomas suggests that down regulation of this gene  might be a 
significant event in the early stages of colorectal carcinogenesis.
P06.069  Polymorphism of estrogen receptor-α gene codon 10 
(t392c) in iranian women with breast cancer
S. M. Abbasi ;  
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies among Iranian 
women. Estrogen receptor-α gene ( ESR1 ) polymorphism has been 
found to be associated with breast cancer and clinical features of the 
disease in Caucasians and Asians. A case study was conducted to es -
tablish a database of ESR1  polymorphisms in Iranian population in or -
der to compare Western and Iranian (Middle East) distributions and to 
evaluate  ESR1  polymorphism as an indicator of clinical outcome. The 
ESR1  gene was scanned in Iranian patients newly diagnosed invasive 
breast tumors, (150 patients) and in healthy individuals (147 healthy 
control individuals). PCR single-strand conformation polymorphism 
methodology and direct sequencing were performed.
The silent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) was performed, as 
reported previously in other studies, but at significantly different fre -
quencies, with further increasing predictive accuracy in Iranian popu -
lation.
Data suggest that ESR1polymorphisms are correlated with various as -
pects of breast cancer in Iranian ESR1genotype, as determined during 
pre-surgical evaluation, might represent a surrogate marker for pre -
dicting breast cancer.
P06.070  Rapid detection of APc mutations in slovak FAP 
families by high resolution melting analysis and protein 
truncation test
L. Mihók , K. Hlinková, D. Ilenčíková;  
National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant pre -
disposition to colorectal cancer and is caused by germline mutations 
in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene ( APC). Classical FAP is char -
acterised by the occurrence of hundreds to thousands of colorectal 
adenomatous polyps and by several extracolonic manifestations. An 
attenuated form of polyposis (AFAP) is associated with less than 100 
adenomas and later onset of the disease.
In this study we analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 68 
probands from unrelated FAP families of Slovak origin. The mutation 
analysis of the complete coding region and exon-intron boundaries of 
the APC gene was performed using a combination of high resolution 
melting analysis and protein truncation test. All positive findings ob -tained by both screening methods were verified by sequencing analy -
sis.
We identified 22 different germline APC mutations and 8 of these were 
novel. Of the identified mutations, 10 were 1 to 5 bp deletions, 2 were 1 
bp insertion and 10 were nonsense mutations, 19 leading to the forma -
tion of premature stop codon. Three mutations were in the splice-site 
region of the APC gene. Mutation screening for large genomic altera -
tions in the APC gene was performed by multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA). Large APC deletions were detected in 3 
patients.
The total mutation detection rate was 80% in patients with classical 
FAP and 9% in AFAP patients. The results of the mutation analysis 
are important for the preparation of individual treatment strategies for 
FAP patients.
This study was supported by MH SR 2006/26-NOU-02.
P06.071  Diagnosis of Fanconi Anaemia (FA) in dizygotic twins
N. Selenti1, A. Kolialexi1, V. Papadakis2, G. Avgerinou2, K. Roka2, S. 
Polychronopoulou2, E. Kanavakis1, A. Mavrou1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine, 
Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pediatric Hematology – Oncology, Aghia 
Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Background: FA is a rare autosomal instability syndrome character -
ized by progressive bone marrow failure, various congenital malfor -
mations, predisposition to malignancy and cellular hypersensitivity to 
cross linking agents. We report on a case of FA in dizygotic twins with 
characteristic congenital abnormalities and the same deletions of the 
FANCA gene.
Patients & Methods : A twin boy and a girl, aged 6 years old, were 
referred to the Department of Medical Genetics for genetic investiga -
tion after the clinical suspicion of FA. Peripheral blood samples were 
analysed with cytogenetic and molecular techniques. Matched for age 
and sex donors were used as controls.
For clastogen-induced chromosome damage both MMC and DEB were 
added and a minimum of 150 metaphases per case were analysed. A 
sample was considered as FA positive if the percentage of breaks and 
radial formations was 7-10 times higher as compared to the control.
Molecular investigation was performed using the Multiplex Ligation-de -
pendent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique to detect deletions of 
the FANCA gene which account for more than 65% of Fanconi Anae -
mia cases.
Results : Induced breaks and radial formations were detected in both 
patients. MLPA identified the same deletions involving exons 1-5 and 
7-17 of the FANCA gene in both patients. Parental molecular testing 
revealed that the mother was heterozygous for deletions of exons 1-5 
and the father for deletions of exons 7-17.
Conclusion : Although the siblings were dizygotic twins, both were 
compound heterozygous for the same deletions of the FANCA gene.
P06.072  Detection of complex mutations in swedish FAP 
familes
A. M. H. Rohlin1, Y. Engwall1, J. Wernersson1, J. Björk2, M. Nordling1;  
1Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 2Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), is caused by mutations in 
the APC gene. In Swedish FAP families, 61 different mutations in 96 
families analyzed have been found and 27 of those are novel (Kanter-
Smoler et al 2008). In classical FAP almost all mutations have been 
found, whereas in attenuated FAP (AFAP) or atypical FAP 70-80% of 
the mutations still remain unknown. The main mutation detection meth -
ods that have been used are , Sanger sequencing, dHPLC, SSCP and 
MLPA.
The aims of this study were therefore to investigate the mutation nega -
tive AFAP cases and the more complex APC gene inactivations result -
ing in a lower expression of the APC gene. In addition mutations affect -
ing splicing and patients with mutations that demonstrate a variation in 
the penetrance of the disease were also studied.
The methods that have been used include copy number- and expres -
sion analysis using the 6.0 SNP arrays and Exon arrays 1.0 from Af -
fymetrix. RT PCR was used for extensive RNA investigations of the 
APC transcripts.
Larger deletions of the APC gene including the promoter region and in 
some cases several other upstream genes have been detected. RNA Cancer genetics17
studies have also revealed the existence of several splice variants 
both in mutation carriers and normal controls. In other cases common 
mutations with lower penetrance among family members have been 
found. These mutations were located in sites that could interfere with 
RNA-binding proteins involved in splicing, however modifying genes 
and other complex mutational mechanisms were not excluded.
P06.073  MutSβ exceeds MutSα in dinucleotide loop repair
M. Kansikas1, J. Kantelinen1, M. K. Korhonen1, S. Ollila1, K. Heinimann2, R. 
Kariola1, M. Nyström1;  
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
The target substrates of DNA mismatch recognising factors MutSα 
(MSH2+MSH6) and MutSβ (MSH2+MSH3) have already been widely 
researched. However, the extent of their functional redundancy and 
clinical substance remains unclear. Mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient 
tumours are strongly associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) 
and the degree and type of MSI seem to be dependent on the MMR 
gene affected, and is linked to its substrate specificities. Deficiency 
in MSH2 and MSH6 is associated with both mononucleotide and di -
nucleotide repeat instability. Although no pathogenic MSH3 mutations 
have been reported, its deficiency is also suggested to cause low di -
nucleotide repeat instability. Germline mutations in MMR genes are 
associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). 
To assess the substrate specificities and functionality of MutSα and 
MutSβ we performed an in vitro MMR assay using three different sub -
strate constructs, GT mismatch, 1 and 2 nucleotide insertion/deletion 
loops (IDLs) in three different cell lines. Our results show that although 
MutSα alone seems to be responsible for GT and IDL1 repair, MutSα 
and MutSβ indeed have functional redundancy in IDL2 repair and in 
contrast with earlier studies, MutSβ seems to exceed MutSα. The find -
ing is clinically relevant because the strong role of MutSβ in IDL2 repair 
indicates MSH3 deficiency in tumours with low dinucleotide and no 
mononucleotide repeat instability.
P06.074  Gain of chromosome 2p, recurrent chromosomal 
aberration in B-cLL
M. Stoklasova1, J. Sobotka1, M. Brejcha1, Y. Brychtova2, V. Holubova1, A. 
Tovarysova1, T. Sablaturova1, A. Czekajova1, D. Adamova3, V. Heinzova3, M. 
Wrobel1, J. Zivna4, M. Urbankova5, J. Mayer2,6;  
1Cancer Center*, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Internal Haematooncological 
Clinic, Faculty Hospital Brno*, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Silesian Hospital in 
Opava, Opava, Czech Republic, 4Hospital Hranice Inc., Hranice na Morave, 
Czech Republic, 5Hospital Sumperk Inc., Sumperk, Czech Republic, 6*CELL, 
The CzEch Leukemia Study Group – for Life, Czech Republic.
Chromosomal aberrations are independent prognostic factors in B-cell 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL).
By improving the cultivation technique using CpG-oligonucleotides 
and IL-2 stimulation other chromosomal aberrations were identified, 
especially unbalanced translocations and complex karyotypes. These 
findings can modify prognosis of patients evaluated by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH). Recently there was found the other recurrent 
aberration- gain of chromosome 2p.
Metaphase cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic analyses detected 
gain of 2p in 17 of 225 patients.
We performed metaphase cytogenetic analysis using cultivation tech -
nique with CpG-oligonucleotides and IL-2 stimulation. Interphase FISH 
was used for detection deletions of 13q, 11q, 17p, trisomy 12 and 
t(14q32). Gains of 2p were confirmed by multicolour FISH and range 
of gain was determined by multicolour banding.
Gain of 2p was detected in 17 (7,6%) cases. In 13 cases, gain of 2p 
was detected as unbalanced translocation with the other chromosome. 
In 3 cases direct 2p duplication was presented, one case had direct 
2p duplication together with unbalanced translocation and isochro -
mosome 2p. FISH identified chromosomal aberrations in 16 cases; 
7 cases had 13q deletion as a sole aberration, 6 cases had 13q and 
11q deletions, one case had 11q deletion and +12, one case had 17p 
deletion. Correlations between gain of chromosome 2p and some clini -
cal/biological parameters will be presented.
The cultivation technique using CpG-oligonucleotides and IL-2 stimu -
lation is an efficient method that can improve quality of cytogenetic 
analysis. Detection of the other aberrations i.e. gain of chromosome 2p 
can provide new prognostic information in B-CLL, which is presented.P06.075  interleukin 1B gene (iL-1B) and interleukin 1 receptor antagonist gene (iL-1RN) polymorphisms and the risk of gastric 
cancer
F. Burada , C. Soare, M. Ioana, P. Mitrut, R. Angelescu, A. Riza, A. Dobrescu, 
E. Buteica, M. Cruce, F. Mixich;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy from Craiova, Craiova, Romania.
Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death world -
wide and remains a significant global health problem, with widely vary -
ing geographical distribution. Association between gastric cancer risk 
and polymorphisms in the genes coding for cytokines was reported in 
case-control studies. The aim of this study was to investigate the poly -
morphisms of IL1B Ex5+14C>T (rs 1143634) and IL1RN Ex5 -35T>C 
(rs 419598) in a Romanian population. A total of 55 gastric cancer 
patients and 105 healthy controls were included. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from patients and controls blood using Wizard Genomic DNA 
Purification Kit (Promega). The polymorphisms were genotyped using 
Taq Man SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosytems) and the differ -
ent alleles were discriminated according to the fluorescence intensity 
of Fam and Vic (RotorGene 6200 HRM-Corbett). To investigate the as -
sociation of these polymorphisms with gastric cancer we used x² test. 
Allelic distributions were examined for deviation from their correspond -
ing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were calculated to assess the relative risk conferred by 
a particular allele and genotype. The results indicate that allele IL1RN 
Ex5 -35C could increase the genetic susceptibility of gastric cancer 
(OR 3.22; 95% CI 1.08-9.60). The polymorphism of IL1B Ex5+14C>T 
is not associated with gastric cancer risk (OR 0.83; 95% CI 0.24-2.85). 
To our knowledge this is the first study of these polymorphisms in an 
Eastern European population and further larger studies of genetic vari -
ation in IL1-B and IL-1RN are required.
P06.076  comparison of the repair kinetics of the UVA- and UVB-
induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in the genome of human 
keratinocytes and its relation to expression of DNA repair genes
M. Karbaschi , M. S. Cooke, M. D. Evans;  
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) by inducing DNA photo-lesions, has 
become the prime cause of most skin cancers. These cancers could 
be prevented if we protect ourselves from UVR.
UVB is directly absorbed by DNA and induces different forms of le -
sions like cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs). In contrast with UVB, 
UVA is indirectly absorbed by DNA. It has long been considered that 
the UVA component of solar UVR carries a minimal risk for skin car -
cinogenesis, as it does not lead to the formation of CPD, not least 
because DNA does not absorb UVA. Most sunscreens filter out UVB 
absorption, but they cannot block most of UVA, so they do not help to 
prevent skin cancer. A better assessment of the routes by which UVA 
and UVB induce CPDs, may lead to prevention of skin cancer.
This study focuses on the differential expression levels of genes cod -
ing for components of the nuclotide excision repair pathway and and 
also viability of the human keratinocytes (HaCaT cell line), before and 
after irradiation with UVA and UVB.
P06.077   
towards an understanding of genetic selection in breast cancer
N. I. Park , P. K. Rogan, J. H. M. Knoll;  
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
The cancer genome contains frequent chromosomal abnormali -
ties and gene mutations. Nevertheless, the cell must maintain the 
capability of self-renewal, unlimited growth potential, and the ability 
to form tumours de novo . We are examining selective forces in the 
breast cancer genome, to determine if the minimal essential genome 
encodes proteins that are consistently targets of therapeutic drugs. 
Analysis of the genomes of 243 previously reported breast tumours 
(Gen Res .2006.16:1465) revealed 766 unstable (amplified and/or de -
leted) and 815 stable (or quiescent) contiguous genomic regions. The 
stable regions had 10,232 protein coding genes of which expression 
of 8,954 of these genes were measured in the Affymetrix HG U133 
Plus 2.0 array. Using datasets reporting differential gene expression 
in primary breast cancer samples vs. matched normal controls ( BMC 
Can. 2007.7:55), we identified that 70% (6247/8954) of the genes had 
both stable copy number and stable expression. The genes with stable 
expression were characterized by bioinformatic analyses of gene on -Cancer genetics177
tology and biological pathways. We determined that the breast cancer 
genome preferentially preserves functions that include cellular meta -
bolic processes, regulation of gene expression, DNA packaging (chro -
matin and nucleosome assembly), cellular component assembly, RNA 
metabolic process and regulation of apoptosis (p≤0.01). Conservation 
of this minimal gene set may explain the effectiveness of certain che -
motherapeutic agents (doxorubicin, cisplatin, carboplatin, tamoxifen, 
estradiol, fluoroucil, etc) due to their actions on multiple gene products 
in this set.
P06.078  Study of 20 glioblastoma patients treated in Kaunas 
University of medicine during 2003-2006y
V. Asmoniene , D. Skiriute, V. Deltuva, A. Tamasauskas;  
Laboratory of Neuroscience, Institute for Biomedical Research of Kaunas 
University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Glioblastoma multiforme (astrocitoma grade IV, WHO) is the most 
common and most aggresive primary brain tumor in adults. Suppos -
edly, glioblastoma arises from altered glia cells or/and brain stem 
cells. These tumors are characterized by intratumoral heterogeneity, 
invasive growth nature and rapid recurrence. Despite aggresive multi -
modal therapy, prognosis for glioblastoma patients still remains poor, 
as most patients die within the first 12-15 months after diagnosis. This 
situation has not significantly changed in the last 20 years.
Here, we report 20 glioblastoma patient cases followed up in the De -
partment of Neurosurgery, Kaunas University of Medicine during 2003-
2006y. Patient clinical data - age, sex, tumor localization, treatment, 
relapse free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) were estimated 
(see Table). The chromosome 9p21 and its CDKN2A locus, with the 
p16(INK4A) and p14(ARF) genes are recognized as the most frequent 
genomic regions involved in the pathogenesis of glioblastoma were 
investigated.
Results: there were no significant points for relapse free survival 
and overall survival, we think because of small glioblastoma patients 
group.
Patient characteristicsRelapse
Significance, pSurvival
Significance, p
Sex9 F 
11 M0.175 0.133
Age, y 48.7 (SD 11.3) 0.125 0.201
Resection 20/20 N/A N/A
Radiation therapy 20/20 N/A N/A
Chemotherapy (Temodal) 15/20 0.875 0.282
p14 deletion 4/17 (23,5%) 0.04 0.456
p16 deletion 3/17 (17,6%) 0.130 0.763
P06.079  Risk Assessment and BRcA1/BRcA2 testing results of Hereditary Breast cancer Patients in t urkey
E. Laleli-Sahin1, C. Irgil2, E. Karatayli3, G. Alis Burgucu1, M. Calikapan2, C. 
Yilmaz2, M. Bozdayi3, A. Tukun4,1;  
1Duzen Laboratory, Ankara, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bursa Breast Surgery Center, 
Bursa, Turkey, 3Ankara University Hepatology Institute, Ankara, Turkey, 4Ankara 
University Medical School Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction and objectives: Breast cancer, with an average frequency 
of 10-12% is a common health concern for all ethnic groups around the 
world. Known risk factors vary from sex/age to environmental factors. 
The inheritance of cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are 
risk factors for familial breast cancer development. About 85-90% of 
breast cancer cases are sporadic and only the remaining 5-10% ac -
count for early onset familial cancer. Individuals that carry BRCA1 and/
or BRCA2 gene mutations, life time risk of developing breast cancer 
significantly increases.
Here we report novel mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes identi -
fied in Turkish families with positive family history and risk estimation 
for these cases.
Methods: This study presents findings form families that have been 
referred to our institutions for breast cancer risk estimation and genetic 
testing. The initial step with all cases is genetic counseling to obtain 
family history, explain the benefits and risks of genetic testing, prob -
able impact of results on the family members, and the limitations of 
genetic testing. Those cases that agree for the testing to proceed an informed consent was obtained.
Results: Analysis of twenty-five cases revealed novel mutations on 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes respectively
Conclusions: It is known that the frequency of breast cancer differs 
with ethnic origin. Assessment of cancer risk and probable life time 
cancer risk development takes into account the mutations found in the 
BRCA genes. Knowing mutations unique to ethnic origins is of interest 
for improving successful risk calculation.
P06.080  Splicing Functional Assays of DNA variants of the BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes.
A. Acedo1, D. J. Sanz1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante1, M. Durán1, E. 
Esteban-Cardeñosa2, C. Miner1, E. A. Velasco1;  
1Instituto de Biología y Genéica Molecular (Uva-CSIC), Valladolid, Spain, 
2Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
The analysis of the deleterious effect of genetic variants in disease 
genes is usually focused on the predicted effect on protein function but 
an increasing amount of evidence indicates that there can be deleteri -
ous effects through the disruption of the splicing process.
We have investigated the presence of aberrant splicing of BRCA1/2  
in hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). About 15% of individuals 
undergoing genetic testing carry a DNA variant of unknown physiologi -
cal significance that hamper genetic counselling in HBOC.
We examined the functional consequences on splicing of 24 BRCA  
variants detected in 688 breast/ovarian cancer families that were bioin -
formatically preselected with splicing specific tools: NNSPLICE (splice 
site analysis), ESEfinder and ESRsearch (detection of splicing en -
hancers and silencers). They were assayed by RT-PCR of lymphocyte 
mRNA and/or hybrid minigene experiments in HeLa and nontumor 
breast epithelial cells. Another 33 putative splicing variants from the 
BIC mutation database were generated by site-directed mutagenesis 
and analyzed by hybrid minigenes assays.
Twenty-eight variants altered the splicing process by different mecha -
nisms, including disruptions of the canonical,splice sites, the polypy -
rimidine tract and splicing enhancers/silencers, and creation of cryptic 
splice sites. We found that any type of variant (missense, synonymous, 
nonsense, insertions/deletions) can be associated with defective splic -
ing.
Furthermore, twenty mutations were predicted to truncate the BRCA 
proteins and/or to delete essential domains, suggesting that aber -
rant splicing of BRCA1/2  may represent an important ethiopathogenic 
mechanism in HBOC.
The identification of splicing disruptions by functional assays is a valu -
able tool to discriminate between benign polymorphisms and patho -
genic mutations.
P06.081  Tumour suppressor function of both of the BRCA1 and BRcA2 genes has a low threshold for splice site mutation.
P. J. Ainsworth1, P. K. Rogan2;  
1London Health Sciences Centre/UWO, London, ON, Canada, 2University of 
Western Ontario (UWO), London, ON, Canada.
The majority of inactivating mutations in the BRCA1/BRCA2 tumour 
suppressor genes are either small frame-shifting in/dels or nonsense 
mutations obviously causing protein-truncating events associated with 
increased risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer, (BIC database1). The 
classification of non-truncating sequence variations of unknown sig -
nificance (VUS) is more difficult. Most of these VUS are comprised 
of synonymous or non-synonymous coding SNP’s, intronic and/or 5’ 
and 3’ sequence variants potentially affecting normal gene expression 
by variously interfering with normal promotor function, mRNA stability 
and/or normal mRNA splicing. Easton et al2 have attempted to better 
characterize the clinical significance of these VUS by: assessment of 
family cancer history, co-occurrence in trans with a known deleterious 
mutation, and/or co-segregation with disease in HBOC families. To fur -
ther analyze this data an information theory-based splicing mutation 
analysis was used to predict the amount of full-length mRNA produced 
by these variants. A significant proportion of the 43/1433 VUS classi -
fied as clinically significant by Easton et al. (12/26 in BRCA1 and 8/17 
in BRCA2) were predicted to disrupt normal splice function, though 3 
of these variants were also non-synonymous coding SNP’s. 50% of 
these damaging splice variants (6/12 in BRCA1 and 4/8 in BRCA2) 
predict only partial loss of splice site recognition. This high prevalence 
of leaky splicing mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes is consistent with Cancer genetics17
the possibility that high levels of these genes products are essential 
for tumour suppression, and alternative splicing at these loci may be 
diverting full length mRNA to inactive isoforms.
1.http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/
2.Easton et.al 2007 AJHG:81:873_883
P06.082  Assesing pathogenicity of unclassified variants in 
hereditary colorectal cancer susceptibility genes
A. J. Brea-Fernández1, C. Fernández-Rozadilla1, M. Ferro1, O. Lortes1, E. 
Fernández1, J. M. Cameselle-Teijeiro2, A. Vega1, Á. Carracedo1, C. Ruiz-Ponte1;  
1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, CIBERER, Grupo de 
Medicina Xenómica-USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Servicio de 
Anatomía Patológica. Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
Genetic testing of susceptibility genes in hereditary colorectal can -
cer (CCR) is applied in clinical practice to predict risk of developing 
CRC. Many of the mutations identified result in premature termina -
tion of translation and thus in loss of function of the encoded proteins. 
These variants are considered pathogenic mutations. However, a sub -
stantial proportion of the variants found are nucleotide substitutions, 
either within the coding sequence (missense or silent variants) or in 
introns , which do not lead to such a premature termination of the trans -
lation.  The question of whether these variants, referred to as unclas -
sified variants (UVs ), affect the normal function of encoded proteins 
and therefore contribute to the development of disease is essential in 
genetic testing. Characterizing the significance of such variants repre -
sents a major challenge for medical management of patients in whom 
they are identified.
The aim of this study was to asses the  pathogenicity of 38 exonic 
and 13 intronic UVs found in APC, MYH  and MMR  genes in families 
with hereditary colorectal cancer. A combination of approaches was 
followed that included: segregation with the disease within families, 
absence in control individuals, co-occurrence with known deleterious 
mutations, effect on mRNA for putative splice-site mutations, effect on 
protein function by bioinformatic analysis, and specifically for MMR 
variants, tumour microsatellite instability status and DNA mismatch 
repair protein expression by inmunohistochemistry.
P06.083  The case report of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer 
with causal mutation in CDH1  gene
E. Prusova1, K. Kyselova2, P. Vanickova1, O. Urban3;  
1P&R LAB a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Radioterapie a.s., Novy Jicin, 
Czech Republic, 3Hospital Vitkovice a.s., Ostrava, Czech Republic.
Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is the autosomal dominant 
susceptibility for diffuse gastric cancer, a poorly differentiated adeno -
carcinoma that infiltrates into the stomach wall causing thickening of 
the wall ( linitis plastica ) without forming a distinct mass (ring carcino -
ma). CDH1,  encoding the protein E-cadherin, is the only gene known 
to be associated with HDGC. Mutations in CDH1  account for approxi -
mately one-third of HDGC. The majority of the cancers in individuals 
with CDH1  mutations occur before the age of 40 years. CDH1  muta -
tions are also correlated with breast, colorectal, thyroid and ovarian 
cancer.
The E-cadherin is cell-cell adhesion molecule whose reduced ex -
pression or loss of function is regarded as one of the main molecular 
events involved in dysfunction of the cell-cell adhesion system, trigger -
ing cancer proliferation, invasion and metastasis.
In this work we demonstrate a case report of molecular analysis of 
CDH1  gene, exemplified demonstrating anticipation of HDGC. Pro -
band is 27-year-old woman whose sister died at the age of 30 to gas -
tric cancer, her mother died at the age of 47 to pancreatic cancer and 
her grandmother died at the age of 63 to gastric cancer. We found 
the causal mutation IVS15-6C> G in the CDH1  gene of proband. The 
uncle of proband (mother‘s brother 57-year-old) was negative for this 
causal mutation. Thanks to performed molecular analysis the proband 
may undergo life-saving total gastrectomy.P06.084  qPCR-HRM combining to unlabeled probes : a single 
technique used for point mutation prescreening, large gene 
rearrangement detection and genotyping of frequent sNPs in 
BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes
F. Coulet , A. Miniere, M. Eyries, F. Soubrier;  
Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et Angiogénétique Moléculaire, Groupe 
Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, AP-HP, PARIS, France.
Quantitative PCR High Resolution melting (qPCR-HRM) allows in one 
step the detection of point mutation and gene rearrangements. Due to 
recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, a large amount of se -
quencing work remains after qPCR-HRM, as melting curves for SNPs 
and deleterious mutations may be similar. To reduce sequencing, we 
developed genotyping of five recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes by unlabeled probes and melting curves analysis. Probes are 
30 to 35 bp 3’ phosphorylated oligonucleotides corresponding to the 
mutated allele of each SNPs and included in PCR mixes. Asymmetric 
PCRs (1:10 primers ratio) were performed with fluorescent saturing 
dye (Resolight dye®) on LightCycler® 480. Genotyping is accom -
plished by monitoring the post-PCR melting of probe-target duplexes. 
Sensitivity and specificity of the assays were evaluated with a blind 
screening of 92 samples previously sequenced. All the heterozygous 
and homozygous were correctly genotyped by unlabeled probes and 
melt curve analysis. In seven cases, sequence alterations were dis -
tinguished from SNPs. For example, previous gene scanning analysis 
showed similar melting curves for the c.2415_2416del mutation and 
the c.2311C>T SNP of the BRCA1 gene . The second example is the 
distinction by unlabeled probes between the c.1-11C>T variant and the 
c.1-26G>A in the BRCA2 gene.
qPCR-HRM combined with unlabeled probes is a simple, sensitive and 
rapid method which allows detection of point mutation and of gene 
rearrangements and genotyping of SNPs. This method could be ex -
tended to other recurrent SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
P06.085  Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer: A 
Nationwide study of all families referred for Fumarate  Hydratase  
germline mutation analysis.
D. L. Smit1, A. R. Mensenkamp2, S. Badeloe3, B. H. Martijn4, M. E. H. Simon5, 
K. Y. van Spaendonck6, C. M. Aalfs7, J. G. Post8, S. Shanley9, L. H. Hoefsloot2, 
J. A. van Moorselaar1, T. M. Starink1, J. Bayley4, J. Frank3, M. A. M. van 
Steensel3, F. H. Menko1;  
1VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Radboud University 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6University 
Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Academic Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 9Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Background  Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HL -
RCC) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterised by multiple 
cutaneous piloleiomyomas, uterine leiomyomas and papillary type 2 
renal cancer. HLRCC is caused by germline mutations in the fuma -
rate hydratase  (FH) gene. Clinical expression is highly variable. We 
evaluated the yield of FH germline mutation analysis in a cohort of 
suspected HLRCC kindreds, assessed clinical variability among fami -
lies with a demonstrated mutation, and propose diagnostic criteria and 
indications for FH mutation testing.
Methods  Clinical data were collected from all families referred for FH 
mutation analysis in the Netherlands. An MLPA test was performed in 
families with negative FH sequence analysis.
Findings In 14 out of 33 families we identified 11 different pathogenic 
FH germline mutations, including four novel mutations and one whole-
gene deletion. Clinical data were available from 34 FH mutation carri -
ers. Cutaneous leiomyomas were present in all FH mutation carriers 
above 40 years. 10 out of 20 female FH mutation carriers underwent 
surgical treatment for symptomatic uterine leiomyomas at 34 years on 
average. Two FH mutation carriers had kidney cancer; the histological 
subtypes were papillary type 2 and Wilms’ tumour, respectively.
Interpretation  All FH mutation positive families harboured patients with 
cutaneous leiomyomas, contrasting with none of the families negative 
for FH mutations. An MLPA test should be part of FH mutation testing. 
FH mutation carriers frequently had early-onset, severely symptomatic 
uterine leiomyomas, whereas renal cancer was infrequent. Multiple cu -
taneous leiomyomas may be diagnostic for HLRCC.Cancer genetics17
P06.086  Molecular diagnostics strategy to identify hereditary 
non-polyposis colorectal cancer patients
O. Kostina1,2, E. Rebane1,2, W. Anderson1, M. Kask1, A. Valkna1;  
1Competence Center for Cancer Research, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn University 
of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.
Introduction. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), 
also called Lynch syndrome, is an autosomal dominantly inherited 
syndrome predisposing to the early development of cancers of colon, 
rectum, endometrial, small bowel and urinary tract and accounts for 
~5% of all colon cancer cases. Molecular investigations have shown 
that most HNPCC families are associated with constitutional mutations 
in a class of genes (called MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2  and probably 
others) involved in DNA mismatch repair. MLH1  and MSH2  genes ac -
count for approximately 90% of HNPCC families identified germline 
mutations. Most of these mutations are point mutations and small in -
sertions or deletions. The large genomic deletions explain a significant 
proportion and epimutations in MLH1  a smaller fraction of point muta -
tion-negative cases with MMR protein loss in tumor tissue. The aim of 
the study is to improve the diagnostic strategy of Lynch syndrome and 
characterize the MMR gene mutations of Estonian HNPCC families.
Methods. A systematic analysis of patients from Estonian HNPCC- 
suspected families is performed using complex analysis by immuno -
histochemistry, microsatellite instability, and by detection of gene mu -
tation and changes in methylation profiles.
Results. A comprehensive analysis of samples from 75 HNPCC-sus -
pected patients is ongoing, we will present preliminary results.
Conclusion. Based on traditional molecular genetics and combined 
with epigenetics, multiple detection methods can accurately diagnose 
HNPCC. As the results of the study, the precise molecular diagnostic 
scheme for diagnosing of HNPCC will be worked out for clinical use 
in Estonia.
P06.087  Promoter region methylation status of MGMT  and 
THBS1  genes in breast carcinoma patients
F. I. Sahin1, O. Ozer1, M. C. Yagmurdur2, Z. Yilmaz1, B. Demirhan3;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of General 
Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department 
of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Carcinogenesis is a multistep process with genetic and epigenetic 
changes playing role from the very beginning to the metastatic level. 
Breast cancer is a major health problem among women all over the 
world. Changes in methylation patterns of a number of genes associat -
ed with cell growth have been reported in breast cancer. In the current 
study, we studied methylation status of MGMT  and THBS1  genes in 
breast carcinoma patients. Paraffin embedded tissue samples from 47 
invasive breast carcinoma patients were included in the study. Promot -
er regions of MGMT  and THBS1  genes were amplified by methylation 
specific polymerase chain reaction following bisulphite modification.
We detected methylation of MGMT  gene in 4 patients (8.51%) where -
as THBS1  promoter methylation was observed in one patient (2.12%). 
Statistical analyses were performed by Pearson’s chi square test to in -
vestigate whether methylation was related with age, menopausal sta -
tus, lactation, parity, histological tumor type, local recurrence, axillary 
metastatic lymph nodes and remote metastasis of the patients. We did 
not detect a significant relationship between the methylation statuses 
of the promoters of the two genes with the above parameters. Methyla -
tion status of different genes has been reported to be heterogeneous 
in breast carcinoma, although we did not detect a significant relation -
ship, we believe studies including increased number of samples and 
genes will provide more information.
P06.088  Somatic mutations in juvenile polyps from BMPR1A 
and smAD4 mutation carriers
R. H. E. Blatter1, M. Plasilova1, A. M. Russell1, J. Zhang1, N. Bösch1, S. T. 
Gokaslan2, R. Ashfaq2, H. Müller1, K. Heinimann1;  
1Research Group Human Genetics, Centre for Biomedicine DKBW, University 
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Pathology, UT Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas, TX, United States.
Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
that predisposes to gastrointestinal polyps and a cancer risk of 10-
50%. Germline mutations in the genes BMPR1A or SMAD4 have been 
identified in approximately half of JPS patients. These ‚first hit‘ muta -tions are often point mutations or small deletions but also large chro -
mosomal deletions occur. So far however, little data is available on the 
nature of the somatic, ‚second hit‘ mutations in polyps of JPS patients. 
In this study, we have screened for somatic mutations in twenty-four ju -
venile polyps from three individuals harbouring a pathogenic BMPR1A 
(583C>T; G195X; patients P1 & P2) or SMAD4 (1244-1247delACAG; 
patient P3) germline mutation.
We identified consistent allelic loss of the BMPR1A wild-type allele at 
the location of the first hit mutation in 45% (5/11) of juvenile polyps 
from patients P1 (4/9) & P2 (1/2). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 
informative STR markers indicated that the entire wild-type BMPR1A 
gene was lost in three of the five polyps. Mutation analysis of epithelial 
and stromal tissue isolated by laser microdissection from one polyp 
showed that LOH solely occurred in the epithelium. This was verified 
by FISH probes covering the BMPR1A region which additionally speci -
fied the size of the chromosomal alteration.
Immunohistochemical staining of the juvenile polyps from patient P3 
revealed the absence of SMAD4 expression in the epithelial (80%, 
12/15) and stromal (60%, 9/15) compartments. However, no second 
hit mutations were identified in these polyps, despite extensive screen -
ing for sequence variations, chromosomal rearrangements, and pro -
moter methylation.
P06.089  Sensitive detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations using mutant-enriched PcR and reverse-hybridization teststrips
G. Kriegshäuser1, B. Holzer2, B. Rauscher1, E. Schuster2, R. Zeillinger1,2, C. 
Oberkanins1;  
1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Molecular Oncology Group, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
KRAS and BRAF are key players in growth factor receptor induced 
signalling pathways. Somatic mutations in the two genes are known to 
play a role in oncogenesis and are found in various types of tumors. 
KRAS and BRAF mutations are also known to be predictive for the 
response to cancer therapy with anti-EGFR antibodies.
We have developed a reverse-hybridization StripAssay targeting ten 
KRAS codon 12/13 mutations as well as BRAF V600E. The test is 
based on PCR in the presence of wild-type suppressors (mutant-en -
riched PCR), followed by hybridization to teststrips presenting a par -
allel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. The hybridization 
and detection steps can be carried out automated using commercially 
available instrumentation. StripAssay performance was evaluated on 
genomic DNA obtained from cultured cell lines, formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded tissue and stool.
Using dilutions of DNA from tumor cell lines into normal DNA, each 
mutation was shown to be detectable at levels as low as 1%. DNA 
containing various proportions of mutant KRAS was analyzed by Stri -
pAssay hybridization and compared to results from real-time PCR, 
dideoxy sequencing and pyrosequencing. Dideoxy sequencing and 
pyrosequencing failed to detect levels of 12.5% or lower, while Stri -
pAssay hybridization and real-time PCR unambiguously identified as 
low as 1% of mutant KRAS.
The existing StripAssay is currently being extended to contain addi -
tional mutations, such as KRAS codon 61 variants. The simultane -
ous detectability of multiple mutations in a single experimental set up 
with excellent sensitivity will make the StripAssay a useful tool for the 
KRAS/BRAF mutation assessment on tumor samples.
P06.090  KRAS  Variant Detection on the Applied Biosystems 
3500xL Genetic Analyzer
C. J. Davidson1, F. Wang1, K. Champion2, M. Gauthier1, N. Koch1, J. 
Boonyaratanakornkit3, A. Pradhan1, J. Walker1, J. R. Jones2, A. Felton1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Greenwood Genetic 
Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3AcroMetrix, Benicia, CA, United 
States.
The KRAS  gene encodes a protein in the RAS-MAPK pathway, one 
of several signaling cascades downstream of EGFR activation. EGFR 
signaling pathways are important in the development and progression 
of several cancers, with KRAS  gene mutations common in pancreatic, 
lung, and colorectal cancers. Activating KRAS  mutations have been 
described most frequently in codons 12 and 13, these mutations result 
in constitutively active form of KRAS causing EGFR pathway signal -
ing independent of EGFR activation; thus making therapeutic agents Cancer genetics10
that block EGFR ineffective. Here we describe limit of detection ex -
periments for the detection of sequence variants in codons 12 and 13 
of the KRAS  gene. Methodologies investigated include capillary elec -
trophoresis (CE) DNA sequencing, Shifted Termination Assay (STA) 
detection, single-base extension, pyrosequencing, real-time PCR, and 
high resolution melt (HRM). Two sample types were used to assess 
the limit of detection: 1) mixtures at various percentages of gDNA 
extracted from KRAS  mutant and wild-type cancer cell-lines; and 2) 
mixtures at various percentages of KRAS  mutant and wild-type cells 
that were formaldehyde fixed and paraffin embedded to create a cell 
block from which gDNA was extracted. The analytic sensitivity of the 
above methodologies is described with a detection of KRAS  variants 
in codons 12 and 13 possible at a level of 1%. Further, copy number 
variation (CNV) assessment of KRAS  mutant cell line gDNA was per -
formed since it is known that cancer cell lines have CNV of the KRAS  
gene. For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human 
therapeutic or diagnostic use
P06.091  sNaPshot as a sensitive molecular tool for prognostic 
determination of K-RAs mutation status in patients with 
colorectal cancer in different clinical stages
T. Slamka1, Z. Bartošová2, L. Mihók1, M. Mamráková1, A. Jendeková1, D. 
Ilenčíková1;  
1Department of Cancer Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, 
Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
The K-RAS  has been the first molecular marker used to predict suc -
cessful response to specific biological treatment with anti-EGFR 
monoclonal antibody (MoAb) in the first line treatment of metastatic 
colorectal cancer (mCRC).
We established a rapid and inexpensive assay based on Multiplex 
SNaPshot kit (Applied Biosystems) to facilitate the identification of K-
RAS mutations in codons 12 and 13 on a routine diagnostic basis.
At first, DNA samples isolated from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embed -
ded tissues have been tested for a diagnostic indication of MoAb tar -
geted therapy in patients with mCRC. The K-RAS  mutations were de -
tected in 182 out of 508 samples (35,7%). Another clinical question we 
addressed, was the distribution of K-RAS  mutations in CRC in different 
clinical stages. Prospective screening included 131 patient samples 
from fresh resected tumors. Patients were classified according to age, 
sex, clinical stage, site of tumor, EGFR expression, p53 and BRAF  
mutation status. We compared these factors in respect to the K-RAS  
mutation status.
Surprisingly, outcomes pointed out a higher mutation rate of K-RAS  
oncogene in clinical non-metastatic stage II(38,8%) in comparison to 
metastatic stage III(31,3%). Therefore, we intend, that monitoring dur -
ing the treatment could explain closer the relationship between K -RAS  
status and tumor behavior, tendency to metastasis and treatment re -
sponse. High mutation rate of K-RAS  in clinical stageII seems to be 
important to focus this molecular marker as a crucial prognostic factor 
in treatment of CRC. Hence, the K-RAS  status could play a key task 
in decision to apply adjuvant therapy. Study was supported - MHSR-
2006/26-NOU-02.
P06.092  Multiplex RT-PCR assay for rapid and cost efficient 
screening of fusion gene transcripts in acute leukemia.
D. Jardan , R. Talmaci, D. Coriu;  
Fundeni Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
The aim of this study was to validate the application of an “in house” 
designed multiplex RT-PCR for the detection of 8 most frequent fusion 
gene transcripts in acute leukemia (E2A-PBX1, TEL-AML1, AML1-
ETO, PML-RARα, MLL-AF4, CBFb-MYH11, BCR-ABL, SIL-TAL) for 
use in routine molecular diagnostic practice. A total of 78 patient sam -
ples at presentation were tested (48 AML and 30 ALL). For evalua -
tion all samples were tested in parallel with HemaVision Full kit (DNA 
Technology).
A total of 19 cases with fusion genes transcripts were identified ( TEL-
AML - 1, BCR-ABL - 4, AML-ETO - 2, PML-RARα - 8, MLL-AF4 - 1, 
CBFβ-MYH11 - 2, SIL-TAL - 1). This allowed risk stratification for 25% 
of AML cases and 23% of ALL cases. In combination with detection 
of MLL-AF9 fusion gene transcript, MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD 
testing and detection of mutations in NPM1 this method allowed evalu -
ation of prognostic for the most of our AML patients. This method em -ploys a nested-PCR approach, thus being suitable for MDR monitoring 
with an almost identical sensitivity as HemaVision assay.
Overall our assay exhibited good sensitivity and specificity and al -
lowed identification of fusion gene transcripts in 24% of acute leuke -
mia. Compared with commercially available kits like HemaVision it is 
considerably cheaper and for our lot of patients identified the same 
fusion gene transcripts as HemaVision assay.
This work was supported by the grant PN 41-087 from the Romanian 
Ministry of Education and Research. The authors express their grati -
tude to European LeukemiaNet for their permanent support.
P06.093  Li-Fraumeni in the Baltics - it‘s not so rare, it‘s not so 
usual, it‘s so timely.
R. Janavičius , K. Andrėkutė, L. Griškevičius;  
Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics, Hematology, oncology and 
transfusion medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Germline TP53 gene mutations are associated with complex cancer 
predisposition syndrome, the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), predispos -
ing to wide spectrum of malignant tumors, especially sarcomas, early-
onset breast cancer, brain and adrenocortical carcinomas. Recently, 
the estimated prevalence of germline TP53 mutations may vary from 
1:5000 to 1:20000.
Of note, genetic epidemiology, genotype-phenotype correlation and 
clinical presentation of LFS are completely unknown in Northern-East -
ern Baltic sea region (Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia). Given the strong 
founder effect in BRCA1 gene in Lithuania, there is a possibility for 
founder effect in other tumor predisposition genes. In Hematology, on -
cology and transfusion medicine center of Vilnius university hospital 
Santarsikiu clinics we prefer less stringent modified Chompret crite -
ria (2009) and prescreen TP53 2-11 exons by high resolution melting 
(HRM) analysis followed by direct automatic sequencing.
During one year period 3 confirmed TP53 carriers families (4 patients) 
were identified. Here we discuss the peculiarities of the phenotypic 
expression in these patients and describe the novel germline TP53 
mutation. Two of patients conformed to clasic LFS criteria, well de -
scribed p.R282W mutation was revealed in one osteosarcoma patient 
and p.C199G mutation was found for the first time in germline status 
(submitted to IARC database) in one breast sarcoma patient. One pa -
tient presented as apparently BRCA1-related breast/ovarian patient, 
which was found negative for BRCA1 mutations but positive for TP53 
p.R273C mutation. Additional genetic modifiers (MDM2 SNP307G; 
T53 R72P, PIN3) were assessed and data will be presented in the 
context of clinical sense.
P06.094  Alterations of LA ts2, sPP1, stK11, ViPR1 and s100A2 
are lung cancer type specific
M. Stražišar , V. Mlakar, D. Glavač;  
Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Molecular heterogeneity within non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is 
evident in the variable presence of mutations, but molecular differenc -
es that may be associated with specific types are either unidentified 
or controversial. In an attempt to find novel molecular differences be -
tween squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (ADC), 
we created a DNA microarray platform (MA) by which expression lev -
els of 3060 genes involved in carcinogenesis and apoptosis are moni -
tored. The expression levels of candidate genes that were chosen on 
the basis of MA results were also validated on RT-PCR, and those 
genes further investigated for mutations, copy-number changes and 
methylation. We examined 118 NSCLC tumours of known stages and 
types, as well as adjacent non-tumour tissue. By means of MA, more 
than 40 genes, most of them involved in transcription or transcription 
regulation, were detected as having differential expression in compari -
son to adjacent healthy tissue. LATS2 and STK11 genes were down-
regulated regardless of the type of NSCLC, but further mutation detec -
tion showed that alterations are significant only for SCC. In S100A2, 
SPP1 and VIPR1, we discovered significant differences between ADC 
and SCC already on expression level. S100A2 and VIPR1 were signifi -
cantly down-regulated and SPP1 up-regulated in ADC in comparison 
to SCC. We were able to identify the causes of down-regulation of 
VIPR1 and LATS2, the former being a copy-number alteration and the 
latter methylation. Our findings confirm LATS2, STK11 and VIPR1 as 
tumour suppressors and identify novel changes and genes that clearly 
show differences between NSCLC histotypes on a molecular level.Cancer genetics11
P06.095  Women with Lynch syndrome: perception of cancer 
risks, follow-up and prophylactic surgery
C. COLAS1, A. Saleyron2, F. Coulet1, F. Soubrier1, Y. Ansquer2;  
1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et d’Angiogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié 
Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Service de Gynécologie, Hôpital Saint-
Antoine, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Lynch syndrome predisposes to colorectal cancer and also to gynae -
cological cancers. Screening recommendations for colorectal cancer 
are well established whereas gynaecological screening is still in de -
bate. We evaluated follow-up, perception of cancer risk and attitude re -
garding prophylactic gynaecological surgery for 24 women with Lynch 
Syndrome,
All women had an adequate digestive follow up (21 of 24 had colo -
noscopies at least every 2 years) but their gynaecological follow up is 
less systematic (only 14 of 24 patients had ultrasonography and less 
than 50% also had an endometrial biopsy). Forty seven percents of pa -
tients had an accurate perception of their colorectal risk of cancer but 
only 33 % also had an accurate perception of their endometrial risk of 
cancer and 8 % for ovarian cancer risk. If gynaecological prophylactic 
surgery was proposed, they would be 63 % to consider this option but 
only after menopause. Almost 90% of the patients (21/24) discussed 
of colorectal cancer risk with their gastroenterologist but only 54% dis -
cussed about the gynaecological risk. On the same way, only 50% 
of these patients discussed about the gynaecological risk with their 
gynaecologist and 10 women (41%) did not mention their genetic pre -
disposition to their general physician.
Women with Lynch syndrome are less aware of their risks for extra -
colonic cancers and undergo endometrial cancer screening less often 
than colonoscopy. Given the increased risks for endometrial and ovar -
ian cancers, sustained efforts to inform women and physicians of can -
cer risks, screening recommendations and possibility of prophylactic 
surgery are important.
P06.096  characterization of germline mutations of MLH1 and  
MSH2  in suspected south American Lynch syndrome families
M. V. Dominguez1, E. M. M. Santos2, F. O. Ferreira2, F. C. Silva2, B. C. Lisboa2, 
D. M. Carraro2, B. M. Rossi2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Clermont Ferrand, France, 2AC Camargo 
Hospital, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Introduction - Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant syn -
drome predisposing to the early development of colorectal cancer 
(CRC), endometrium, ovary, small intestine, stomach and urinary 
tract. LS is caused by germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair 
genes, mostly MLH1  or MSH2 , which are responsible for more than 
85% of known germline mutations in patients with SL. 
Objectives - Search for germline mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 genes 
in 99 Brazilian suspected unrelated LS patients. 
Material and Methods - 99 DNAs were obtained from peripheral blood 
and subjected to PCR followed by direct sequencing in both directions 
of all exons and intron-exon junctions regions of MLH1  and MSH2  
genes. 
Results - We found 32 MLH1  or MSH2  pathogenic mutations, being 2 
individuals with 2 mutations. Thirty pathogenic mutations were found, 
being 21/41 (51.27%) fulfilling the Amsterdam and 9/58 (15.5%) the 
Bethesda criteria. Thirteen pathogenic mutations were described for 
the first time. Currently, these findings are available on LOVD data -
base. 
Conclusions - The results were consistent with literature. Moreover, 
higher frequency of MLH1  or MSH2  mutations was observed in pa -
tients with Amsterdam criteria, confirming their high specificity. The 
number of new pathogenic mutations in  MLH1  or MSH2  genes found 
in this study point for the requirement to screen suspected LS families, 
mainly regarding the Brazilian families complex genetic background.
P06.097  the risk of urothelial bladder cancer in Lynch 
syndrome is increased, in particular among MSH2  mutation 
carriers
N. Hoogerbrugge , R. S. Post van der, L. A. Kiemeney, M. J. Ligtenberg, J. 
Krieken van;  
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background: Colorectal, endometrial and upper urinary tract tumours 
are characteristic for Lynch syndrome. The aim of this study was to 
establish whether carriers of mutations in MSH2, MLH1 or MSH6  are at risk of urinary bladder cancer.
Methods: Carriers and first-degree relatives of 95 families with a germ -
line mutation in the MSH2  (n=43), MLH1  (n=26), or MSH6  (n=26) gene 
were systematically questioned about occurrence of carcinoma. The 
cumulative risk of cancer occurring before the age of 70 years (CR70) 
was compared to CR70 of the general Dutch population. Microsatellite 
instability (MSI) testing and/or immunhistochemistry (IHC) was per -
formed on bladder tumours.
Results: Bladder cancer was diagnosed in 21 patients (90% men) from 
19 Lynch syndrome families (15 MSH2 , 2 MLH1,  and 4 MSH6 ). CR70 
for bladder cancer was 7.5% [95% CI 3.1-11.9%] for men and 1.0% 
[95% CI 0-2.4%] for women, resulting in relative risks for mutation car -
riers and first-degree relatives of 4.2 [95% CI 2.2-7.2] for men and 
2.2 [95% CI 0.3-8.0] for women. Men carrying an MSH2  mutation and 
their first-degree relatives were at highest risks: CR70 for bladder and 
upper urinary tract cancer being 12.3% [95% CI 4.3-20.3%] and 5.9% 
[95% CI 0.7-11.1%]. Bladder cancer tissue was MSI positive in 6/7 tu -
mours and loss of IHC staining was found in 14/17 tumours, indicating 
Lynch syndrome aetiology. 
Conclusion: Patients with Lynch syndrome carrying an  MSH2  mutation 
are at increased risk of urinary tract cancer including bladder cancer. 
In these cases surveillance should be considered.
P06.098  Evaluation of pathogenicity of single-base germline 
changes involving the mismatch repair genes mLH1, msH2 and 
msH6  in diagnostics of Lynch syndrome.
L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante Sanz1, E. Velasco Sampedro1, E. Lastra Aras2, 
J. Cuevas González3, A. Acedo Bécares1, M. Alonso Ramos1, I. Fernández 
Carvajal1, L. Hernández Sanz1, N. Martínez Martín1, C. Miner Pino1, M. Durán 
Domínguez1;  
1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain, 3Hospital 
Comarcal Medina del Campo, Medina del Campo, Valladolid, Spain.
Lynch syndrome is an inherited disease caused by germ-line mutation 
in mismatch repair genes such as MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6.
A proportion of families are characterized by nucleotide substitutions, 
unclassified variants (UVs) have been found, in order to use the vari -
ants for predictive testing in persons at risk, their pathogenicity has to 
be evaluated.
We examined 7 UVs detected in MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6 genes in pa -
tients suspected of HNPCC for expression at RNA level, the effects 
on splicing were evaluated by RT-PCR analysis and systematic se -
quencing: MLH1: c.306+5G>A and c.307-29C>A; MSH2: c.1661G>A, 
c.2634G>A; MSH6: c.100G>C, c.3425C>T and c.4004A>C.
We demonstrate that 3 of the 7 UVs analyzed affect splicing. The vari -
ant c.306+5G>A, a G to A transversion affecting position +5 of the 
splice donor site of MLH1/exon 3; the sequencing of this revealed a 
deletion of five nucleotides which gave rise to the aberrant splicing. 
The substitution MSH2 (c.1661G>A) affecting the last nucleotide of 
exon 10, the change from guanine to cytosine makes the natural splic -
ing site 50 (value 0.60) disappear, using a new donor cryptic site in 
position c.1580 (value 0.56), thus producing the deletion of 81 nucleo -
tides in the mRNA. This point was confirmed by means of RT-PCR 
analysis, so that the normal fragment would have a size of 357bp and 
the aberrant fragment 246bp. We confirmed complete skipping of exon 
15 for the mutation MSH2: c.2634G>A.
The pathogenic splicing mutations identified in this study will contribute 
to the assessment of „unclassified variants“ in genetic counselling.
P06.099  molecular characterization of cNs embryonal tumors 
in early childhood: differences between medulloblastoma and 
atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (A t/Rt).
M. Biscuola1, E. Rivas1, G. Ramirez2, A. Santos1, E. Quiroga2, J. Palacios1;  
1Pathology Department of Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, 
Spain, 2Pediatric Oncology of Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, 
Spain.
Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) are highly malignant CNS 
tumors with an ominous prognosis that justifies an aggressive treat -
ment. Due to their heterogeneous histology, IHC profile and some 
morphologic overlap with Medulloblastoma (MB), make an accurate 
diagnosis results to be a difficult challenge.
In order to characterize the molecular profile, we constructed a specific 
Tissue Micro Array (TMA) with a series of 30 formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded childhood brain tumours (22 MB and 8 AT/RT), from year Cancer genetics12
2003 to 2009, were acquired from the archives of the Pathology De-
partment of H. Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain. Representative areas 
of each tumour were chosen.
We studied by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) Ki-67, sinaptofisin, eno -
lase, GFAP, EGFR, INI-1, β-catenin and cyclin D1 and by FISH we 
studied EGFR, HER2, MYC, MYCN, 11p, 17p/17q, 6q status.
AT/RT group showed: 1) Loss of expression for INI-1 protein in all 
the cases: 2) Positive immunohistochemical nuclear expression of β-
catenin and cyclin D1 in 62% and 90% of the samples respectively, 
while the group of MB was positive only in a 13% and 9% respectively; 
3) 75% of AT/RT samples carried 6q deletion while only 18% of MB 
showed this alteration. In contrast 36% of MB showed gain of 6q.
Amplification of HER2 and MYC/MYCN was observed only in MB 
group in the 22% and 36% of these samples.
These results suggest that molecular characterization could be a help -
ful tool for a more accurate diagnosis of these two tumors.
P06.100  Exome re-sequencing of 7 melanoma cell lines to 
identify “driver” mutations
S. I. Nikolaev1, K. Harshman2, C. Gehrig1, M. Guipponi1, B. J. Stevenson3, 
A. J. Sharp1, D. Rimoldi4, P. Descombes1, I. Xenarios5, V. C. Jongeneel3, A. 
Valsesia3, C. Iseli3, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Ltd, and 
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Institute for Cancer 
Research, Ltd, Lausanne Branch, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Melanoma is the most dangerous form of skin cancer. Ultraviolet light 
exposure is a well known environmental risk factor for this tumor. Al -
though a few prevalent mutations have been identified, the full mu -
tational spectrum that includes the “driver” mutations of melanoma 
is unknown. To better understand the molecular pathophysiology of 
melanoma we have used high throughput sequencing of array-select -
ed exons to determine the mutational spectrum in the protein-coding 
fraction of seven melanoma cell lines, 5 unrelated and 2 derived from 
the same patient (before and after treatment).
We performed the exome selection using CCDS capture arrays (34 
Mb, 20000 genes) on genomic DNA extracted from cell lines derived 
from metastatic tumors and from normal tissues of the same patient 
(EBV-transformed or non-transformed PBLs). An improved capture 
protocol results in 60% of DNA library fragments originating from cod -
ing exons. Exomes were re-sequenced using 2-3 lanes of 2x76 bp 
paired-end sequencing, providing 40-80 fold coverage per sample. 
More than 98% of SNPs recovered on SNP arrays were confirmed 
by re-sequencing. Somatic mutations were determined by comparison 
between the melanoma and normal cell lines for each individual. We 
observe that the most abundant class of mutations is C>T, a hallmark 
of exposure to ultra-violet light. In order to detect “driver” mutations, 
we compared somatic mutations between individuals and revealed a 
subset of genes affected by probably deleterious mutations. We are 
also investigating rare germline variants that are shared by the mela -
noma patients which may include alleles that predispose individuals 
to this disease.
P06.101  Copy number profiling of metastatic melanoma cell 
lines
A. N. Valsesia1,2,3, B. J. Stevenson1,2, D. Rimoldi1, D. Martinet4, M. Gaillard4, 
B. Rapin4, P. Benaglio3, S. Bergmann3,2, S. I. Nickolaev5, S. E. Antonarakis5, C. 
Rivolta3, J. S. Beckmann3,4, C. V. Jongeneel1,2, C. Iseli1,2;  
1Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss 
Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical 
Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of Medical 
Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and 
Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
Melanoma is a malignant tumour arising from melanocytes (pigment 
producing cells) which can generate metastases throughout the body. 
Although one of the less frequent skin cancers, melanoma is respon -
sible for most of the associated deaths. We are analyzing seven meta -
static melanoma cell lines, as well as matched control cells, with 1) 
karyotype, high-resolution CGH and SNP analyses to study large-scale 
genomic variation; 2) ultra-high-throughput sequencing of exome-cap -
ture genomic DNA to discover mutations in protein-coding genes; 3) 
transcriptome profiling using 454/Roche pyrophosphate sequencing to identify melanoma-specific expression patterns and splicing events; 
and 4) methylation analysis to uncover epigenetic changes in mela -
noma cells that contribute to melanoma-specific expression patterns.
Here we present results from the karyotype, CGH and SNP analyses, 
as well as preliminary results from transcriptome sequencing. We ex -
amine the challenges and limitations of working with highly aneuploid 
cancer genomes, and propose appropriate analytical procedures. Our 
comprehensive copy number profiling is useful to stratify melanomas 
into sub-categories based on genomic amplification status (see Table). 
We demonstrate a link between genomic amplification and increased 
gene expression, and we have grouped genes according to their copy 
number profiles. We anticipate that characterisation of melanoma-spe -
cific aberrations at the genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic levels 
will improve clinical diagnosis by identifying new candidate genes play -
ing a role in melanoma malignancy.
Number of genes and genome fraction affected
 by copy number aberrations (* regions ≥ 100Kb)
Melanoma subsetNumber of
 melanomasDeletions*Amplifications*  
(copy number ≥ 5)
Large deletion 2612Mb  
3778 genes12Mb  
77 genes
Moderate amplification 326Mb  
200 genes217Mb  
1548 genes
Major amplification 225Mb  
148 genes1978Mb  
14312 genes
P06.102  multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (mEN), type iiA - case 
report
A. Kirov1,2, T. Todorov1,2, L. Angelova3, A. Todorova1,2, V. Mitev1;  
1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “St. Marina” Hospital, Varna, Bulgaria.
MEN2 is a rare familial cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the 
Rearranged During Transfection (RET) protooncogene and is inher -
ited as an autosomal dominant disorder. MEN2 is classified into three 
subtypes: MEN2A, MEN2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. 
The overall frequency is 1:30,000-50,000. Almost all MEN2A patients 
(95%) develop medullary thyroid carcinoma. It is generally the first 
manifestation and appears between the ages of 5 to 25 years (mean 
15 years). We report on a Caucasian male with complains of general 
weakness and weigh loss (10 kg for 2 month). The patient’s mother has 
been diagnosed at 47 as bilateral pheochromocytomas and struma no -
dosa and died at age of 51. In the index patient abdominal ultrasound 
examination with biopsy of adrenal glands and histological analysis 
revealed pheochromocytoma on right side; elevated plasma calcito -
nin concentration and US scan with biopsy of thyroid tissue detected 
medular thyroid cancer. The index patient has two elder brothers - (it 
turned out that one of them) had been surgically treated for medular 
thyroid cancer in the past; bilateral pheocromocytomas were detected 
in the family screening process. Presymptomatic identification of at-
risk siblings led to the diagnosis of medular thyroid cancer and right 
sided pheocromocytoma in the eldest brother. MEN2A diagnosis was 
suspected and we performed sequencing of RET protooncogene. The 
genetic analysis of the family affected members revealed c.1902C>G, 
p.Cys634Trp heterozygous mutation. Unfortunately, two kids in the 
families of 2 of the brothers have also inherited the mutation. All adult 
family members were offered genetic counseling.
P06.103  Aberrantly expressed microRNAs indicate the 
pathways potentially associated with non-small cell lung cancer 
development
T. Annilo1, U. Võsa1, R. Kolde2, K. Välk1, R. Roosipuu3, T. Vooder3, A. 
Metspalu1,4;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
2Institute of Computer Sciences, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu 
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Center, University of 
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are regulatory molecules that have been impli -
cated in development of a number of different cancers. The mecha -
nisms of altered expression and functional relevance of many dysregu -
lated miRNAs are still unknown.
To investigate the role of miRNAs in lung cancer development, we ex -
amined the miRNA expression profiles in 40 I and II stage non-small Cancer genetics1
cell lung cancers (NSCLC) and 40 paired normal lung samples. We 
used Illumina MicroRNA Expression Profiling Panels which are able 
to detect 858 human miRNAs. Altered expression of several miRNAs 
was confirmed by individual TaqMan miRNA assays.
We identified miRNAs miR-9, miR-149 and miR-205 as most signifi -
cantly up-regulated and miR-648, miR-1264 and miR-512-5p as most 
significantly down-regulated miRNAs in NSCLC samples (P < 10-6).
The molecular pathways potentially affected by dysregulation of these 
miRNAs were identified using online tool Diana mirPath. Significant 
enrichment of predicted targets was observed in pathways involved in 
adhesion, signaling and tumorigenesis, indicating that altered miRNA 
expression may have a causal role in lung cancer development.
P06.104  the inhibition of cell proliferation by a microRNA 
molecule, miR-145 in human prostate cancer.
S. Sevli, O. F. Bayrak, S. Gulluoglu, Z. Demir, M. Ozen ;  
Yeditepe University Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
Prostate cancer is one of the most significant cancers of the men 
and there is a need to identify novel therapeutic approaches in this 
disease. MicroRNAs are new class of small RNAs as regulators of 
gene expression. Alteration in microRNA expression may play a critical 
role in tumorigenesis, androgen independency and recurrency after 
radical prostatectomy. Global microRNA expression studies revealed 
the key regulatory microRNAs in prostate cancer. We have shown a 
widespread deregulation of microRNA expression in human prostate 
cancer. miR-125b, miR-145 and let-7c are down regulated in prostate 
tumors as compared to normal prostatic tissues. miR145 is downregu -
lated in prostate tumor samples and prostate cancer cell lines including 
PC3, DU145, LNCaP and LAPC4 but has relatively higher expression 
in normal prostatic epithelial cells. The ectopic expression of miR145 
significantly inhibited the proliferation of prostate cancer cells in vitro. 
The molecular mechanism behind this change are being investigated. 
Possible targets could be SEMA3A and SOX9 as identified by gene 
expression profiling. More studies to elucidate the mechanism of this 
inhibition are in progress. In summary, our data showed that miR-145 
has an anti-proliferative ability as tested in vitro in human prostate can -
cer cell lines, suggesting microRNAs as important molecules in pros -
tate cancer tumorigenesis.
This study is supported by a grant (18S051) from The Scientific and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey.
P06.105  the mLH1, msH2 and msH6 mutations among familial 
colon cancer Russian patients
E. A. Goncharova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, 
E. L. Korchagina2, R. F. Garkavtseva2, D. Shakhmatov3, Y. A. Shelygin3, E. K. 
Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3State Scientific 
Centre of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
For the first time MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 gene mutations were ana -
lyzed among Russian patients. There were 67% of hereditary non-pol -
yposis colon cancer syndrome cases with MLH1 and MSH2 mutations. 
The mutations mainly were in MLH1 gene. Only one mutation - deletion 
of 3T in MLH1 exon 16 (p.Lys618del3) was repeated (20% of MLH1 
spectrum). It is interesting that all patients with this mutation had mul -
tiple primary neoplasms. This is often than under the other mutations 
near the significance value (P=0.06). The rest mutations were unique. 
Among 80 colon cancer families not corresponding to Amsterdam‘s 
criterion only 3 cases (~4%) with MLH1/MSH2 mutations were found. 
The MSH6 gene was analyzed among 17 colon cancer families that 
included endometrial cancer cases. There were two MSH6 mutations 
in the sample (12%). One of those - 1142insCCCA was not found in the 
data bases and available literature and, so, is new.
P06.106  Development of a workflow to detect variants on MLH1 
and msH2 genes, using the newest capillary electrophoresis 
platform the 3500 Genetic Analyzer
R. Petraroli1, L. Bagait2, C. Davidson3, T. Lovecchio4, M. Dieu4, D. Boidin4, M. 
Crépin4, M. Buisine4;  
1Life Technologies, Roma, Italy, 2Life Technologies, Paris, France, 3Life 
Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 4Laboratoire d’Oncologie Moléculaire , Centre de Biologie et Pathologie ,CHRU, Lille, France.
The MLH1 and MSH2 genes belong to the mismatch repairs genes 
family. Thus far more than 200 different variants have been character -
ized in each of the MLH1 and MSH2 mismatch repair genes. These 
mutations are not present in any particular hotspot or zone of the gene 
and include either nucleotide substitutions (missense, nonsense or 
splicing errors) or insertions/deletions (gross or small). Specifically the 
overwhelming majority of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers 
(HNPCC) are attributed to mutations in the genes MLH1 and MSH2 
respectively, which allows them to be classified as tumour suppressor 
genes. Ongoing research on MLH1 and MSH2 genes mutations has 
underlined the need for simple mutation detection research protocol. 
The high number of variations, the gene length and the absence of 
a hot spot region make the automated capillary electrophoresis (CE) 
DNA sequencing the gold standard method for this research. It’s a 
highly referenced and robust technique that delivers long read lengths 
and the ability to sequence anywhere from a few to several hundred 
samples in a single day. Here we present a MLH1 and MSH2 research 
protocol. This protocol was developed via a collaborative research 
study on 15 colorectal cancer samples using the Applied Biosystems 
3130 Genetic Analyzer and the newest capillary electrophoresis plat -
form, the Applied Biosystems 3500 Genetic Analyzer.
P06.107  Expression of multidrug resistance-associated protein 
1 and lung resistance-related protein in breast cancer patients: correlation with response to chemotherapy treatment
M. Taheri1,2, F. Mahjoubi2, R. Omranipour3;  
1Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success treatment of 
breast cancer. Molecular investigations on drug resistance have led 
to the discovery of genes coding for P-gp, multidrug resistance-as -
sociated protein 1, lung resistance-related protein and many others. 
Despite the intensive studies regarding the role of these genes in in -
ducing drug resistance in cancer patients the data is still controversial 
and debated.
Therefore, in this study we attempted to investigate the possible cor -
relation between multidrug resistance-associated protein 1, lung re -
sistance-related protein and clinical response in women with breast 
cancer. We determined mRNA levels of MRP1 and LRP in tumor and 
adjacent normal tissues of 54 breast cancer patients by Real Time 
RT-PCR.
A statistically significant increase in MRP1 and LRP expression level 
was observed when tumor tissues were compared with normal breast 
tissues. Furthermore, MRP1 and LRP expression levels were signifi -
cantly different in patients responding to chemotherapy compared to 
noresponding patients. No relation between the expression level of 
either of these genes and clinicopathology markers was found.
Our results suggest that MRP1 and LRP in human breast cancer cells 
may affect the clinical response to treatment and determination of 
MRP1 and LRP (either alone or in combination) may be valuable for 
the prediction of the chemotherapy outcome in breast cancer patients 
which remains to be cleared.
P06.108  Expression of MDR1 and MRP1 in colorectal cancer patients: correlation with response to chemotherapy treatment
S. Samanian1, F. Mahjoubi1, R. Mirzaei2, R. Azizi3, B. Mahjoubi3;  
1Department of Clinical Genetic, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2D Department of 
Surgery, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Surgery, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success treatment of 
breast cancer. Molecular investigations on drug resistance have led to 
the discovery of genes coding for P-gp, and multidrug resistance-as -
sociated protein 1 (MRP1).Despite the intensive studies regarding the 
role of these genes in inducing drug resistance in cancer patients the 
data is still controversial and debated.
Therefore, in this study we attempted to investigate the possible cor -
relation between MRP1 and MDR1expression level and clinical re -
sponse in patients with colorectal cancer. Tumor and adjacent normal Cancer genetics1
tissues from cancer patients were assessed for the expression level of 
MRP1 and MDR1 by Real Time RT-PCR.
Here we present some of our data in regards to the role of MDR1 and 
MRP1 in clinical response to chemotherapy.
P06.109  Evidence for a founder effect for the common 
caucasian p.t yr179cys and p.Gly396Asp mUtYH mutations in 
the italian population
R. Tricarico1, E. Pin2, E. Lucci Cordisco3, A. Panza4, M. Pedroni5, A. Piepoli4, 
M. Ponz de Leon5, A. Viel2, M. Genuardi1;  
1Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Medical Genetics Unit, University 
of Florence, Italy, 2Experimental Oncology 1, Oncology Reference Center, 
IRCCS, Aviano, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, 
Italy, 4Gastroenterology Unit and Research Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy.
Background:  MUTYH -associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal re -
cessive inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of polyposis and 
colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Although MAP-causing mutations are dis -
tributed across the MUTYH  locus , a few population-specific mutations 
have been reported. The majority of changes found in the MUTYH  gene 
are missense variants; among these, p.Y179C and p.G396D (previ -
ously annotated as p.Y165C and p.G382D) represent approximately 
75% of MUTYH  mutations found in Caucasians. The high frequency of 
these two mutations in Caucasian populations could result from either 
recurrent de novo  mutational events or from founder effects.
Aim: To verify the presence of possible founder effects for MUTYH  
mutations p.Y179C and p.G396D in the Italian population.
Materials and Methods: Haplotype analysis, using a set of 16 markers 
(microsatellites and SNPs) spanning a region of ~6cM covering the 
MUTYH  locus , was performed in 42 unrelated p.Y179C and p.G396D 
carrier families and in a set healthy control chromosomes, including 
nuclear pedigrees. Haplotypes were manually constructed to minimize 
the minimum number of recombinations. The distributions of allelic 
frequencies in normal and mutated chromosomes were compared by 
Chi-squared and two tailed Fisher’s exact tests.
Results: We observed  statistically significant differences in allele fre -
quencies between normal and both p.Y179C and p.G396D chromo -
somes. In addition, p.Y179C and p.G396D chromosomes were char -
acterized by an association with distinct haplotypes.
Conclusions:  Our data support the hypothesis that the common 
p.Y179C and p.G396D mutations may have been transmitted by a 
common founder in the Italian population.
P06.110  Phenotypic variation in mUtYH-associated Greek 
polyposis patients
F. FOSTIRA1, M. Pertesi1, A. V. Stavropoulou1, C. Panopoulos2, A. Grivas3, D. 
Yannoukakos1;  
1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2St. 
Savas Regional Oncology Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Metaxa Cancer Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
MUTYH -Associated Polyposis (MAP) syndrome is inherited as a re -
cessive trait and is characterized by low polyp burden and increased 
lifetime colorectal cancer risk. In Caucasians, two MUTYH mutations: 
p.Y179C and p.G396D constitute the majority of all MUTYH muta -
tions identified. Ten families meeting the MAP phenotypic criteria were 
studied. Patients were presented with 10-100 colorectal adenomas, 
and in most cases family history does not show vertical transmission 
of polyposis. The mean age of developing colorectal cancer was 47 
years. Analysis of the MUTYH  gene revealed eight different germline 
mutations in seven polyposis families. Furthermore, the pathogenicity 
of a 13-base pair deletion, located on intron 6 of MUTYH  gene, which 
was identified in two unrelated Greek MAP patients, was elucidated. 
The polyp number, as well as the onset of colorectal cancer varied 
amongst families studied. This is the first report of germline MUTYH 
mutations in the Greek population, which can explain a fraction of pol -
yposis patients, which are APC negative. The pathogenicity of a rare 
pathogenic MUTYH  mutation, possibly associated with a relatively se -
vere MAP phenotype, has been elucidated. It is quite evident that each 
MAP case should be handled according to its distinct genotype, follow -
ing a specific prophylaxis protocol to ensure cancer prevention. Fur -
thermore, preliminary data reveal genetic heterogeneity of the Greek 
population, as well as lower prevalence of the two most frequent mu -tations, p.Y179C and p.G396D, when compared to other Caucasian 
populations.
P06.111**  chromosome 11q aberrations and the tumor suppressor cBL in myeloproliferative neoplasms
T. Klampfl1, A. Harutyunyan1, T. Berg1, R. Jäger1, B. Gisslinger2, F. 
Passamonti3, E. Rumi3, D. Pietra3, J. T. Prchal4, M. Cazzola3, H. Gisslinger2, R. 
Kralovics1,2;  
1Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, 
Austria, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Blood 
Coagulation, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of 
Hematology, University of Pavia, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, 
University of Utah and VAH, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
Aberrations of the long arm of chromosome 11 (11q) have been fre -
quently described in hematological malignancies. Recently it was 
shown that these aberrations often associate with mutations of the tu -
mor suppressor CBL at 11q23. Using high-resolution SNP array geno -
typing of patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) we identi -
fied a variety of 11q aberrations that predominantly but not exclusively 
targeted CBL. Two patients harboring 11q uniparental disomy (UPD) 
spanning the CBL locus carried a mutation in the CBL gene. For the 
first time we show, that a chromosomal gain of 11q amplifies a mutant 
CBL allele. As two patients with 11q deletions at the CBL locus did not 
carry mutated CBL on the remaining allele, loss of a single CBL allele 
(haploinsufficiency) may also be oncogenic in MPN. Patients with MPN 
often develop secondary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and since CBL 
mutations have been previously described in AML we examined the 
association of CBL mutations with post-MPN AML. Sequence analysis 
of CBL in 309 MPN patients in chronic phase and post-MPN leukemia 
revealed an association of CBL mutations with leukemic transforma -
tion (P=0.0048). Not all aberrations that we detected on chromosome 
11q were overlapping with the CBL locus. Thus, other 11q tumor sup -
pressor genes may play a role in the evolution of a malignant cell clone 
in MPN. The role of chromosome 11 in MPN pathogenesis is likely 
more complex than previously recognized.
P06.112  A missense mutation of the NBs1 gene altering DNA 
damage response in a patient with familial early-onset breast 
cancer
L. M. PRADELLA1, L. B. AMATO1, V. MINIERI2, V. TURINETTO2, C. 
GIACHINO2, R. ZUNTINI1, G. GASPARRE1, G. ROMEO1, D. TURCHETTI1;  
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and 
Biological Sciences, Turin, Italy.
While screening candidate Breast Cancer (BC) genes in BRCA-nega -
tive early-onset BC patients, we detected a constitutional heterozy -
gous missense mutation (V210F) of the NBS1 gene in a patient with 
BC diagnosed at age 29 and a family history of early-onset BC.
NBS1 encodes a protein, nibrin, involved in the repair of DNA Double-
Strand Breaks. Biallelic NBS1 mutations cause Nijmegen Breakage 
Syndrome, characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, im -
munodeficiency, chromosome instability, radiation sensitivity, and a 
predisposition to lymphoid malignancies. However, there is growing 
evidence of an increased cancer risk in heterozygous carriers of NBS1 
mutations.
The V210F variant has been previously reported in a child affected by 
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and in a patient with melanoma, but 
not, to our knowledge, in healthy controls.
To explore the effect of this variant on Double-Strand Breaks Repair, 
we performed an immunofluorescence assay on EBV-transformed B 
lymphocytes from the patient. The response to DNA damage following 
exposure to γ-radiations was evaluated in terms of number, intensity, 
and persistence of histone γ-H2AX positive nuclear foci.
A marked increase of the γ-H2AX signal, indicating an increase in the 
number and intensity of nuclear foci, was found in the cells of the pa -
tient, in comparison with a healthy, wild-type control and with a het -
erozygous carrier of the 657del5 mutation, the most common NBS1 
mutation.
These preliminary results suggest that the V210F mutation may actu -
ally alter NBS1 function and raise the hypothesis of a role in the gen -
esis of cancer. Further studies are ongoing to test this hypothesis.Cancer genetics1
P06.113  Neuroblastoma genetics: A great challenge for the 
Paediatric Oncologist
S. Trabelsi1, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim1, M. Ben Brahim2, M. Gribaa1, S. Sassi1, 
S. Mougou-Zerelli1, A. Zakhama3, A. Saad1;  
1Laboratoire de cytogénétique de génétique moléculaire et biologie de la 
reproduction humaines Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de 
chirurgie pédiatrique Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital Monastir Tunisie, Monastir, 
Tunisia, 3Service d’anatomie pathologique Fattouma BOURGUIBA Hospital, 
Monastir, Tunisia.
Few tumors have engendered as much fascination for clinical and 
laboratory investigators as neuroblastoma. Neuroblastoma, the most 
common solid tumor in childhood, is derived from primitive cells of the 
sympathetic nervous system. Genetic abnormalities in tumor cells cor -
relate closely with the clinical outcome.  These genetic abnormalities 
include gains as well as loss of genetic material (MYCN amplification 
chromosome 17q gain and deletions of 1p). MYCN amplification is the 
first genetic marker to be used as a guide for therapeutic decision and 
remains the most relevant prognosis factor.
The primary aim of our study is to combine the use of molecular ge -
netics strategies to screen chromosomal rearrangements in Tunisian 
children neuroblastoma. For this we have chosen 3 technics: chromo -
genic in situ hybridization (CISH), multiplex ligation probe amplification 
(MLPA) and microsatellite analysis, on fresh and paraffin-embedded 
tissues. We analyzed 22 neuroblastoma tumors encompassing 2 case 
of recidivism. Using both CISH and MLPA, we analyzed MYCN ampli -
fication rate. MLPA also allowed us to analyze MYCN nearby genes 
(NAG, DDX1 and ALK) and 17q gain, whereas microsatellite mark -
ers analysis enables us to identify 1p deletions. We investigated 21 
patients, the age of tumor discovery ranged from 4 days of life to 10 
years. MYCN amplification rate ranged from 5 to 9 copies, at least 
one patient showed chromosome 1p deletion. Amplification of MYCN 
nearby genes was frequently found associated to MYCN amplifica -
tion. Our results correlates with patient prognosis and allowed us to 
set up the first Tunisian neuroblastoma therapeutic strategy based on 
molecular findings.
P06.114  characterization of amplicon junction sequences in 
genomic regions surrounding the mYcN gene in neuroblastoma tumors; implications for clinical follow-up of high-risk patients
H. Kryh1, J. Abrahamsson2, E. Jegerås1, R. Sjöberg1, I. Devenney3, P. Kogner4, 
T. Martinsson1;  
1Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 
2Institute of Clinical Sciences, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Institute of Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, University of Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 4Childhood 
Cancer Research Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background: Amplification of the MYCN (2p24) gene region is a com -
mon feature among one group of unfavorable neuroblastoma tumors. 
The aims of this study were to characterize the amplified DNA seg -
ments (amplicons) in detail and to obtain tumor-specific PCR frag -
ments to be used for minimal residual disease (MRD) detection in 
these patients.
Method: High-density SNP-arrays were used to map the endpoints 
of the MYCN amplicons in a subset of neuroblastoma tumors. As we 
sought to clone novel junctions between amplicons, outward-facing 
primers were designed, giving rise to a PCR product only in the case 
of a rearrangement. DNA sequencing revealed information about the 
junction region and the successful primersets were also tested for 
MRD detection in a semi-quantitative PCR assay, comparing DNA 
from blood samples with a serial dilution of tumor/control DNA to esti -
mate the amount of tumor DNA in the blood.
Results: A tumor-specific junction fragment was detected in each of the 
four cases hitherto analyzed, albeit different in each case. The junc -
tions consisted of small microhomology regions of only a few bases 
and mapped to the reference genome as two separate hits on either 
side of MYCN, confirming a head-to-tail orientation of the amplicons. 
Our approach to MRD detection was found to be sensitive enough to 
detect the junction fragment in a 1/10^6 dilution of Tumor/Control DNA 
and we were also able to estimate the tumor-DNA content in the pa -
tient samples. Thus, this method is suitable for patient-specific moni -
toring of treatment response and early detection of relapse.P06.115  the importance of t rk gene family in neuroblastoma
M. C. Popoiu1, D. A. Izvernariu1, A. Goanta2, A. Timofte2, E. Seclaman1, V. L. 
David2, A. V. Popoiu1, C. A. M. Petrescu1, E. S. Boia1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 
2Emergency Children Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania.
Neuroblastoma is the most frequent extracranial solid cancer in child -
hood and the most common cancer in infancy. Despite multimodal 
treatment: chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy, the prognosis of neu -
roblastoma is reserved. The Trk family genes play an important role in 
neuroblastoma behaviors. Neuroblastomas expressing TrkA are bio -
logically favorable and evolve to spontaneous regression or differenti -
ation; meanwhile TrkB-expressing tumors often have a poor outcome. 
Between 2000 and 2009 a total of 17 patients with Shimada grade III 
and IV neuroblastoma were admitted in our hospital. There were 7boys 
and 10 girls, age between 3 months- 8 years. Most of the patients (11) 
were in stage IV, 4 were in stage III and 2 were IVS. Overall mortality 
rate was 77%, 75% in the Shimada III group, 81% in the Shimada IV 
group and 50% in the IVS. These rates are significantly higher than 
that previously mentioned in the literature and, more important, are 
similar for the Shimada III and IV. This is an indication that more is to 
be done for a better stratification of the patients. A better stratification 
means better results with fewer side effects. This is particularly impor -
tant because the majority of survivors of high-risk neuroblastoma have 
long-term side effects from the treatment. Survivors of intermediate 
and high-risk treatment often experience hearing loss, growth reduc -
tion, thyroid function disorders, learning difficulties, and greater risk of 
secondary cancers. The determination of Trk A and Trk B improve risk 
grade stratification, therapy approach providing attractive targets and 
decrease side effect of chemotherapy.
P06.116**  multiplexed amplicon sequencing of the breast cancer 
genes BRCA1&2: challenges, opportunities and limitations.
K. De Leeneer1, J. Hellemans1, J. De Schrijver2, W. Van Criekinge2, A. De 
Paepe1, P. Coucke1, K. Claes1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics - Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 
2Laboratory for Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics -Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
Since the launch of 454 Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), an in -
creasing number of applications has been published, however, its 
implementation in a diagnostic setting remains a challenge. 
We first optimized an efficient workflow allowing pooling of as many 
patients possible in a single run. After amplification with amplicon-spe -
cific primers, a second reaction is performed to fuse the A/B adaptors 
and MID tags to each amplicon. Different set-ups for BRCA1/2 ampli -
con sequencing were used to evaluate coverage, sensitivity and speci -
ficity. Equimolar pooling of 112 simplex PCR reactions, covering the 
complete coding and splice site regions of BRCA1/2, was compared 
with equimolar pooling of these 112 amplicons in 16 strongly optimized 
multiplex reactions. Data analysis was performed with the VIP (Variant 
Identification Pipeline) software package.
More uniform coverage was obtained with the multiplexing approach. 
After optimization, a fold difference to mean coverage of 2 was reached 
for 90% of the amplicons. Sensitivity was evaluated with 132 distinct 
sequence variants of which 90 were deletion/insertion mutations. In 
total 129/132 (~98%) of all variants could be easily detected. Variants 
not detected were all deletions/insertions in homopolymeric repeats. 
By defining filters initial specificity for 4013 amplicons was increased 
from 50% to 98.5%. 
By using a multiplex barcoding approach NGS becomes competitive 
with other prescreening techniques currently used in diagnostics. To 
our knowledge this is the largest validation of 454 amplicon pyrose -
quencing published so far and our approach can be used as a guide -
book for the implementation of other diagnostic tests.
P06.117  PcR-based targeted sequence enrichment for next 
generation sequencing platform
R. Padilla1, N. Hoag1, L. Z. Pham2, K. Li1, J. Ziegle1;  
1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2RainDance Technologies, 
Inc., Lexington, MA, United States.
Many human diseases are associated with genetic polymorphisms. 
Resequencing candidate regions can provide valuable information 
about the genetic basis for these diseases. Combining Next Genera -
tion Sequencing with a new PCR-based enrichment method gener -Cancer genetics1
ates a robust and cost-effective workflow for deeper interrogation of 
targeted genomic regions of interest for specific applications. Here, 
we report the use of Next Generation Sequencing with PCR-based 
enrichment to extract target regions from Yoruba DNA. We present 
an optimized and flexible workflow for library construction post PCR 
enrichment to emulsion PCR and sequencing on a Next Generation 
Sequencing platform. We demonstrate that this pipeline provides a 
useful solution for targeted resequencing applications.
P06.118  Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in molecular 
diagnostics: evaluation of data analysis software tools and 
application to BRcA1/2 testing
G. Michils , S. Hollants, J. Van Houdt, L. Vliegen, V. Brys, J. Vermeesch, H. 
Cuppens, G. Matthijs;  
Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
One of the challenges in genetic testing is the implementation of the 
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies. There are techni -
cal and managerial pitfalls as well as aspects of validation and ac -
creditation of both the ‘wet’ work and the data analysis. We develop 
diagnostic applications on the Roche 454-GS FLX platform, starting 
with BRCA1/2.
First, fragments spanning the coding region of the BRCA1 gene were 
amplified using different DNA samples, to generate an (artificial) con -
trol sample that contained 40 variations, including 16 frameshifts. The 
data files were analyzed with three commercial software tools: CLC 
Genomics Workbench (CLC bio), Sequence Pilot (SeqNext module, 
JSI medical systems) and GS Amplicon Variant Analyzer (AVA, Roche). 
Second, the coding regions of the BRCA1/2 genes were amplified for 
454-GS FLX sequencing, using a recently developed multiplex assay 
(distributed by Multiplicon, Belgium).
All known tested variations could be detected by a combination of the 
different software tools; except for SeqNext, the tools missed one or 
a few variants. The variant frequencies (% mutant versus wild type 
reads) for heterozygous variations were 46 ± 2. We are increasing the 
number of samples to generate figures for the sensitivity and reproduc -
ibility of the method.
The multiplex assay is robust for the simultaneous amplification of ge -
nomic fragments for subsequent analysis on the Roche platform. How -
ever, the software tools still have to undergo further developments. 
On the basis of the results using patient samples, we are confident 
that the multiplex PCR approach will soon be ready for introduction in 
molecular diagnostics.
P06.119  Analysis of NF2 mRNA expression in sporadic colon 
cancer
T. Cacev , S. Kapitanovic;  
Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
NF2 protein product merlin is predominantly localized to the mem -
brane-cytoskeleton interface and has a role in receiving extracellular 
signals and controlling cell-cell and cell-ECM communication, motility 
and differentiation. It has been shown recently that merlin inhibits Ras 
and Rac activation by uncoupling them from growth factor signals.
Since these processes are essential for tumorigenesis and metastasis 
in general, we decided to examine the possible role of NF2 in sporadic 
colon cancer through analysis of its mRNA expression. The NF2  gene 
( 22q12) is composed of 17 exons, with two alternatively spliced major 
isoforms, type I and II. Isoform type I lacks exon 16, whereas isoform 
type II contains exon 16 but lacks exon 17. These isoforms are variably 
expressed in some tissue types with possibly different functions.
Real-time PCR was used to determine the NF2 mRNA expression, 
as well as expression of its mRNA isoforms type I and II in 60 pairs of 
colon cancer tumors and corresponding normal tissue. No statistically 
significant difference in total expression of NF2 gene as well as its 
isoforms I and II was observed in tumor tissue as compared to cor -
responding normal tissue. Results of mRNA expression were corre -
lated with the patients‘ clinicopathological features. Expression of NF2 
mRNA, as well as its isoforms I and II, was higher in moderately and 
poorly differentiated tumors and tumors classified as Dukes‘ C. Based 
on our results we can conclude that NF2 gene is involved in sporadic 
colon cancer development and progression.P06.120  Analysis of genetic susceptibility to non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma (NHL) in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia
I. Gilyazova1, M. Bermisheva1, O. Goncharova2, O. Lipatov2, E. 
Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian 
Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
NHL is a heterogeneous malignancy of B and T-cells that involves their 
uncontrolled clonal expansion in the periphery. The aim of study is to 
define the role of genetic polymorphisms and reveal potential suscep -
tibility loci for NHL. The sample included 119 NHLpatients aged 55-64 
years from Bashkortostan. Patients were defined as all patients with 
a first, incident, morphologically verified diagnosis of NHL.Controls 
were matched for age, gender, ethnic origin and area of residence. 
We examined polymorphisms in homocysteine metabolism related 
enzymes (MTHFR C677T, MS 2756 AG), oxidative stress (MPO G-
463A, SOD2 Val16Ala), detoxification (GSTM1*0, CYP1A1 A4889G, 
EPHX Tyr113His, CYP2E1 (intron6)), TNF-α ( G-308A). No statistically 
significant effects on risk, incidence, NHLstatus with SOD2, MPO, 
CYP2E1, MTHFR, CYP1A1, GSTM1 genotypes were observed. Dis -
tribution of genotype and allele frequencies in TNF-α gene showed 
significant increase of TNF-308AA genotype and TNF-308A allele in 
cases. TNF -308AA genotype was more frequent in aggressive form 
(7,1%) than in indolent (0%). Individuals with TNF -308A allele, associ -
ated with higher constitutional and inducible expression of TNF-α, had 
a significant increase in NHL risk (OR=2,11, CI=1,14-3,92). Analysis of 
MS gene showed MS2756GG and MS2756GA genotypes to be asso -
ciated with decreased risk (OR=0,38, CI=0,14-0,99). Significant differ -
ences in distribution of EPHX gene genotypes showed high possibil -
ity of aggressive NHL form development in individuals with His allele 
(OR=2,19, CI=1,23-3,93). Risk of NHL development was also higher 
in cohort aged less than 55 years old (OR=2,14, CI=1,01-4,56). These 
polymorphisms might play a role in NHL by influencing DNA synthesis 
or DNA methylation.
P06.121  invasion and metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer: 
expression analyses
S. N. Metodieva1, D. N. Nikolova1, A. G. Josifova1, S. K. Karachanak1, S. P. 
Hadjidekova1, M. I. Kicheva2, D. B. Petrov3, D. I. Toncheva1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
2Progene, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Thoracic Surgery, University 
Hospital St Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Purpose: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is major cause of can -
cer-related death. The poor outcome of NSCLC is usually caused by 
metastatic disease. Current diagnostics and treatment regimens are 
ineffective partly due to the limited ability to distinguish differences in 
inherent tumor invasiveness. The purpose of this study was to deter -
mine the expression levels of 84 genes associated with invasion and 
metastasis in Bulgarian patients with NSCLC.
Methods: Total RNA was extracted from 54 NSCLC samples and 34 
adjacent non-tumorous lung tissues. Six pools were prepared - one 
control and 5 pools of tumor RNAs divided according to clinicopatho -
logical features including histological subtype and lymph node me -
tastases (LNM). Expression profiles of 84 genes were determined by 
applying real-time PCR on pathway focused gene arrays (SABiosci -
ences, USA).
Results: Common expression alterations in all 5 pools of NSCLC was 
upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases MMP11 and 13, their activa -
tor ETV4, as well as downregulation of TIMP3, cell growth and pro -
liferation genes FGFR4 and TRPM1, cell adhesion gene MCAM and 
transcription factors NR4A3 and RORB. The genes underexpressed 
in LNM-positive samples are involved in cell adhesion (CDH6, ITGA7, 
SYK) and cell growth (SSTR2) while LNM-negative pool showed spe -
cific downregulation of matrix degradation related genes TIMP2 and 
CTSL1. Unlike adenocarcinomas squamous cell carcinomas showed 
prevalent deregulation of cell growth and proliferation genes, charac -
teristic overexpression of MMP9, underexpression of adhesion gene 
MGAT5 and metastasis suppressor KISS1.
Conclusion: This study revealed distinct transcriptional profiles related 
to invasiveness and metastasis in pooled NSCLCs in respect to clini -
copathological features.Cancer genetics17
P06.122  LNcR2 region and the incidence of polymorphic alleles 
in czech patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer diagnosis
E. Hirmerová1, A. Panczak1, E. Křepela2, V. Kebrdlová1, A. Hořínek1, J. 
Štekrová1, M. Marel3, J. Homolka3, M. Kohoutová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University and General Teaching Hospital, Praque, Czech Republic, 
2Laboratories of Molecular and Cell Biology University Hospital Bulovka, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Department of Tuberculosis and Respiratory 
Diseases, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Teaching 
Hospital, Praque, Czech Republic.
Recent genome-wide association studies identified associations be -
tween the risk of lung cancer and certain single-nucleotide polymor -
phisms (SNP) mapping to the region LNCR2 on chromosome 15q 
including genes encoding the nicotinic receptors subunits. We have 
introduced the analysis of four SNPs in the vicinity of these genes: 
LOC123688 (rs931794, rs8034191), CHRNA3 (rs1051730) and CHR -
NA5 (rs16969968) to identify the frequency of these polymorphic al -
leles in Czech patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) com -
pared to two control group - individuals with non-neoplastic pulmonary 
diseases, and anonymized blood samples from routine laboratory. The 
DNAs of NSCLC patients were isolated either from peripheral blood 
leukocytes or from normal lung tissue.
We found no signifiant differences in the frequencies of SNP alleles 
between both subgroups of NSCLC patients regarding types of DNAs 
(PBL or tissue) investigated or between both control groups respec -
tively. Generally, the individual alleles of SNPs in LNCR2 region form 
haplotypes, but a small proportion of “recombinants” could be de -
tected; they are more frequent in the NSCLC patients than in control 
individuals. We looked for the association between haplotype variants 
in LNCR2 region and diagnosis of NSCLC. The highest difference in 
genotypic frequencies was seen between the groups of NSCLC pa -
tients and individuals with non-neoplastic pulmonary diseases, namely 
in rs8034191 and rs931794 (P = 5.9 x 10-6 and P = 1.1 x 10-6 respec -
tively). Similar results have been obtained for smoking habitus.
Supported by the grant project MSMT CR MSM0021620808
P06.123  Prognostic significance of NOTCH1 and FBXW7 mutations in pediatric t -ALL
Y. Erbilgin1, M. Aydin Sayitoglu1, O. Hatirnaz1, O. Dogru2, A. Akcay3, G. 
Tuysuz3, T. Celkan2, G. Aydogan4, Z. Salcıoglu3, C. Timur5, L. Yuksel Soycan6, 
U. Ure7, S. Anak8, L. Agaoglu8, O. Devecioglu8, I. Yildiz2, U. Ozbek1;  
1Institute of Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Pediatric 
Hematology Divisions of Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, Bakirkoy Maternity and Childrens 
Hospitalh, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatrics, Bakirkoy Maternity and 
Childrens Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Unit of Pediatric Hematology, Ministry 
of Health Goztepe Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Turkish BFM Study 
Group, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Internal Medicine, Haseki Education 
and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Pediatric Hematology Division of 
Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
The NOTCH signalling pathway plays important role in the develop -
ment of multicellular organisms, as it regulates cell proliferation, sur -
vival, and differentiation. NOTCH1 and/or FBXW7 mutations both lead 
to activation of the NOTCH1 pathway and are found in the majority of 
T-ALL patients.
In this study, mutation analysis of NOTCH1 and FBXW7 genes were 
performed in 87 pediatric T-ALLs who were treated on the ALL-BFM 
protocols. Overall, 22,2% of our T-ALL patients had NOTCH1 muta -
tions and 10% FBXW7 mutations. We define novel mutations as 
well as previously reported ones inside the NOTCH1 and FBXW7. 
Whereas FBXW7 mutation frequency is similer to previouse studies, 
prevalence of NOTCH1 mutation was relatively lower in our group. We 
also analyzed the relationship of the mutation data with the clinical 
and biological data of the patients. NOTCH1 and FBXW7, NOTCH1 
alone were found correlated with lower initial leucocyte counts which 
was independent from sex and T- cell immunophenotype. However, 
NOTCH1 and FBXW7 mutations were not predictive of outcome in the 
overall cohort of pediatric T-ALLs.
The characterization of the NOTCH1 mutations and certain targets on 
the NOTCH pathway are important for developing novel and specific 
therapeutic strategies. Inhibitors of γ-secretase have recently been 
tested in T-ALL cell lines and were shown to induce cell cycle arrest. 
Importantly, FBXW7 mutations have been associated with resistance to γ-secretase inhibitor treatment. Therefore, the identification of 
NOTCH1 and FBXW7 mutations need to be taken into account when 
choosing target therapies in T-ALL patients.
P06.124  Nucleophosmin is overexpressed in thyroid tumors
A. Pianta1, C. Puppin1, D. Fabbro2, A. Franzoni1, C. Di Loreto3, M. Romanello1, 
M. Deganuto1, G. Tell1, E. Puxeddu4, S. Filetti5, D. Russo6, G. Damante1;  
1Università di Udine, Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, 
Italy, 2Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria “S. Maria della Misericordia”, Udine, 
Italy, 3Dipartimento di Ricerche Mediche e Morfologiche, Università di Udine, 
Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Università di Perugia, Perugia, 
Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche, Università di Roma “la Sapienza”, 
Roma, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacobiologiche, Università di 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a protein that contributes to several cell 
functions. Depending on the context, it can act as oncogene or tumor 
suppressor gene. Misexpression or delocalization of NPM, associated 
with mutations in the structural gene, has been described in many hu -
man neoplasia. Expression and localization of NPM was investigated 
in human thyroid tumors and cell lines. By immunohistochemistry 
studies, NPM overexpression was detected in papillary, follicular, un -
differentiated thyroid cancer and also in follicular benign adenomas, 
indicating it as an early event during thyroid tumorigenesis. In normal 
thyroid FRTL-5 cells, a positive correlation between NPM protein lev -
els and proliferation state was detected. By using quantitative RT-PCR 
to measure NPM mRNA, we found that overexpression of NPM protein 
is not always associated to increase of NPM transcript, suggesting 
the existence of a post-mRNA regulatory mechanism. Finally, while 
in non-cancerous thyroid cell lines NPM is localized in nucleolus, in 
some thyroid tumor cell lines also a nuclear localization was detected, 
suggesting that in thyroid tumors a partial delocalization of NPM may 
occur. However, no NPM1  gene mutations were detected in all except 
one thyroid tumor examined.
P06.125  clinical and cytogenetic characteristics of acute 
leukemias with t(9;11)(p22;p15)
C. Lundin1, A. Horvat1, K. Paulsson1, K. Karlsson2, T. Olofsson2, B. Johansson1;  
1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Hematology, Lund, Sweden.
The NUP98  gene in 11p15 is fused to a wide variety of translocation 
partners in hematologic malignancies, with many of the correspond -
ing chromosomal changes (most often translocations) being re -
ported in only a few cases each. One of these rare translocations is 
t(9;11)(p22;p15), which has been found in four cases of acute myeloid 
leukaemias (AML), in one case of acute biphenotypic leukaemia, and 
in one chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) in myeloid blast crisis (Mitel -
man et al, 2009; present study). By reviewing the available clinical data 
in these cases, including one from our own department, some notable 
features are emerging, albeit based on a small number. The t(9;11) 
was the sole cytogenetic aberration in all cases, except for the CML, in 
which the typical CML-related t(9;22)(q34;q11.2) was present as well. 
All cases investigated molecularly harboured the NUP98-LEDGF  fu-
sion. Two cases were males and four were females, and all but one 
were adults (the exception being a 5-year-old girl with AML M2/M3). 
Excluding this pediatric patient, the median age at diagnosis was 52 
years (20-64). The median peripheral blood values were hemoglobin 
89 (72-104) g/l, platelets 42 (30-104) x 109/l, and the white blood cell 
count 64 (1.4-293) x 109/l. Among the adult acute leukemia patients, 
all relapsed within five years (3-54 months), suggesting an unfavour -
able prognosis.
P06.126  study of opticin expression in human cancer cell lines
Z. Tahmasebi Fard1, M. Jeddi-Tehrani2, A. Ahmad Bayat2, H. Rabbani2,3, K. 
Parivar4;  
1Department of Biology, Roudehen Islamic Azad University and Member 
of Young Researchers Club, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Monoclonal 
Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Immune and Gene Therapy Lab, Cancer Center 
Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department 
of Developmental Biology, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Unit, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Opticin is a member of a family of secreted proteoglycans 
that mainly expressed in human eyes. It is also expressed in human 
brain, ligament, liver and skin, but at lower levels than the eyes. The Cancer genetics1
precise function of opticin are unknown but may be involved in fibril -
logenesis of collagen molecules to form the vitreous gel and is poten -
tially involved in maintaining the spacing between the collagen fibrils of 
the tissue. Here we present expression profile of opticin in a variety of 
human cancer cell lines.
Methods: Two peptides from extracellular domain and signal peptide 
of opticin were synthesized and used for polyclonal antibodies produc -
tion. Anti-opticin polyclonal antibodies were purified and evaluated by 
ELISA, and Western blot (WB). Opticin expression in mRNA and pro -
tein levels were studied by RT-PCR and Western blot on the following 
cell lines: A-172 (brain cancer), T47D (mammary gland carcinoma), 
Paca-2 (pancreas carcinoma), Ej-138 (bladder carcinoma), Calu6 
(lung carcinoma), ACHN (kidney cancer), SKOV3 (ovarian cancer), 
LS-180 (colon carcinoma), A-375 (skin cancer), PC3 (prostate adeno -
carcinoma), CLL-CII (chronic lymphocytic leukemia ).
Results: All cancer cell lines except A-172 expressed opticin at both 
mRNA and protein levels.
Conclusion: Our finding may represent opticin as a novel tumor marker 
in a wide variety of cancers.
P06.127  Gene polymorphisms that affect the circulating amount 
and cytokine function of leptin are associated with risk for oral 
cancer
C. N. Yapijakis1, M. Kechagiadakis1, Z. Serefoglou1, D. Avgoustidis1, F. W. 
Neukam2, E. Vairaktaris1;  
1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Erlangen 
Medical School, Nurnberg, Germany.
Introduction: Functional DNA polymorphisms in genes of factors regu -
lating cell proliferation have been associated with increased predis -
position for oral cancer by genetic association studies performed by 
our group and others. This study examined the possible association 
of oral cancer risk with DNA polymorphisms -2548G/A and Q223R in 
the leptin (LEP) and leptin receptor (LEPR) genes, respectively. Both 
polymorphisms affect the circulating amount and cytokine-type func -
tion of leptin, which in the oral region seems to promote keratinocyte 
proliferation.
Methods: PCR-based RFLP analysis was performed in DNA samples 
of 150 patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and 152 
healthy controls of equivalent gender, age, and ethnicity (Greeks and 
Germans).
Results: In comparison to controls, the homozygous high gene expres -
sion genotype A/A of the LEP -2548G/A polymorphism was significant -
ly increased in the subgroups of patients with advanced cancer stages 
(P = 0.0001; OR 9.0, 95% CI 2.62-30.89), of patients with a positive 
family history of cancer (P = 0.0346; OR 3.55, 95% CI 1.15-11.01) and 
nonsmokers (P = 0.0051; OR 9.69, 95% CI 1.03-91.24). The homozy -
gous low-leptin-binding genotype G/G of the LEPR Q223R polymor -
phism was strongly associated with an increased risk for OSCC for all 
patients (P = 0.0028; OR 4.11, 95% CI 1.30-12.97) as well for most of 
the patient subgroups.
Conclusion: These findings reveal a significant contribution of circulat -
ing leptin in the occurrence of OSCC. This is the first study indicating 
the association of LEP and LEPR gene polymorphisms with increased 
risk for oral cancer.
P06.128  P38 gene mutations and Breast cancer
M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2;  
1Dept.Science,Islamshahr Branch,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
It has been known for a while that the P38 protein induces cell death. 
On the other hand it has been demonstrated that P38 can be essential 
for death receptor-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells.
In this study a kind of phenotype-genotype research for breast carci -
noma and P38 gene mutations has been done.
The correlation between breast cancer stage and its prognosis has 
been evaluated with the mutation types of the P38 and their statistical 
analyses were the matter of interest through a series of clinical and 
genetic variables.
Analyses were conducted for the 400 patients and 160 controls geno -
typed for P38, including 182 patients, 76 Control of premenopausal 
women and 218 patients, 84 Control of postmenopausal women and 
ages were 35-55 years. The P38 gene consists of 12 exons.Searching for mutations, we performed SSCP-PCR protocol. Se -
quenced with a DNA sequencer.
Our study shows any P38 mutation database phenotypically interre -
lated with the clinical prognoses.
P06.129  comparative yield of endosonography and magnetic 
resonance imaging in surveillance of individuals at high risk for 
pancreatic cancer
F. Harinck1, J. Poley1, J. van Hooft2, D. J. Gouma2, C. van Eijck1, Y. Nio3, J. J. 
Hermans1, A. Cats4, A. Wagner1, C. Aalfs3, I. Kluijt4, P. Fockens3, M. J. Bruno1;  
1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Academic 
Medical Center University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Academic 
Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Individuals at high risk for pancreatic cancer (PC) might 
benefit of a surveillance-program diagnosing this disease at an early 
and potentially curable stage. Endosonography (EUS) has proved to 
be a potentially valuable tool for surveillance-purposes. Data for MRI 
are limited. We present preliminary results of a comparative study be -
tween baseline-EUS and baseline-MRI investigations in high-risk indi -
viduals (HRI) entering a yearly surveillance-program.
Methods: Individuals eligible for surveillance were 1st-degree members 
of families with familial-PC (FPC) and mutation-carriers of PC-prone 
hereditary syndromes (e.g. p16-Leiden, BRCA1/2, p53, Peutz-Jeghers 
syndrome (PJS)). HRI prospectively underwent EUS and MRI.
Results: Sixty-four HRI (M/F 30/34, median age 50 years) underwent 
baseline surveillance-investigations (42.2% FPC, 28.1% p16-Leiden, 
6.3% BRCA1-mutation, 17.2% BRCA2-mutation, 3.1% p53-muta -
tion, 3.1% PJS). Asymptomatic masses (50mm, 10mm and 7mm) 
were detected in three individuals (4.7%; 2 p16-Leiden, 1 FPC). All 
masses were detected by EUS only (in one individual MRI was con -
traindicated), of which two proved to be a malignancy and in one no 
malignancy but focal areas of premalignant-lesions were found. Small 
cystic lesions (median size 4.5mm) were detected in 15 individuals 
(23%), more often by MRI (MRI/ EUS 16/12). None showed signs of 
malignancy.
Conclusion: Based on these preliminary baseline-results, EUS and MRI 
seem complementary techniques to detect (potential) (pre)malignant 
lesions in HRI. All mass lesions were detected by EUS only, including 
two malignancies and one lesion with focal areas of premalignant-le -
sions. Small cystic lesions were frequently found (23%) and more of -
ten detected by MRI. Whether surveillance improves survival remains 
to be investigated.
P06.130  Genetic analysis of BRAF mutation status in papillary 
thyroid carcinoma
K. Zavodna , Z. Bartosova, J. Podoba, S. Galbavy, M. Vallova, M. Milly, E. 
Weismanova, M. Konecny, J. Kausitz;  
St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Thyroid cancer represents a serious problem worldwide. Progress 
in human genome project and modern molecular biology techniques 
have improved our undestanding of the genetic changes that lead to 
carcinogensis and have provided opportunities for identifying disease 
biomarkers. The recently discovered activating mutation in the gene 
for the B-type Raf kinase ( BRAF ) is the most common genetic altera -
tion in thyroid cancer. The BRAF  mutation (V600E) is the most fre -
quent genetic alteration in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). The role 
of BRAF  mutation as a poor prognostic factor has been reported in 
many studies. The presence of the BRAF  mutations in papillary thyroid 
cancer patients correlates with older age, extrathyroidal tumor inva -
sion, distant metastases, higher tumor stage, and even higher rates of 
recurrent disease.
The aim of our study was to establish the methods for rapid, sensitive 
and cheap detection of BRAF mutation status in tumour tissues DNA. 
We applied DxS BRAF mutation test kit to detect somatic mutations in 
BRAF  gene in the set of 70 samples. Next step was to evaluate the 
SNaPshot analysis and compare the sensitivity of these two methods. 
Our results demonstrate the utility of using the SNaPshot analysis for 
detection of somatic BRAF  mutations in clinical samples. The sensitiv -
ity of mentioned test is comparable to commercial DxS BRAF mutation 
test kit.Cancer genetics1
P06.132  Role of p73 and acetylation of H3 histone in the 
regulation of periostin expression in thyroid cancer cell lines
C. Puppin1, F. Frasca2, R. Vigneri2, P. Dello Russo3, S. Tomaciello1, G. 
Damante1,3;  
1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, 
Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Medicina Specialistica, Sezione di 
Endocrinologia, Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy, 3Azienda Ospedaliero-
Universitaria “S. Maria della Misericordia”, Udine, Italy.
Periostin expression is a characteristic of the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition, which occurs during epithelial tumor progression. Previous 
data indicate that periostin expression is related to aggressiveness in 
thyroid tumors. In order to identify mechanisms responsible for peri -
ostin expression during thyroid tumorigenesis, four different human 
thyroid tumor-derived cell lines were investigated by chromatin immu -
noprecipitaion assay: BCPAP and TPC-1 (from papillary thyroid carci -
noma), WRO (from follicular thyroid carcinoma), FRO (from undifferen -
tiated thyroid carcinoma). Steady-state levels of acetylated histone H3 
at lysines 9 and 14 are not related to periostin mRNA levels. Moreover, 
treatment of WRO and FRO cells with the histone deacetylase inhibi -
tor, Tricostatin A, increases acetylated H3 levels at periostin promoter 
or coding sequence but reduces periostin mRNA levels. Therefore, no 
relationship was observed between H3 acetylation status at levels of 
either periostin promoter and periostin expression.
In addition to epigenetic mechanisms, by cell transfection, the effect 
of several transcription factors was investigated. The thyroid-specific 
transcription factors Pax8 and Hex have no effects on periostin pro -
moter. Instead, ΔNp73, but not TAp73α TAp73β, significantly increases 
periostin promoter. Since ΔNp73 is expressed in thyroid cancer but 
not in normal thyroid tissue, our data suggest a molecular mechanism 
involved in development of thyroid carcinomas.
Moreover, our results suggest that periostin gene expression is con -
trolled in cancer thyroid cells by mechanisms that are independent 
from the levels of H3 histone acetylation.
P06.133  molecular genetic analysis of apparently sporadic 
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in czech patients
Z. Musil1, A. Krepelova2, T. Zelinka3, A. Vicha4, Z. Frysak5, A. Puchmajerova2, 
M. Simandlova2, J. Widimsky3, M. Kohoutova1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 
Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd Medical Department - Clinical Department of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism of the 1stFaculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 4Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2 nd Medical 
School, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 53rd Clinical Department of Faculty of Medicine, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic.
Pheochromocytoma is sympathetic tumour of chromaffin cells in the 
adrenal medulla that may produce and secrete catecholamines. This 
rare endocrine disorder causing arterial hypertension among approxi -
mately 0,1 % of patients with hypertension, occurs in approximately 
90 % as a sporadic disease, or as a hereditary disorder either as a 
component of cancer syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
( germ-line mutations in the RET proto-oncogene located on 10q11.2), 
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome ( germ-line mutations in the VHL tumour 
suppressor gene located on 3p26-p25) and, much lesser in neurofi -
bromatosis type 1 (germ-line mutations in the NF1 gene) also known 
as von Recklinghausen disease or nonsyndromic familial disease. 
Germline mutations in genes SDHB (1p36.1-p35) and SDHD (11q23) 
that encode subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, which participate in 
aerobic electron transport and the Crebs tricarboxylic acid cycle, have 
been identified to cause susceptibility to familial pheochromocytoma.
Head and neck paraganglioma is tumour of chromaffin cells, which 
arise from parasympathetic ganglia, most commonly at the bifurca -
tion of the carotid artery (carotid body tumour). The causes of the he -
reditary paragangliomas are germline mutations in the SDHB, SDHC 
(1q23) and SDHD genes, which encode three of the four subunits of 
enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). Genomic imprinting might 
be a possible cause as mentioned in some recent studies.
Among 187 sporadic pheochromocytoma patients 5 germline muta -
tions were found in the VHL  gene. Further, 8 mutations in SDHB gene 
were detected.. In addition, in 3 examined patients with paraganglioma 
we detected mutation of the start codon in SDHD gene.P06.134  PRDm16 is frequently rearranged with various partner 
genes in myeloid malignancies with 1p36 alterations
F. P. Duhoux1, G. Ameye1, K. Bahloula1, I. Wlodarska2, M. Mozziconacci3, C. 
Roche-Lestienne4, S. Raynaud5, C. Herens6, F. Speleman7, N. Dastugue8, S. 
Taviaux9, N. Nadal10, P. Talmant11, E. Lippert12, K. Rack13, F. Mugneret14, F. 
Nguyen-Khac15, N. Auger16, M. Lafage17, C. Terré18, M. Collonge-Rame19, I. 
Tigaud20, C. Cabrol21, J. Libouton1, H. A. Poirel1, G. F. C. H22, B. C. G. H. O23;  
1Cliniques univ saint-Luc / UCL, Brussels, Belgium, 2KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium, 3Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Hôpital Jeanne de 
Flandre, Lille, France, 5CHU, Nice, France, 6CHU, Liège, Belgium, 7UZ, Ghent, 
Belgium, 8Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 9Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 
Montpellier, France, 10CHU Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 11CHU, Nantes, 
France, 12CHU, Bordeaux, France, 13IPG, Gosselies, Belgium, 14CHU, Dijon, 
France, 15Centre Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 16Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France, 17Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 18Hôpital 
Mignot, Versailles, France, 19CHU, Besançon, France, 20Centre Hospitalier Lyon 
Sud, Lyon, France, 21Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Genève, Switzerland, 
22Groupe Francophone de Cytogénétique Hématologique, 23Belgian 
Cytogenetics Group Hemato-Oncology.
Cytogenetic rearrangements of chromosomal band 1p36 are found in 
approximately 0.1% of myeloid malignancies. PRDM16 , a gene located 
on 1p36.32, is involved in the reciprocal translocations t(1;3)(p36;q21) 
and more rarely t(1;21)(p36;q22) in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) 
and acute myeloid leukemias (AML).
We studied 83 myeloid malignancies with 1p36 abnormalities by fluo -
rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with a bacterial artificial chromo -
somes (BAC) contig containing more than 80 BAC probes on 1p36.
In this series, PRDM16  was found to be rearranged with RPN1  in 30 cas -
es of t(1;3)(p36;q21), AML1/RUNX1  in 1 case of t(1;21)(p36;q22), TEL/
ETV6  in 1 case of t(1;12)(p36;p13), IKZF1  in 1 case of t(1;7)(p36;p12), 
CDH4  in 1 case of add(1)(p36), NSF in 1 case of t(1;17)(p36;q21), 
a non-coding unknown sequence in 1 case of t(1;2)(p36;p12), and 2 
further loci in 2 cases of t(1;2)(p36;p21).
PRDM16  was thus involved in over 45% of myeloid malignancies with 
1p36 rearrangements. Like MDS/EVI-1 , PRDM16  encodes for a zinc 
finger transcription factor and contains an N-terminal PR domain. 2 
isoforms have been described. Most translocations would allow for the 
expression of both the long and the short isoform (lacking the PR do -
main). This is in contrast with previously published studies which sug -
gested that, as for MDS/EVI-1 , only the short isoform was supposed to 
have an oncogenic effect due to its translocation-induced upregulation 
in AML. Further studies are needed to understand the pathogenesis 
of AML and MDS mediated by PRDM16  isoforms and the role of the 
partner genes.
P06.135  Polymorphic variants in CYP1B1  linked with increased 
risk for prostate cancer in Bulgarian patients
D. L. Kachakova1, M. Boyadzhieva2, E. Popov3, A. Mitkova1, R. Dodova1, A. 
Vlahova4, T. Dikov4, S. Christova4, I. Kremensky5, C. Slavov3, V. Mitev1, R. 
Kaneva1;  
1Molecular Medicine Centre, MU- Sofia, Department of Medical Chemistry 
and Biochemistry, Medical University –Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular 
Medicine Centre, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Urology, Medical 
University –Sofia, Clinic of Urology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, MU-Sofia, Central Pathology Laboratory, 
Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Molecular Medicine Centre, 
MU- Sofia, National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics, Sofia, 
Bulgaria.
Introduction: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most diagnosed non-skin can -
cer and it is the second leading cause of cancer death in men. One of 
the genes associated with PC is CYP1B1  which encodes cytochrome 
P450 1B1. This enzyme activates many carcinogens and catalyzes 
hydroxylation of estrogens. It is over expressed in tumors and some 
polymorphic variants may increase the activity of the enzyme and have 
role in human prostate carcinogenesis. 
Materials and methods:  We have investigated the association with PC 
of four polymorphisms in exons 2 and 3 in CYP1B1  in case control 
study of 181 PC patients and 200 controls. Direct sequencing was 
used for genotyping and SeqScape for scoring.
Results: Positive association with PC risk showed the polymorphic 
variants rs1056836 (L432V) and rs1056837 (D449D). The C/C geno -
type of rs1056836 and rs1056837 have OR=1.44, 95% confidential 
interval (CI)=0.95-2.18, p=0.053. The C allele of the same variants Cancer genetics10
shows OR=1.345, 95% CI= 1.002-1.8, p=0.028. The polymorphisms 
rs1056827 (A119S) and rs1800440 (N453S) did not show any signifi -
cant association with PC. No association was found between stage 
and grade of cancer with any of the polymorphisms.
Discussion: CYP1B1  is hypothesised to play an important role in car -
cinogenesis owing to its role in the metabolism of both environmental 
and endogenous procarcinogens. Several studies have demonstrated 
the association between one or more genetic variants of CYP1B1  and 
increased PC risk.
Conclusions:  CYP1B1  polymorphisms D449D and L432V showed as -
sociation with PC in the Bulgarian population but further study with 
larger sample size is needed.
P06.136  study of ccassettes alterations in mitochondrial D-
Loop in iranian prostate cancer patients
Z. Ousati Ashtiani1, M. Heidari1, M. Ayati2, N. Rakhshani3;  
1Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Imam 
Khomeini Hospital,Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Shariati Hospital,Tehran University of Medical Science, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Prostate cancer which is the most commonly diagnosed nonskin ma -
lignancy among menhas heterogenous nature that multiple genes 
may involve in its occurance and progression. Mitochondrial genomic 
mutations are found in variety of human cancers. The non-coding 
displacement-loop(D-loop) region of mtDNA in which contains es -
sential sequences for the initiation of replication and transcription,is 
a polymorphic region that accumulates point mutations. Mt D-Loop 
has two hypervariable regions(HSVI, HSVII) with homopolymeric C.To 
investigate the mitochondrial micro satellite instability (mtMSI) within 
the mononucleotide C repeat at np 303-312 and 16184-16195 of mt 
D-Loop hpervariable regions in Iranian prostate cancer patients and 
Benign prostatic hyperplasia(BPH) group, DNA from 30 pathologi -
cally-confirmed prostate cancer patients (paraffin-embedded tissues 
of tumour and adjacent normal tissues) and 30 age-matched with BPH 
extracted and amplified D-Loop region by PCR.Sequencing results 
showed different alterations in two C cassettes.Most of them were as 
follows: del C, C→A and C→T at np 16184-1695, del and ins C in ho -
mopolymeric stretch interrupted by a T at np 303-312. The identifica -
tion of micro satellite instability may complement other ealy detection 
approaches for prostate cancer and BPH.
P06.137  Paradoxical apoptotic induction of mcs-c2, a pyrrolo-
pyrimidine derivative, via up-regulation of p53-independent, AR-
dependent p21ciP1 expression in androgen-dependent prostate 
cancer cells
C. Lee , H. Oh, H. Suh;  
College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of.
Androgen is essential for prostate development and homeostasis. An -
drogen, acting through androgen receptor (AR), regulates not only a se -
ries of androgen target genes, such as PSA, but also genes for cell cy -
cle- and apoptosis-regulatory molecules within prostate epithelial cells, 
such as p21CIP1, which induces cell cycle arrest in response to DNA 
damage and protects cancer cells against p53-mediated apoptosis.
In the course of screening for novel modulators on apoptotic induction, 
we generated MCS-C2, a pyrrolo-pyrimidine derivative. MCS-C2 in -
duced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis in a time- and dose-depen -
dent manner in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells (DU145, 
PC3) and various non-prostate cancer cells. However, MCS-C2 para -
doxically induced apoptosis at specific drug concentration (6 μM) in 
androgen-dependent prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, LNCaP-E9, -G4 
and C4-2), while weakly inducing apoptosis at lower (3 μM) and higher 
(9, 12 μM) drug concentration.
To investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in this paradoxi -
cal apoptotic induction of MCS-C2 in LNCaP and its subline cells, we 
performed real time-CES, Western blots, real time-PCR, confocal mi -
croscopic analysis, knocking-down using siRNA.
Interestingly, paradoxical apoptotic induction of 6 μM MCS-C2 is as -
sociated with dramatic up-regulation (46-fold) of p53-independent, AR-
dependent p21CIP1.
Androgen, in general, up-regulates expression of p21CIP1 gene in stim -
ulating prostate cancer cell proliferation. However, in contrast, we con -
clude that up-regulation of 6 μM MCS-C2-mediated, p53-independent 
p21CIP1, which is activated by AR via a canonical androgen response element (ARE) in its proximal promoter region, plays pivotal role in the 
cellular signaling pathways that control apoptosis of androgen-depen -
dent prostate cancer cells.
P06.138  Multifaceted preventive effects of single agent quercetin on a human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (Pc-3): implications to nutritional transcriptomics and multi-target 
therapy
M. R. Noori-Daloii1, M. Momeny1, N. Motamed2, N. Kazemialiakbar2, M. 
Yaseri1, M. Yousefi1, Z. Roshani1, S. Hashemi1;  
1Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University 
of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The aim of the present study is to evaluate the effects of quercetin, a 
dietary flavonoid, on human prostate adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells. Lac -
tate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, microculture tetrazolium test (MTT 
assay) and real-time PCR array were employed to assess the influ -
ences of quercetin on cell cytotoxicity, cell proliferation and expression 
of various genes in PC-3 cell line. Quercetin inhibited cell growth and 
proliferation and modulated the expression of genes involved in DNA 
repair, matrix degradation and tumor invasion, angiogenesis, apopto -
sis, cell cycle, metabolism and glycolysis. More importantly, quercetin 
inhibited the expression of genes responsible for progression from the 
androgen deprivation-responsive stage to the hormone deprivation re -
fractory phase. In addition, no cytotoxicity of quercetin on PC-3 cells 
was observed. Taken together, as shown by the issues of the current 
study for the first time, the manifold inhibitory impacts of quercetin on 
PC-3 cells may introduce quercetin as an efficacious „magic shotgun“ 
in order to be used in the future nutritional transcriptomic investigations 
and multi-target therapy to overcome the therapeutic impediments in 
crusade against prostate cancer.
P06.139  GstP1 cpG island hypermethylation as an epigenetic 
biomarker in the molecular detection of prostate cancer
R. Dumache , D. L. David, A. Kaycsa, D. Ionescu, M. Puiu, R. Minciu, M. Motoc;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‚‘Victor Babes‘‘, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction: Prostate cancer represents a leading cause of cancer re -
lated mortality and mortality among men.
GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation occurs during carcinogenesis and 
is considered to be a major event of prostate carcinogenesis. DNA-
based biomarkers are a class of new and promising tools for the early 
cancer detection.
The aim of our study was to detect the promoter hypermethylation of 
GSTP1 gene in blood and tissue samples from patients with PCa and 
BPH. To detect this epigenetic DNA alteration we applied the methyla -
tion specific PCR (MSP) method.
Materials and methods: For our study we used tissue and blood sam -
ples from 57 patients with the histological diagnosis of PCa, with a 
Gleason score of 4 to 7, and 44 patients with the diagnosis of BPH.
Patients with prostate cancer were subdivided according to their Glea -
son score, PSA, age and TNM staging.
Results: GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in 55 from 
57 prostate cancer samples (96,5%) but it was not detected in any 
sample from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Conclusion: Promoter hypermethylation of GSTP1 gene distinguishes 
between PCa and BPH and therefore, this epigenetic alteration can 
be used as a biomarker for screening, early diagnosis and molecular 
staging of prostate cancer.
P06.140  investigation of PtcH1 promoter mutations and 
polymorphisms
V. Musani , M. Sabol, D. Car, P. Ozretic, S. Levanat;  
Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia.
PTCH1 is a tumor suppressor gene, located at 9q22.3, encoding a 
12-pass transmembrane glycoprotein, that acts as an antagonist in the 
Hedgehog signaling pathway. PTCH1 gene has 23 coding exons and 
several alternative forms of exon 1.
PTCH1 is often mutated in Gorlin syndrome and various tumors, basal 
cell carcinomas in particular. Gorlin syndrome is a rare autosomal 
dominant disorder characterized with multiple basal cell carcinomas 
(BCCs), meduloblastomas, meningiomas, ovarian fibromas, jaw cysts, 
different developmental abnormalities, such as craniofacial alterations, 
bifid ribs, and polydactyly and syndactyly.
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin, the most common human can -Cancer genetics11
cer, shows a continuously increasing incidence, occurring predomi -
nantly on sun-exposed skin of elderly fair-skinned people. Several 
tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of BCCs, and most of them are members of the Hedge -
hog signaling pathway.
In our previous research we discovered several new PTCH1 muta -
tions and polymorphisms located in promoter region of exon 1b. Two 
new mutations: c.-892_-891CC>TT and c.-808C>T were discovered in 
BCCs and , new polymorphism c.-1184G>A was found in screening of 
Gorlin syndrome samples, healthy controls, BCCs and ovarian tumors. 
Additionally, two new alleles with 5 and 6 CGG repeats were discov -
ered in the CGG repeat polymorphism in the 5’UTR region.
We are continuing this research with the functional impact of these mu -
tations and polymorphisms on the promoter activity and consequently 
on PTCH1 role in the pathway.
P06.141  Next Generation Presequencing for BRCA1  and BRCA2  
Genes : comparison between qPcR-HRm and EmmA
C. Derouet, C. Lefol, R. Lidereau, I. Bièche, E. Rouleau ;  
INSTITUT CURIE - HOPITAL RENE HUGUENIN, ST CLOUD, France.
Most are involved with next generation sequencing research projects. 
However, two new routine methods (qPCR-HRM and EMMA) provide 
valuable information to screen point mutations and large rearrange -
ments at low cost and low computing investment. We compare them 
prospectively on 91 patients with a familial cancer predisposition.
METHOD : qPCR-HRM was performed with 79 amplicons, in tripli -
cate, on a LightCycler480 (Roche Diagnostic). EMMA was performed 
with 24 amplicon multiplexes (Fluigent), on an automatic sequencer 
ABI3130XL (Applied Biosystem). Softwares were GeneScanning 
(Roche Diagnostic) and home-made macro in qPCR-HRM and Em -
malys (Fluigent) in EMMA.
RESULTS : Total number of analyzed amplicons was 7189 for qPCR-
HRM and 7371 for EMMA. Abnormal profiles were 730 in qPCR-HRM 
and 1141 in EMMA. There were 16 deleterious mutations (17,5%) and 
15 unknown variants (UV), a duplication (exons 5-7) and a deletion 
(exon 24) in BRCA1  and none in BRCA2 . All events were detected by 
the two approaches.
DISCUSSION : Their advantages are discussed. For 8 samples, a run 
is 9 hours in qPCR-HRM and 12 hours in EMMA. qPCR-HRM sounds 
more rapid and appropriate for urgent screening. There were no main -
tenance, no technical skill in automatic sequencer, PCR products for 
direct sequencing and ability to rapidly shift to new primers or genes. 
EMMA can genotype current polymorphisms. Then, a validated multi -
plex kit clearly lessen the number of sequences. Emmalys software is 
well-dedicated to diagnostic purposes and large series.
CONCLUSION : Both methods are similar high throughput pre-screen -
ing for point and complex mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2  genes.
P06.142  molecular genetic alterations in the VHL gene and 
methylation of several tumor suppressor genes in sporadic clear 
cell renal cancer
D. S. Mikhaylenko1, M. V. Grigoryeva2, V. V. Zemlyakova1, V. V. Shkarupo1, L. 
N. Lubchenko3, R. V. Kurynin4, A. M. Popov5, D. V. Zaletayev1, I. G. Rusakov2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Hertzen Research Oncological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3N.N. Blokhin Research Oncological Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Clinic 
of Urology of I.M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 5Medical Radiological Research Center RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Renal cancer (RC) is one of ten most frequent carcinomas in adults 
and represents actual problem of modern oncology. Aim of this investi -
gation is molecular genetic analysis of RC for development of potential 
markers of desease. We have studied 209 RC samples, 192 from wich 
were clear cell carcinomas. Mutations in the VHL gene were tested 
using SSCP and sequencing, methylation was detected by methylsen -
sitive endonuclease digesting and following PCR (hypermethylated 
samples were confirmed using bisulphite sequencing). We have de -
tected VHL somatic mutations in 35.4% of samples. VHL inactivating 
events were present in 53.7% of patients with stage I that testified 
in favour for early alteration of this gene in clear cell RC. Aberrant 
methylation of VHL was observed in 12.0%, RASSF1  - 56.0%, FHIT  - 
58.4%, and CDH1  - 46.4% of cases. Methylation of at least one tested 
gene was detected in 84.1% of samples. RASSF1  hypermethylation 
was associated with later RC stages (p = 0.015) and metastases (p 
= 0.036). Aberrant methylation of CDH1  was associated with tumor 
progression, invasion, and metastases (P = 0.009, 0.039, and 0.002 
correspondingly). Results of this investigation denoted the opportunity 
for using mutation and methylation of VHL, aberrant methylation of 
RASSF1  and CDH1  in RC molecular marker system.
P06.143  Phytoalexin resveratrol induces apoptosis in hormone-
resistant cancer cell lines.
S. I. Olga ;  
Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Phytoalexin resveratrol has some structural similarities to diethyl stil -
bestrol, a synthetic estrogen. Resveratrol has been reported to pos -
sess cancer preventive properties.
In this study, we analyzed anti-tumor activity of resveratrol towards 
breast and prostate cancer cell lines.
Methods: We incubated two human cancer cell lines Du145, MBA-MD-
231 (ER-negative) with resveratrol in high concentration, in dosage 
and time dependent manner; and analyzed the influence of drug on 
cell lines by flow cytometry.
Resveratrol treatment had reduced the proliferation of human cancer 
cells, cells had been arrested in the G2/M phase, and the percentage 
of cells in the subG1/G0 fraction had increased.
We characterized the anti-proliferation activities of resveratrol.
Treatment with resveratrol had resulted in a non-significant decreasing 
the percentage of cells in the G1/G0 phase in androgenresponsive 
human breast cancer cell line (50-100 Mmol/L for 24 hours), and dose-
response (50-100 Mmol/L) induction of apoptosis in androgenrespon -
sive human prostate cancer cells (incubation time 24 and 48 hours). 
However, at similar concentrations, resveratrol treatment did not affect 
the viability and rate of apoptosis in normal human prostate epithelial 
cells.
These data suggest that resveratrol have to be further examined as 
a potentially clinical chemotherapeutic agent for treating breast and 
prostate cancer.Cancer genetics12
P06.144  Modification effect of RET+3:T allele in medullary thyroid 
cancer
K. Ziemnicka1, M. Podralska2, J. Sowinski1, A. Plawski1;  
1Karol Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute 
of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Sporadic medullary thyroid cancer is a non-hereditary type of medullary 
cancer. Familial type is caused by mutation in the RET gene. The RET 
protooncogene is one of the receptor tyrosine kinases, cell-surface 
molecules that transduce signals for cell growth and differentiation. 
Medullary thyroid cancer arises from specialized cells named para -
follicular cells. The present study concerns RET+3:T polymorphism 
localized in enhancer region. We investigated only sporadic cases of 
medullary thyroid cancer. Patients are delivered from Department of 
Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, University of Medi -
cal Sciences in Poznan. In our studies, we compared the frequency of 
the occurrence of the RET+3:T allele in our group of 48 non-familial 
MTC patients with the frequency of occurrence of the allele in the Pol -
ish population. The frequency of the occurrence of the heterozygote 
variant of the RET+3:T for the Polish population reached almost 12% 
(18/152) of heterozygotes but in the group of patients with MTC, we 
did not find even a single RET+3:T allele. The frequency difference is 
statistically significant and in the Fisher‘s Exact Test, the two-sided P 
value is 0.0080. This observation allows assuming that the occurrence 
of the RET+3:T in the heterozygotic state may lead to the inhibition 
of the disease phenotype in the cases of the medullary thyroid carci -
noma.
P06.145  MDM2  and TP  are modifier genes of retinoblastoma
V. Disciglio1, P. Berchialla2, D. Giachino3, M. Amenduni1, G. Livide1, M. 
Mencarelli1, A. Marozza1, F. Mari1, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1, M. De Marchi3;  
1Medical Genetics Unit, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, 
Siena, Italy, 2Dept. of Public Health and Microbiology, University of Torino, 
Torino, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
Current evidence support the role of DNA repair and apoptosis gene 
polymorphisms as cancer modifiers. Two common SNPs TP53 R72P 
and MDM2 SNP309 with known functional effects have been studied 
with contrasting findings in both sporadic cancer (gastric, lung, child -
hood ALL) and the inherited Lynch syndrome, and in Li-Fraumeni syn -
drome a significant interaction between the germline TP53 mutation 
and the MDM2 SNP has been shown. To investigate their role in he -
reditary retinoblastoma we genotyped the two SNPs by Pyrosequenc -
ing® assays on blood DNA of 90 patients with known germinal RB1 
mutation, 34 familiar. A descriptive analysis showed an earlier age at 
diagnosis in patients with bilateral retinoblastoma than in those with 
unilateral retinoblastoma (median age: 0.57 yrs vs 1.49 yrs, respec -
tively, p<0.001). Since age of onset is often nor exactly known, we con -
sidered bilaterality as a more robust measure of the variable genetic 
risk. A multivariate logistic regression model adjusted for age and gen -
der showed the risk of bilateral disease to be: i) as for the type of RB1 
mutation higher for splicing and missense mutations than for deletions, 
duplications, nonsense and frameshift mutations but not significantly 
so (OR=1.33; 95% CI 0.22 - 8.22); ii) as for the MDM2 SNP309, sig -
nificantly higher for the GG genotype than TT (OR=11.78, 95% CI 2.18 
- 63.65) but not significantly for TG; iii) as for the TP53 R72P SNP not 
significantly for the PP genotype. Our results suggest for the first time 
that MDM2 and TP53 may be modifiers of Retinoblastoma as well.
P06.146  RB1 gene mutation in children with retinoblastoma
B. Piackova1, D. Ilencikova1, D. Durovcikova2;  
1National Institute of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Slovak health University, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background: Retinoblastoma is the most common intraocular tumour 
in children. The molecular scanning of RB1 genes in searching of a 
germline mutation lead to the publication of new mutations whose 
knowlegde is important for genetic counselling and the characteriza -
tion of phenotypic relationships.
Results: RB1 gene mutation was first examined in child patients diag -
nosed with retinoblastoma as germline mutation detected in peripheral 
blood or bone marrow. Out of the entire number of patients, 14 cases 
out of 21 (66,6%) were diagnosed with unilateral retinoblastoma, and 
7 out of 21 (33,3%) had bilateral retinoblastoma. In order to identify 
germline mutations we used the standard PCR, and for a proper visu -alization we used Denaturing Gradient Gel  Electrophoresis (DGGE). 
In case of positive findings we sequenced the particular fragments. In 
case of negative results we continued by using Multiplex Ligation - de -
pendent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and Methylation - specific MLPA. 
In all the cases of bilateral retinoblastoma we trapped point nonsense 
mutations. In 5 out of 14 (35%) patients point mutations were detected 
and 9 out of 14 (65%) were negative. In negative patients (4 out of 9 
- 44,4%) we requested samples of tumor tissue, where we managed to 
detect particular mutations that caused the disease.
Conclusion:  Analyzed RB1 gene mutations were compared to cases 
retrieved from RB1 gene Mutation Database (Lohmann 1999). We also 
discovered new, yet unpublished mutation cases, in majority of them a 
deletion occurrence was involved, or nucleotide insertion.
P06.147  Adnexectomy status is the critical feature for 
association between serum selenium level and the risk of 
cancer in BRcA1 carriers
J. Lubinski1, T. Huzarski1, T. Byrski1, C. Cybulski1, M. Stawicka2, A. 
Jakubowska1, J. Gronwald1, B. Gorski1, T. Debniak1, W. Wasowicz3, E. Kilar4, 
M. Szwiec5, D. Surdyka6, E. Marczyk7, P. Serrano Fernandez1, P. Sun8, S. A. 
Narod8,9;  
1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Prophylactic and 
Epidemiology Center, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Occupational Medicine, 
Lodz, Poland, 4Regional Oncology Hospital, Swidnica, Poland, 5Regional 
Oncology Hospital, Opole, Poland, 6Center of Oncology of Lublin Region, 
Lublin, Poland, 7Regional Oncology Center, Krakow, Poland, 8Womens College 
Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Dalla Lana School of Public Health, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
In these analysis we asked whether serum selenium levels were differ -
ent in women with a BRCA1 mutation who developed breast or ovar -
ian cancer, compared to matched mutation-positive controls who did 
not develop cancer. We conducted a nested case-control study of 60 
women with breast cancer and 15 women with ovarian cancer (and 75 
matched controls) who were diagnosed among a cohort of 518 women 
in a selenium supplementation trial and for whom a blood sample had 
been taken for serum selenium measurement. Cases and controls 
were matched for age at enrolment, past history of breast cancer, oo -
phorectomy and whether they received selenium supplement or pla -
cebo during cancer chemoprevention trial. Selenium measurements 
for this analysis were performed one year after above trial. The mean 
serum selenium level was 74.4 µg/l for the 75 cases, versus 72.8 µg/l 
for controls.
Selenium level was the independent risk factor for breast/ovarian can -
cer risk among BRCA1 carriers stratified depending on oophorectomy. 
For carriers after adnexectomy the optimal concentration of Selenium 
in the blood was <70 µg/l (p = 0.033; OR = 0.27; CI = 0.08-0.8).
For carriers without adnexectomy the optimal selenium concentration 
was 60-80 µg/l. This sub-group have had ~20 fold lower risk of cancers 
as compared with carriers with selenium blood level <60 µg/l (OR = 
18.6; p = 0.024; CI = 0.04 - 0.80) and ~2 fold lower risk of cancer as 
compared with carriers with selenium level > 80 µg/l (OR = 0.57; p = 
0.43; CI = 0.2 - 1.6).
P06.148  Molecular characterisation of SH2D1A and ODZ1 gene 
deletions in three patients with variable phenotype of X-linked 
lymphoproliferative syndrome
M. Vlckova1, A. Janda2, E. Mejstrikova2, T. Freiberger3, B. Ravcukova3, 
Z. Zmitkova1, J. Drabova1, M. Koudova1,4, M. Hancarova1, P. Keslova2, D. 
Sumerauer2, O. Hrusak2, R. Zachova5, Z. Sedlacek1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Charles University 2nd 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 
3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and 
Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Present adress: GHC, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 5Department of Immunology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
The SH2D1A  gene encodes an adaptor protein interacting with the 
cytoplasmic tail of SLAM family members. Mutations of SH2D1A  are 
responsible for the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome.
We present 3 patients from 2 families with complete deletions of the 
SH2D1A  gene. The first patient was an 18-year-old man with Burkitt Cancer genetics1
lymphoma treated by intensive chemotherapy at the age of 16 followed 
by severe aplastic anaemia treated by stem cell transplantation from 
his brother. Molecular analysis showed a deletion of all SH2D1A  exons. 
His maternal cousin, a 25-year-old man with mild learning difficulties, 
mild autistic features and severe epidermolysis bullosa-like dermatitis 
that manifested at the age of 8 years, carried the same deletion. Due 
to this atypical phenotype, array CGH was performed to specify the 
extent of the deletion. It was about 65 kb long and removed also the 3‘ 
terminal part of the ODZ1  gene. The molecular defect was identical in 
both cousins. The third patient was a 20-year-old man who developed 
EBV-driven lymphoproliferation at the age of 3. He recovered after 
chemotherapy and now, at the age of 21, he is well, suffering only from 
hypogammaglobulinaemia. His brother died of lymphoproliferation in 
infancy. The deletion in this patient spanned over 200 kb, affecting the 
entire SH2D1A  and a part of ODZ1 . FISH analysis was used to identify 
female carriers in this family. Our study can help to decipher the phe -
notype contribution of genes deleted together with SH2D1A  in carriers 
of large Xq25 deletions.
Supported by INCORE, IGA NS10480-3 and MZOFNM2005.
P06.149  the differentl effect of the gene knockdown on 
apoptosis of two human colon cancer cell lines.
A. A. Korotaeva , A. S. Bavykin, E. G. Zenit-Zhuravlouva, E. A. Goncharova, A. 
V. Karpukhin;  
Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We investigated the effects of gene silencing mediated by small in -
terfering RNA (siRNA) on two colorectal cancer cell lines: HT-29 and 
CaCo2. The HT-29 is characterized by APC gene mutation that is 
absent in CaCo2 cell line. In accordance with this we found an ex -
pression of c-Myc gene in HT-29 cells approximately five times more 
in comparison with CaCo2 cells. The expression c-Myc mRNA was 
determined also following siRNA transfer to cells. After c-Myc gene 
silencing we observed apoptosis among HT-29 cells (17%, 3 times 
more than in control). There were no significant difference of apoptotic 
cell number in CaCo2 culture with and without c-Myc silencing. The 
c-Myc silencing after heat-shock treatment of cells (44ºC, 40 min) for 
apoptosis induction lead to increasing of apoptotic cell number in both 
cell lines. However, silencing by siRNA of HSPA5 gene, the member 
of heat-shock protein 70 family, result in more effect on apoptosis for 
both cell lines after heat-shock in comparison with c-Myc silencing. 
The combined using of both mentioned gene silencing lead to 90% of 
apoptotic cells for HT-29 and 60% for CaCo2 that is significantly more 
than after heat-shock alone. The data demonstrate different effect of 
the same gene silencing in dependence on cancer cell genomic char -
acteristics and significance of genes studied for development cancer 
treatment, especially for colon tumor with APC gene mutation.
P06.150  A combination of anti-iAP interfering RNAs and 
chemotherapy induce efficient colon tumor cell apoptosis under 
drug small dozes
A. Bavykin ;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The gene silencing mediated by small interfering RNA (siRNA) was 
used to increase a chemotherapy effect. The siRNA of 19-22 base pair 
long and small hairpin RNA (shRNA) produced from expression vector 
were used for this study. A number of colon tumor cell lines: Caco2, 
HT-29 and HCT-116 were tested for the cisplatin and oxalyplatin sensi -
tivity. The HT-29 appeared to be more susceptible for oxalyplatin. The 
p53-negative HT-29 cells seem to escape from p53-depended apopto -
sis and anticancer platin based drugs activate caspase cascade. We 
performed serially repeated RNA silencing of caspase linked ingibitors 
of apoptosis (IAP). Mixed cocktail of anti-FLIP, IAP-2 shRNAs and anti-
IAP-5 (Survivin), HspA5 siRNAs showed twice stronger effect than ox -
alyplatin alone: 38 and 18% respectively. Combinations of IAP-2/FLIP 
and IAP-5 with oxalyplatin resulted in 50 to 60% apoptosis compared 
with 10% of the negative control. In summary, anti-FLIP and IAP-2 
together with small doze oxalyplatin demonstrated the same apoptotic 
death of cells as treated with (3x)-oxalyplatin alone. Our data indicate 
that anti-IAP siRNA seem to be a prominent tool to increase the ef -
fect of standart chemotherapy and significantly reduce it‘s overload for 
cancer patients.P06.151  High-risk neuroblastoma without MYCN amplification 
- characterization of the 11q-deletion tumors reveals a poor 
prognostic chromosome instability phenotype with later onset
H. Carén1, H. Kryh1, M. Nethander2, R. Sjöberg1, C. Träger3, S. Nilsson4, J. 
Abrahamsson5, P. Kogner3, T. Martinsson1;  
1Dept Clinical Genetics, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Genomics Core Faciliy, The Sahlgrenska 
Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Childhood 
Cancer Research Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska Hospital,, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of 
Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 5Dept, Pediatrics, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Analysis of chromosomal aberrations is used to predict clinical prog -
nosis of children with neuroblastoma and to stratify risk-based therapy. 
MYCN amplification (MNA) alone is incomplete as a poor prognostic 
factor and 11q status has recently been included in risk classification. 
We analyzed 170 neuroblastomas using high-density SNP microar -
rays and describe and compare the high-risk groups defined by MNA 
(n=37) and 11q-deletion (n=21). Median age at diagnosis was 21 
months for the MNA group and 42 months for 11q-deleted, while medi -
an survival from diagnosis was 16 months for MNA and 40 months for 
11q-deletion. Overall survival was similarly poor, 35% at eight years for 
both groups. MNA and 11q-deletion were almost mutually exclusive; 
only one tumor harbored both aberrations. The numbers of segmen -
tal aberrations differed significantly; the MNA group had a median of 
four aberrations, while 11q-deleted group had 12. The high frequency 
of chromosomal breaks in the 11q-deletion group is suggestive of a 
chromosomal instability phenotype gene located in 11q, and one such 
gene, H2AFX, is located in 11q23.3 (within the 11q-deleted region in 
all tumors). Furthermore, in the groups with segmental aberrations 
without MNA or 11q-deletion, children with tumors with 17q gain had 
worse prognosis than those with segmental aberrations without 17q 
gain, who had a favorable outcome in our material. This study has im -
plications for understanding of neuroblastoma genetics, prognostic as -
sessment and choice of therapy for different risk groups and stresses 
the use of genome wide microarray analyses in clinical management 
to evaluate patient diagnosis, risk and treatment.
P06.152  MMR system gene expression profile in sporadic 
colorectal cancer
M. Ioana , C. Angelescu, F. Burada, A. Riza, M. Cruce, F. Mixich, A. Saftoiu;  
Univ Med Pharm Craiova, Craiova, Romania.
Colorectal carcinoma is the second leading cause of death by can -
cer in Europe as its incidence increases with life span. As colorectal 
cancer (CRC) develops over a long period of time, screening is a vital 
prevention and early detection component. Continuing research to de -
tect new highly sensitive and specific noninvasive CRC biomarkers is 
essential. The aim of this study was to compare 9 mismatching repair 
(MMR) genes activation levels in normal, polyp and malignant tissues 
in order to detect a MMR gene expression pattern in sporadic colorec -
tal malignant pathology. Real-Time PCR with TaqMan (Applied Bio -
systems) probes specific to ANKRD17, EXO1, MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, 
MSH3, MSH4, MSH5, MSH6 gene transcripts were used. The general 
tendency observed is a decreased mRNA level of the MMR genes in 
tumor samples by comparison with normal tissue, with the exception of 
EXO1 and MSH5. Of the analyzed genes, ANKRD17 mRNA appears 
to be the most sensitive target and may have a potential value as an 
additional marker for the existing multitarget assay panel for colorectal 
cancer detection.
P06.153  t elomere length evaluation in patients with B-chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia - correlation with other molecular, 
cytogenetic and immunophenotypic features
J. Brezinova1, S. Vcelikova1, A. Berkova2, Z. Zemanova2, S. Izakova1, I. 
Sarova1, H. Cechova1, L. Grosova2, L. Lizcova2, E. Malinova2, M. Zemanova2, 
E. Cmunt3, M. Trneny1,3, J. Karban3, J. Schwarz1, K. Michalova1,2;  
1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Center of Oncocytogenetics, General University Hospital, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 3First Medical Department, General University 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is a heterogeneous disor -
der characterized by a highly variable clinical course. Classical staging Cancer genetics1
systems introduced by Rai and Binet help to predict survival in B-CLL, 
however they do not distinguish patients who will evolve more aggres -
sive disease from those who will remain indolent. Therefore, other in -
dicators related to the genetics and biology of B-CLL are increasingly 
used for prognosis and treatment response prediction. Recently, some 
evidences suggest that short telomeres are associated with poor out -
come and telomere length might be of predictive significance.During 
the years 2007 - 2009, peripheral blood and bone marrow samples 
of 102 patients with B-CLL (53 male, 49 female, mean age 68 years) 
were analyzed to ascertain whether telomere shortening was associat -
ed with genomic aberrations detected by I-FISH (Abbott Vysis), immu -
noglobulin variable heavy chain (IgVH) mutational status, CD38 and 
ZAP-70 expression, and telomerase activity. No difference in telomere 
length between patients with good and intermediate prognosis accord -
ing to cytogenetics was found, however, in patients with deletion of 
ATM/p53 gene and IgH rearrangement short telomeres were proved 
(p=0.053). Association between telomere length and IgVH mutational 
status, ZAP-70, CD38 expression and telomerase activity was found 
as significantly shorter telomeres in patients with unmutated IgVH sta -
tus (p=0.001), ZAP-70 positivity (p=0.001), CD38 positivity (p=0.01) 
and telomerase positivity (p=0.01) were detected. Telomere length 
in combination with other prognostic parameters completes the risk 
profile and might serve for better subclassification of B-CLL patients 
with different outcomes and further treatment. Supported by grants 
MZOVFN2005, MSM0021620808, MSMLC535.
P06.154  TIMP2  Gene Polymorphisms in Breast carcinoma 
Patients
O. Ozer1, N. Kozan1, M. C. Yagmurdur2, Z. Yilmaz1, B. Demirhan3, F. I. Sahin1;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of General 
Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department 
of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are potent proteolytic enzymes that 
are known to play key roles in invasion and metastasis of malignant 
tumours. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are endog -
enous inhibitors of activated MMPs that contribute to normal functions 
such as tissue repair after injury and development, as well as to patho -
logic states such as cardiovascular disease and cancer.
There are four known TIMP genes ( TIMP-1-4 ) which have both MMP-
dependent and MMP independent effects in many cell types includ -
ing the breast. TIMP-2 is normally expressed in breast stromal tissue; 
however, increased expression has been found in ductal carcinoma 
in situ and in invasive breast carcinomas. TIMP-2 has been found to 
stimulate cell growth and inhibit apoptosis in breast cancer cells, as 
well as to inhibit endothelial cell growth and abrogate angiogenesis.
This study was conducted to investigate TIMP2 gene polymorphisms 
on breast cancer.
In our study we investigated the  TIMP2 G418A and C303T polymor -
phisms in 42 breast cancer patients and 41 fibroadenoma samples that 
were used as a control group. DNA was extracted from paraffin em -
bedded tissue sections according to standard protocols. Polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was used for 
the detection of TIMP2  G418A and C303T polymorphisms.
According to our results TIMP2  gene polymorphisms don’t seem to be 
associated with breast cancer susceptibility and clinical parameters. 
However to confirm our results, further studies need to be performed 
in a larger group of patients and additional polymorphisms of TIMP2 
gene.
P06.155  Human papilloma virus and tP53 gene mutation in oral 
tongue scc and their correlation with tumor characteristics in 
iranian population; a multicenter study
J. Mehdizadeh Seraj1, L. Vazifeh Mostaan2, Z. Ousati Ashtiani3, S. Mehdizadeh 
Seraj1, S. Hasheminasab3, Z. Madani Kermani1, B. Memar4, F. Mirashrafi1, N. 
Yazdani1;  
1Otorhinolaryngology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2ENT Department, Imam Reza Hospital, 
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Pathology Department, Imam Reza Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most 
common cancer worldwide, the most common site of oral-cancer 
development is the anterior two thirds of tongue.TP53 has been fre -
quently reported to be associated with HNSCC among smokers and 
drinkers. In recent years, number of patients at younger ages who are 
non-smokers and non-drinkers but suffer from oral cavity SCC (OSCC) 
is increasing. For these patients, other etiologic factors such as infec -
tion with Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) may be considered. The pur -
pose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of HPV infection 
and TP53 mutation in patients with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of 
the tongue and subsequently its significance on cervical lymph node 
metastases and tumor differentiation. Sections of tissue blocks from 
ninety five tongue SCC patients, were enrolled. Immunohistochemical 
(IHC) technique was used to study tissue TP53 mutation. Polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) was performed for detection of high risk HPV 
types, sixteen and eighteen. Frequency of HPV16 and HPV18 infec -
tion were 10.6% and 16% respectively. TP53 mutation was found in 
70.2% of patients. Young patients (aged below 45 years) comprised 20 
% of all patients. There was not a significant association betweenTP53, 
HPV16 or HPV18 presence and higher stages of the tumor, tumor dif -
ferentiation or presence of nodal metastasis. Although association be -
tween HNSCC and HPV infection is being recognized and reported, 
our data implicates that HPV infection or TP53 mutation may not play 
a significant role in oral tongue SCC pathogenesis, differentiation or 
metastasis.
P06.156  Novel tP53 germ-line mutations in a czech familes with 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
E. Machackova1, J. Smardova2, M. Mikova1, J. Hazova1, L. Foretova1;  
1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, BRNO, Czech Republic, 2University 
Hospital, BRNO, Czech Republic.
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome char -
acterized by the occurrence of diverse mesenchymal and epithelial 
neoplasms at multiple sites.
Here we demonstrate 2 novel germ-line mutations detected in Czech 
LFS families.
A novel large germ-line deletion of TP53 gene spanning exons 2-11 
(confirmed by CGH-array) was identified by MLPA in typical LFS family 
with early childhood brain tumor and severe family history of bilateral 
breast cancer cases, liposarcoma and melanoma in 4 generations di -
agnosed in early adulthood.
TP53 missense substitution p.Ile254Val located in DNA binding do -
main was detected in a family with 3 relatives with breast, bilateral 
breast and brain tumors (diagnosed at age of 42-56). This missense 
substitution has not been yet described as a germ-line mutation but 
was reported as a very rare somatic mutation in IARC TP53 database. 
By the assessment of transactivation capacities measured by Kato et 
al. p.Ile254Val was designed as functional in IARC TP53 database. 
We evaluated a functional status of p.Ile254Val using FASAY, which 
resulted in loss of function as fully inactivating mutation.
TP53 missense mutants located in the DNA binding domain could 
be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles 
based on their ability to transactivate target sequences. Several stud -
ies indicated that specific mutation in TP53 may affect the type of tu -
mor and the age of onset but the effect of the functional heterogeneity 
of the TP53 mutations on the severity of associated disease has not 
been assessed.
Supported by grant MZ0MOU2005 
P06.157  the role of pregnancy on hemangioblastomas in von 
Hippel-Lindau disease: a retrospective French study.
C. Abadie1,2, I. Coupier1,2, S. Bringuier-Branchereau3, G. Mercier3, F. Séguret3, 
N. Aghakhani4,2, P. David4,2, F. Parker4, D. Le Gars5,2, G. Robert6, P. Pencalet7, 
J. Houtteville8, P. Mercier9,2, S. Deveaux2, S. Richard2,10;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, Unité d’Oncogénétique, Montpellier, France, 
2Réseau National et Centre de Référence Cancers Rares INCa ”Maladie de 
VHL et prédispositions héréditaires au cancer rénal de l’adulte” (PREDIR), 
Service d’Urologie, AP-HP, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 
3Département d’Informatique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 4Service 
de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 5Service 
de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, 6Service de Neurochirurgie, 
Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild, Paris, France, 7Service de Cancer genetics1
Neurochirurgie, Hôpital Foch, Suresnes, France, 8Service de Neurochirurgie, 
CHU, Caen, France, 9Service de Neurochirurgie, CHU, Angers, France, 
10Laboratoire de Génétique Oncologique EPHE, CNRS FRE 2939, Faculté de 
Médecine Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre et Institut de cancérologie Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) [OMIM 193300] is a dominantly in -
herited disorder predisposing to highly vascularized tumors, mainly 
hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system (CNS) and retina, 
but also renal cell carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, pancreatic neu -
roendocrine tumours and endolymphatic sac tumours. The disease re -
sults from germline mutations in the VHL tumour-suppressor gene that 
plays a key role in response to hypoxia and angiogenesis.
A potential growth of hemangioblastomas during pregnancy with con -
sequent risk to the mother and fetus has been reported in a few case 
reports and an only study in a small population of VHL patients. Thus, 
we performed a retrospective and comparative French study in 269 
women from 172 families from the national VHL clinical database. 
Patients were divided into two groups according to their gestational 
status. The study focused on the occurrence of new hemangioblas -
tomas and complications of previously known tumors. Available data 
of imaging follow-up of CNS and retina were collected in 176 women 
with at least one pregnancy (group 1) and 93 women with none (group 
2). The results showed more complications of hemangioblastomas in 
group 1 (p=0.031) with increased symptoms and the need for surgical 
treatment in emergency in some cases.
To our knowledge, this is the first study analysing the pregnancy’s ef -
fect in a very large series of VHL patients. This work underlies the 
necessity of a close follow-up during pregnancy and a systematic CNS 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging without injection is recommended during 
the fourth month of pregnancy in women with hemangioblastomas.
P06.158  Identification of germline mutation in a Turkish patient 
with Von Hippel-Lindau disease
R. K. Özgül1, D. Yücel2, H. Kıratlı3;  
1Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science,Department 
of Molecular Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University,Faculty of 
Medicine,Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara, Turkey.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an uncommon, dominantly inher -
ited multisystemic cancer syndrome. Various benign and malignant tu -
mors appear in multiple organs including eye, kidney, pancreas, broad 
ligament, epididymis, adrenal gland and central nervous system in the 
disease. Retinal capillary hemangioblastoma is hallmark tumor lesion 
in the eye. VHL disease caused by germline mutations in the VHL 
tumor-supressor gene located on chromosome 3p25-26. Germline 
mutations in the VHL gene span three exons.
In this study, germline VHL mutation identified in a Turkish patient 
affected with the disease. Mutation screening of three exons in VHL 
gene was performed to detect disease causing pathologic allele. Mu -
tation analysis in exon 3 of VHL gene revealed that there is a disease 
causing heterozygous R161X mutation in the patient. Different type of 
VHL mutations in literature were classified and VHL truncating muta -
tions were found to be associated with hemangioblastomas and renal 
cell carcinoma.
Analysis of germline mutations in VHL gene and correlation between 
mutations and ocular phenotype may light on understanding of patho -
genetic mechanisms underlying VHL tumorigenesis in the eye.
P07 cancer cytogenetics
P07.01  Rare cytogenetic findings in two cases of acute leukemia
C. Popa1, H. Ionita2, A. Belengeanu3, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Hematology, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Identification of recurring chromosomal abnormalities has a major im -
pact on risk evaluation and for treatment of the patients with acute leu -
kemia. Cytogenetic and molecular genetic analyses of childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are today used routinely for diagnostic 
and prognostic evaluation; chromosomal aberrations are revealed in 
approximately 70% of patients. Genetic alterations can be detected in approximately 80% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), these alterations 
are considered important in initiating events in the process of leukemo -
genesis and as indicators of clinical outcome. In the cytogenetic labo -
ratory at the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara we have 
investigated 56 cases of acute leukemia, 26 cases of ALL and 30 cas -
es of AML. In one case of ALL, the cytogenetic findings were trisomy 
4 associated with trisomy 17. Trisomy 4, a numerical abnormality, is 
commonly associated with high hyperdiploidy and is very rarely found 
in cases of ALL with low hyperdiploidy. The functional consequences of 
hyperdiploidy are not clearly understood. It remains to elucidate if the 
extra copies of particular chromosomes found in hyperdiploid ALL lead 
to increased expression or to more marked changes in expression of 
particular genes. In one case of AML the only cytogenetic aberration 
found was trisomy 4. Trisomy 4 is a rare cytogenetic abnormality in 
patients with AML, with a frequency of less than 1%. The prognostic 
significance of this abnormality in patients with AML is not clear, but ap -
pears to be poor. More data are needed for understand the prognostic 
significance of such rare karyotypic abnormalities.
P07.02  cytogenetic analyses of the chromosome 11 duplication/
amplification in acute myeloid leukemia
I. Sarova1, J. Brezinova1, S. Izakova1, E. Malinova2, Z. Zemanova2, L. Lizcova2, 
J. Cermak1, J. Polivka3, J. Vydra3, M. Siskova4, K. Michalova2;  
1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 
2General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, 
Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 4General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Gene amplification is a frequent genetic abnormality in solid tumors, 
whereas it has been rarely detected in hematological malignancies. 
Activation of proto-oncogenes is associated with aggressive growth of 
tumor cells and poor prognosis. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
repeated target of gene amplification is chromosome 11, particularly 
band 11q23.
During years 2006 to 2009, bone marrow cells of all newly diagnosed 
patients with AML were examined by conventional cytogenetics and 
FISH with a Vysis MLL Break Apart Rearrangement probe  (11q23.3). 
In some cases, target regions of chromosome 11 amplification were in -
vestigated by Vysis LSI ATM (11q22.3), LSI CCND1 (11q13.2) probes 
(Abbott) and/or by methods mFISH/mBAND 11 (MetaSystems).
Chromosome 11 aberrations were proved in 32 of 148 patients: rear -
rangements in 28, duplication/amplifications in 13 and deletion in 3 pa -
tients. The amplification was presented as: amplification of the 5´ MLL 
(myeloid/lymphoid leukemia) gene (1x), trisomy 11 (3x), partial trisomy 
11q (5x), isochromosome 11q (1x) and multiple amplification (3x).
In conclusion, chromosome 11 duplication/amplification has been 
proved to be present in approximately 10% of AML cases. Amplicons 
vary in size and can be located on both arms of chromosome 11. How -
ever, overrepresentations usually include a band 11q23 and MLL gene. 
The identification of true target genes of amplification is important for 
understanding the cancer pathogenesis and can be useful for cancer 
therapy selection. Therefore, a combination of conventional and mo -
lecular cytogenetic methods is needed for their detection.
Supported by grants MZOUHKT2005, MZOVFN2005, MSM 
0021620808, MSMT LC 535.
P07.03  Novel translocation t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) in de novo  acute 
myeloid leukemia with complex karyotype - a case report
A. A. Arghir1, S. Chirieac1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, A. Colita2, A. Lungeanu1;  
1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol 
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
50-70% of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients have cytogenetic 
abnormalities and 10-15% of adult AML show complex karyotypes. It 
is well established that karyotype represent a key feature for diagnosis 
and prognosis.
We present a de novo  AML case (72 year-old, female) with complex 
chromosomal abnormalities identified at diagnosis, including a novel 
translocation t(6;17)(p12;p11.2).
Bone marrow chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded 
slides. FISH with painting probes (chromosome 9 - Kreatech, chromo -
some 6 - Cytocell), locus specific probes (TP53 - Vysis, subtelomeric 
17pter Kreatech, dual fusion BCR/ABL probes - Vysis) and BAC FISH 
probes (RP11-525O11 - 17p11.2, RP11-129E3 - 17q24) were applied Cancer cytogenetics1
for molecular characterization.
Two malignant clones were detected, one bearing abnormalities of 
chromosomes 6 and 17, and the other having additional abnormali -
ties - partial deletions of both short and long arm of chromosome 9. 
Both homologous chromosomes 17 were involved, in different anoma -
lies: a t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) generating der(17)t(6;17)(p12;p11.2)(wcp6+
, ST17pter-,TP53-,RP11-525O11+,RP11-129E3+), and an interstitial 
deletion, not encompassing TP53, del(17)(p11.2p1?3)(STpter+,TP5
3+,RP11-525O11-,RP11-129E3+). The anomalies involving chromo -
some 9 are still to be elucidated. Painting FISH sugests a deletion, as 
no chromosome 9 material is observed elsewhere. ABL region is not 
deleted: der(9)del(9)(p?)del(9)(q?q34)(wcp9+,ABL+).
The pathogenesis of AML with complex karyotype is less well un -
derstood when compared with AML associated with specific genetic 
defects. Thus, unravelling new cytogenetic abnormalities in AML with 
complex karyotype might bring some important insights in understand -
ing this heterogeneous disease.
To our knowledge, this is the first reported case with a translocation 
t(6;17)(p12;p11.2) as part of a complex karyotype in de novo  AML.
P07.04**  chromosomal alterations evaluated by acGH 
in patients presenting pediatric cancer and congenital 
dysmorphisms
L. P. Capelli1, A. C. V. Krepischi1, B. Heck1, B. de Camargo1, C. Rosenberg1,2;  
1Antonio Prudente Foundation, AC Camargo Cancer Hospital, São Paulo, 
Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, 
Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Oncogenesis is a multistep process that, generally, requires several 
years until manifestation of the disease. Accordingly, childhood neo -
plasias must be rare. It seems reasonable to assume that the prema -
ture appearance of neoplasias often involves genetic alterations con -
stitutively present in somatic lineages of the patients, shortening the 
period of time necessary to trigger the tumorigenesis. Furthermore, an 
increased frequency of congenital defects has already been reported 
among pediatric cancer patients. The presence of variation in copy 
number of DNA segments (copy number variations - CNVs) affecting 
gene(s)-dosage could explain the concomitant occurrence of cancer 
and associated phenotypes. Currently, array-based comparative ge -
nomic hybridization (aCGH) is a useful tool to detect submicroscopic 
deletions or duplications. In this work, we used a 180K aCGH platform 
(Agilent) to investigate the presence of such chromosomal alterations 
in patients presenting pediatric cancer associated with clinically mi -
nor anomalies or congenital defects, an approach almost unexploited 
to identify genes involved in cancer and/or associated phenotypes. 
Among 31 patients evaluated so far, including one XY female, seven 
of them (22.6%) presented submicroscopic chromosome alterations 
never or rarely reported in DGV (Database of Genomic Variants), be -
ing four microduplications (at 4q13.3, 11p15.5, Xq27.2 and 18q21.33) 
and three microdeletions (at 7q36.1, 5p13.1 and 3p14.2). Our initial 
results point to chromosomal regions possibly involved with the emer -
gence of childhood cancer. Financial support:  FAPESP.
P07.05  cytogenetic characteristics of basal cell carcinoma
S. Ibrulj1, A. Haveric2, S. Haveric2, A. Rahmanovic2, F. Alendar3;  
1Medical faculty, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
2Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 3Clinical center, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
Basal cell carcinoma is the most common epithelial cancer in humans. 
Known karyotypic abnormalities in this tumor are nonrandom, rarely 
including evidence of clonal evolution. The aim of this research was to 
investigate the frequencies of numerical and structural chromosome 
aberrations in primary cultures of basal cell carcinoma. Cytogenetic 
analysis was conducted over 10 successfully harvested samples. Ob -
served chromosome aberrations were scored according to the Interna -
tional System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature. Aneuploidy was 
the most frequent among observed numerical chromosome aberra -
tions. Aneuploid cells were found as it was expected because aneu -
ploidy is probably the only mutation capable to clarify all aspects of 
carcinogenesis.P07.06  Predictive genetic diagnosis of breast cancer: detection 
of large rearrangements in the genes BRCA1  and BRCA2 by 
molecular combing
A. Vannier1, E. Rouleau2, K. Cheeseman1, A. Thomas1, A. Briaux2, A. 
Bensimon1, R. Lidereau2, E. Conseiller1, M. Ceppi1;  
1Genomic Vision, Paris, France, 2Centre René Huguenin - Institut Curie, Saint-
Cloud, France.
The BRCA1  and BRCA2 genes are involved with high penetrance in 
breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility. Among patients with breast 
cancer and severe family histories of cancer who test negative for 
BRCA1  and BRCA2  point mutations, about 10 to 15 % can be expect -
ed to carry large genomic alterations (deletion or duplication) in one of 
the two genes, mostly on BRCA1 . Large rearrangements are missed 
by direct sequencing. Thus, effective methods to identify these types of 
mutation should be integrated in current diagnostic procedure to obtain 
a more comprehensive genetic screening strategy. Molecular Comb -
ing is a powerful FISH-based technique for the direct visualization of 
single DNA molecules which allows exploration of the entire genome 
at high resolution in a single analysis. We have developed a novel 
predictive genetic test based on molecular combing, for which specific 
BRCA1  and BRCA2  “genomic morse codes” and associated analysis 
platform have been designed and validated on 10 breast cancer pa -
tients with severe family history. Large rearrangements corresponding 
to deletions and duplications of one to several exons and with sizes 
ranging from 3 kb to 40 kb have been detected on both genes. Im -
portantly, the mutations identified by Molecular Combing confirm the 
results previously obtained by high-resolution zoom-in aCGH (11k) on 
the same patients, with a resolution in the 1 - 2 kb range.
P07.07  molecular cytogenetic analysis of novel recurrent 
abnormality of chromosome 7 in three pediatric patients with 
myelodysplastic syndrome (mDs)
L. Lizcova1, Z. Zemanova1, E. Malinova1, M. Jarosova2, E. Mejstrikova3, P. 
Smisek3, D. Pospisilova2, J. Stary3, K. Michalova1;  
1General University Hospital and Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 2University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, 
Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Motol and Charles University in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
Abnormalities of chromosome 7 are the most common cytogenetic 
findings in childhood MDS occurring in ~55% of children with primary 
disease. Chromosome 7 aberrations are associated with poor outcome 
and most frequently occurs as a loss of whole chromosome or intersti -
tial deletion of long arm with major breakpoints at 7q22 and 7q35-q36. 
Deletions of short arm are less frequent.
We present an unusual structural abnormality leading to loss of whole 
short and long arm of chromosome 7 which was found in bone mar -
row cells of three children with MDS. For precise characterization of 
the marker chromosome conventional cytogenetics and FISH analy -
ses using Vysis CEP 7/LSI 7q31, ToTelVysion probe mix (Abbott Mo -
lecular) and XCyte 7 color kit (MetaSystems) were performed. A tiny 
“dot-like” marker chromosome was shown to be composed solely of 
chromosome 7 centromeric region and was described as der(7)del(7)(
p11)del(7)(q11) in all three cases and was presented in 79%, 53% and 
15% of screened nuclei, respectively.
Together with one previously published case1 it represents a new re -
current karyotypic abnormality involving chromosome 7 in childhood 
MDS. Whether this novel chromosomal abnormality is a new cytoge -
netic entity or a specific prognostic subgroup must be evaluated on 
larger series of patients. Cytogenetically, reported marker, due to its 
size, can easily be overlooked by G-banding analysis. Therefore all 
cases with an apparent monosomy 7 observed by conventional cyto -
genetics must be interpreted with caution and should be confirmed by 
molecular cytogenetic methods.
Supported by MSM21620813, MSMLC535, MZOVFN2005.
1Zamecnikova A. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2008;180:163-4.
P07.08  Isochromosome i(9)(q10) in childhood T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia
E. Malinova1, L. Lizcova1, Z. Zemanova1, A. Berkova1, P. Smisek2, J. Stary2, K. 
Michalova1;  
1General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, 
Prague 2, Czech Republic, 22nd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Cancer cytogenetics17
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
Isochromosome i(9)(q10) is a rare recurrent chromosomal aberration 
described in bone marrow cells of ~1% children with acute lympho -
blastic leukemia (ALL). This abnormality more often occurs in patients 
with pre-B immunophenotype, although rare cases of T-ALL have also 
been reported.
We examined 62 newly diagnosed children with T-ALL by combina -
tion of cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic methods. In two of them, 
i(9)(q10) was found, in one case as sole aberration and in the other 
combined with trisomy 8 and t(10;14)(q24;q11). Findings were con -
firmed by mBAND and mFISH (XCyte 9, 24XCyte, MetaSystems). 
Chemotherapy was administered to both patients (BFM Interim) and 
they are living in complete remission 10 and 6 months after diagno -
sis.
The biological effect of i(9)(q10) is not well established. Formation 
of isochromosome results in partial monosomy of the short arm and 
partial trisomy of the long arm of chromosome 9. These two patho -
genetic events - overexpression of several proto-oncogenes (includ -
ing the ABL gene at 9q34) and deletion of various tumor-suppressor 
genes (including  CDKN2A  at 9p21.3 or PAX5  at 9p13), have been 
suggested to play significant role in malignant proliferation of leukemic 
cells. Specifically, loss of the known candidate gene CDKN2A  leading 
to deregulation of cell cycle, is one of the most important deletions 
in childhood T-ALL. Nevertheless, the i(9)(q10) is a scarce genomic 
abnormality and therefore, its clinical implication is extremely hard to 
evaluate. Thus, the significance of i(9)(q10) in pathogenesis of T-ALL 
needs to be further studied on larger cohorts of patients.
Supported by MSM0021620813, MSMLC535 and MZOVFN2005.
P07.09   
Recurrent chromosomal unbalance translocation in two cases of 
chronic lymphocitic leukemia with tP53 deletion.
A. Carrió , C. López, D. Costa, C. Gómez, N. Villamor, D. Colomer, M. Rozman, 
F. Bosch, E. Montserrat, E. Campo;  
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most common leukaemia 
in the Western world. The analysis of chromosomal aberrations has 
provided significant prognostic information. The use of metaphase cy -
togenetics, however, has turned out to be problematic, due to the low 
mitotic index of most CLL cells even in the presence of B-cell mito -
gens. The analysis of aberrant chromosomal regions by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH), which can be applied to interphase cells, 
resulted in the detection of clonal aberrations in more than 80% of CLL 
patients. Deletion of the locus of the TP53 gene identifies the most 
aggressive subset.
We present here two patients with TP53 deletion and a recurrent trans -
location that involve chromosomes 8 and 17.
Conventional cytogenetic studies were carried out with G-banded ac -
cording to standard protocols. FISH analyses were performed in cell 
suspension from the conventional cytogenetics culture, with CLL kit 
LSIp53 / LSI ATM and LSI D13S319 / LSI 13q34 / CEP 12 (Vysis). Two 
hundred nuclei were analysed for each probe.
Both patients showed -8 and der(17)t(8;17)(q12;p13) and TP53 dele -
tion.
From our knowledge it is the first time that it recurrent chromosomal 
abnormality is described. We can remark the relevance to combine 
conventional and molecular cytogenetics in CLL to detect new recur -
rent clonal chromosomal aberrations that can help us to understanding 
the biological mechanisms related with the pathology and evolution of 
CLL patients. 
P07.10  chronic lymphocitic leukemia with trisomy 12 
associated with t(14;18) or trisomy 18.
D. Costa1, C. López1, C. Gómez1, N. Villamor1, D. Colomer1, M. Rozman1, P. 
Abrisqueta2, E. Montserrat2, E. Campo1, A. Carrió1;  
1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 
2Hematology Department. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Chronic lymphocitic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative dis -
order. This is the most common leukemia of the adult population in 
Western countries. The chromosomal abnormalities associated with 
CLL are: trisomy 12, del(13)(q14), del(11)(q22-23), del(17)(p13) and 
del(6)(q21). Some studies have reported the presence of trisomy 12 
associated with other chromosomal abnormalities as t(14;18)(q32;q21) and trisomy 18. The t(14;18)(q32;q21) has been identified in 90% of 
follicular lymphomas and 20-30% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 
but is rare in CLL. The CD10 marker is expressed in of follicular lym -
phoma and is not expressed in CLL. The expression of ZAP70 and 
CD38 markers are both associated with a poor prognosis in CLL. The 
aim of this study was to describe the clinical and pathological features 
of 5 CLL patients with trisomy 12 associated with t(14;18)(q32;q21) or 
trisomy 18. Material and Methods. In this study, three patients showed 
by karyotype and/or FISH studies trisomy 12 + t(14;18)(q32;q21) and 
two patients trisomy 12 + trisomy 18. The CLL markers were studied 
by flow cytometry in 4 cases. CD10 was studied in three cases [+12, 
t(14;18)(q32;q21) two cases; +12,+18 one case]. Results. In all cases 
the ZAP70 marker was negative and CD38 was positive. CD10 marker 
was negative in all cases. Follow-up was available in two patients (12,+ 
t(14;18)(q32;q21); +12 + 18) and none of them progressed. Remarks. 
CD38 marker was positive and ZAP70 negative in all the CLL patients 
included in the study. The lack of expression of CD10 marker expres -
sion excludes the follicular lymphoma diagnosis.
P07.11  complex karyotype in a case of cmmL
M. Souto , M. Cunha, O. Moutinho, R. Pinto Leite;  
Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal.
The chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a haematological 
disease of difficult classification because of their clinical characteris -
tics and their evolution. Initially, according to FAB classification, the 
CMML was considered a myelodysplastic syndrome. Recently, CMML 
is included in a new category: the disease myelodysplastic / myelopro -
liferative according to WHO classification.
The cytogenetic analysis may be important in the characterization 
of disease and prognosis. Approximately 20 to 40% of patients with 
CMML have chromosomal abnormalities, but none is specific to the 
disease. The most common aneuploidies involve the chromosomes 8 
and 7, structure abnormalities in chromosome 12 and complex karyo -
types are also described.
The authors present the results of a cytogenetic study in a patient with 
CMML, with 10 years of development, clinical and analytical stable, 
despite leukocytes sustained over 20.000/μl.
Bone marrow cell cultures were made and all the technical procedure 
to obtain metaphases was performed according to the protocols in the 
laboratory.
The karyotype was: 46, XY, der(1)t(1;5)(q44;q31),der(5)del(5)(q14q
31),t(15;22) confirmed by FISH technique. This is a complex karyo -
type, unbalanced, presenting two translocations in all metaphases 
analyzed.
The authors present a bibliographic revue.
P07.12   
Instability at common fragile sites as a possible cause of 
recurrent chromosomal rearrangements in colorectal cancer
L. Brueckner , M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva;  
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks among the leading causes of cancer 
death worldwide. The identification of genes that influence colorectal 
cancer susceptibility and progression therefore remains an essen -
tial goal of basic and clinical research. Specific patterns of structural 
chromosomal aberrations have been associated with this tumour type. 
However, despite these findings, the molecular events underlying can -
cer susceptibility and chromosomal instability in these tumours are not 
well understood.
Early-stage colorectal cancer development is associated with DNA rep -
lication stress inducing DNA double-strand breaks and consequently 
genomic instability. Such genomic DNA damage, represented mainly 
by deletions and amplifications, occurs particularly at specific loci that 
are prone to DNA double-strand breakage. These loci are present in all 
human individuals and are referred to as common fragile sites (cFSs).
Rearrangements within cFSs were identified using customised CGH 
arrays with spotted sequences of 21 known cFSs. Aberrations were 
detected within multiple cFSs in all samples investigated, suggesting 
that cFSs may well be involved in colorectal tumourigenesis. Breaks 
seem to most prominently occur within fragile sites FRA3B (76.5%) 
and FRA16D  (47%), usually within the regions spanning  FHIT and 
WWOX, respectively. Additionally, aCGH data indicate several other 
active cFSs, such as FRA1A  (41.2%), FRA2C  (41.2%) and FRA2E  Cancer cytogenetics1
(35.3%). Many of the observed rearrangements seem to affect cFS 
genes , making them potential candidates for further study. Investigat -
ing cFS loci for genomic alterations in cancer cells, rather than the 
entire genome, is likely to accelerate the search for CRC candidate 
genes as biomarkers for clinical patient management including targets 
for therapies.
P07.13  Karyotype and first complete remission rate in adult 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia
M. G. Velizarova1, E. A. Hadjiev2, K. V. Alexandrova2, I. I. Dimova3, D. 
Toncheva3;  
1Chair of clinical laboratory and clinical immunology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic 
of hematology, University hospital „Alexandrovska“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Chair of 
medical genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The associations of cytogenetics with complete remission (CR) rates, 
time to achieve first CR and therapy resistance were studied in 35 
untreated adult ALL patients in a clinical trial comparing 3 patient’s 
prognostic groups: poor risk, standard risk and miscellaneous. Chro -
mosomal analyses of bone marrow were performed by G-banding 
and aberrant chromosomes were examined using fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) with locus specific and centromere probes 
(Vysis). The statistical variables tested for potential prognostic value 
were: molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities, age, WBC, immunologic 
subgroup, CR, frequency of resistant disease and early deaths in ALL 
patients. Clonal chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 18 of 35 
(51.4%) adult patients with ALL with the follow separation: poor risk 
group (t(9;22), t(11q23), t(8q24) and complex karyotype)- 31.4%, stan -
dard risk group (normal karyotype, t(1;19) and hyperdiplody)- 65.7% 
and miscellaneous risk group (del(12p), i(7q)and del(4p)) - 14.3%. CR 
was achieved in 71.4% of patients and resistant disease (RD) or early 
deaths were detected in 34.4% of cases. Although the presence of 
poor pretreatment laboratory characteristics, the group with miscella -
neous abnormalities is suggestive of having better CR rate compared 
with the poor risk and standard risk groups (83.3% vs. 68.7% and 
76.5% respectively). Patients with t(9;22), t(8q24) and complex karyo -
type had higher rate of RD ( 50-75%) then patients with other aberra -
tions or normal karyotype. Our study emphasizes that karyotype is an 
independent prognostic factor in adult ALL after intensified treatment 
regimens. In multivariate analysis, karyotype retained its prognostic 
significance for CR rate, time to achieved remission and RD.
P07.14  conventional cytogenetics in Acute and chronic 
Leukemias: A Laboratory Report
S. Komandur1,2, S. Dayakar1, A. Swaroopa1, A. Sheik3, S. Chakravarthy4, S. 
Prasad4, S. Vanajakshi3;  
1Apollo Health City, Hyderabad, India, 2Department of Cytogenetics, Vijaya 
Diagnostic Center, Hyderabad, India, 3Department of Haematology, Apollo 
Health City, Hyderabad, India, 4Department of Oncology, Apollo Health City, 
Hyderabad, India.
Cancer is, in general, more common in industrialized nations, but there 
has been a growth in cancer rates in developing countries, particularly 
as these nations adopt new diet and lifestyle habits. The burden of 
leukemias is increasing by the day and the incidence of different types 
of leukemia varies with the age in different parts of India.
We received a total of 85 Bone Marrow Aspirates over a period of 10 
months between November 2008 and September 2009. Conventional 
GTG chromosomal analysis was carried out according to the modified 
method of Morehead. 30 metaphases were analyzed and 10 karyo -
types made.
The 85 cases included 49 (57.6%) males and 36 (42.4%) females. 
Of these, normal karyotype was revealed in 49/85 (57.6%) while an 
abnormal karyotype was seen in 36/85 (42.4%) cases. Karyotype with 
t(9;22) was seen in 10/36 (27.8%), t(8;21) in 5/36 (13.9%) and t(15;17) 
in 6/36 (16.7%). Other abnormalities i.e., 13q-, inv (3), monosomy 7, 
5q+, t(5;11), der7, dup (1p), trisomy 8, t(1;3), 2x (del) 22? and aneu -
ploidy were seen in 15/36 (41.7%) cases. Our results show that con -
ventional cytogenetics could be used as first line diagnostic tool for 
different types of leukemia. Further it gives a complete picture of the 
chromosomal changes compared to FISH or Real time PCR which are 
specific. Conventional cytogenetics can also be used to differentiate 
between acquired and constitutive changes and can also detect treat -
ment induced random aberrations. It is also cost-effective in compari -
son to FISH and Real Time.P07.15  cytogenetic abnormalities del(17p) and del(11q) in 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
I. Ionita , M. Puiu, C. Ionita, R. Cioaca, D. Calamar, H. Ionita;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Background. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the presence of 
del(17p) is associated to chemotherapy resistance and poor progno -
sis. Del (11q) also confer an unfavorable outcome.  Aims.  To asses 
the incidence of del (17p)/del (11q) in CLL patients in different phases 
of their disease and their impact on treatment requirement. Methods.  
From September 2000 to december 2009, 87 CLL patients were in -
cluded in this study. There were three groups: 45 cases at diagnosis, 
24 at first progression and 18 at progression after one or more thera -
pies. Cytogenetic abnormalities and CD38 expression were analyzed. 
Results.  The incidence of del(17p) was 22%, del(11q) was 11% and 
CD38 expression in 9% of the cases. All patients CD38+ had del(17p) 
or del(11q). Cases with del(17p) or del(11q) had a treatment-free in -
terval that was on average half of that of cases without these abnor -
malities (23 vs 40 months) as well as patients with CD38 pos vs neg 
( 18 vs 42 months). Conclusions.  Del(17p) and del (11q) occur in CLL 
cases associated with CD38 expression and show a rapidly progres -
sive course of the disease.
P07.16  Using the FISH method for an identification of genetic 
alterations in cervical carcinoma and cervical intraepithelial 
neoplasia: gain of human telomerase gene (htERc)
I. Slamova1,2, L. Moukova3, D. Zezulkova1, N. Strossova1, V. Vranova1,2, P. 
Kuglik1,2;  
1Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Institute of Experimental Biology, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Departement of Medical Genetics, 
Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk 
Memorial Cancer Institute, Departement of Gynaecological Oncology, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women in the 
Czech Republic, approximately 400 women die of this disease every 
year. It is known that this carcinoma develops from precancerous cer -
vical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) which is characterized by series of 
genetic abnormalities. Gain of hTERC  (3q26) was the most consistent 
chromosomal abnormality found in cervical carcinoma. It was discov -
ered that gain of hTERC  gene is associated with progression from 
precansers (CIN1, CIN2, CIN3) to cervical carcinoma.
In our work, we studied copy number changes of the chromosomal 
region of hTERC  gene using the FISH method in cytological smears 
obtained from 30 patients of the Departement of Gynaecological On -
cology of Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute Brno. Gain of hTERC  
gene was found in 16 from 30 (53 %) patiens with the diagnosis of cer -
vical cancer or with CIN1-CIN3. It was confirmed that gain of hTERC  is 
significantly associated with cervical carcinoma.
In 2009 a new DNA probe for simultaneous identification of HPV infec -
tion and examination of copy number changes of hTERC  and MYCC  
genes using the FISH method was created by Abbott. The initial ex -
periences with detection of hTERC  and MYCC genes in HPV positive 
cells in CIN3 are presented.
The results of genetic analyses should serve as a supporting tool for 
the determination of samples containing high risk HPV infections and 
chromosomal aberrations linked to the potential progression and tu -
mor proliferation.
P07.17  Assessment of HER-2 gene amplification in breast 
cancer
A. Belengeanu , D. Stoicanescu, A. Muresan, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu, N. 
Meszaros;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
A fraction of breast cancers, as part of their development, undergo 
gene amplification. Amplification and overexpression of HER-2  onco -
gene seems to remain stable over the course of disease. Gene over -
expression is an important marker of poor prognosis and a useful de -
terminant of susceptibility to trastuzumab. The present study aimed to 
evaluate HER-2 amplification/overexpression status in breast cancer 
patients by FISH technique and immunohistochemistry. The study was 
performed on 50 selected cases with primary mammary carcinoma. 
We used immunohistochemistry for HER-2 oncoprotein and FISH as a 
follow up test for ambiguous results. From the 50 tumors, 34% present -
ed different degrees of positivity with immunohistochemistry; 66% did Cancer cytogenetics1
not express the oncoprotein c-erbB2. Cases with 2+ immunostaining 
score were interpreted as uncertain and HER-2 status was determined 
by FISH to reveal genic amplification. 3 cases showed gene amplifica -
tion. HER-2/CEP17 ratio was determined using the rate between HER-
2/neu signals and CEP17 signals in 20 nuclei. We could appreciate 
amplification in 4 cases, 2 with „low level“ amplification and 2 with „high 
level“ amplification. Polyploidy was considered in cases with at least 
3.0 signals from chromosome 17. We identified 1 case of polyploidy. 
HER-2 amplification/ overexpression are used as prognostic markers, 
but also as predictive markers for breast cancers. Thus, in positive cas -
es, tumors are faster growing, more aggressive and less responsive to 
chemotherapy and hormone therapy. Identification of HER-2 - positive 
tumors is certainly crucial in order to identify patient candidates for 
anti- HER-2 therapies.
P07.18  Chromosome aberations in hypertrophic gastritis
O. A. Matveyenko1, L. N. Urazova1, I. N. Lebedev2, A. D. Cheremnykh2;  
1Research institute of oncology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 
Medical Genetics, SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russia, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Gastric cancer takes a special place among human tumor pathology. In 
most cases this type of neoplasia arises on the background of continu -
ously existing changes of mucosa. Precancerous lesions are usually 
presented by morphological damages of epithelium and replacement 
of normal mucosa by dysplastic tissue. However, oncogenic potential 
of these changes as well as underlined genetic mechanisms remain 
unclear. One of the possible reasons of tumour transformation is ac -
cumulation of multiple chromosome aberrations. But their prevalence 
among different types of preneoplastic lesions is not fully investigated. 
The aim of present research was molecular cytogenetic analysis of hy -
pertrophic gastritis tissues. DNA from 15 samples was investigated by 
CGH. The most common chromosome aberrations were gains of chro -
mosome regions 1q32-q42 (93.3%), 10q24 (73.3%), 15q22 (66.3%) 
and losses at 9p13 (66.3%), 9q21 (60%) and 1q21 (60%). Our data 
indicate that these aberrations can be early events in gastric cancero -
genesis. It is possible, that cells with observed abnormalities can have 
selective advantages and form foci of gastric neoplasia. This study 
was supported by Federal Agency of Education (P-1706).
P07.19  making of JAK2 RG kit with Real t ime PcR method for 
the First t ime in iran
M. A. Saremi1,2, S. Negari2, M. Moshirazin2, M. Saremi3;  
1Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Kawsar Tech Exploration Company, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Health 
Reference Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
JAK2 (Janus Kinase 2) is a Tyrosin Kinase located in cytoplasm with 
essential role in signaling pathways for cytokines and growth factors. 
The acquired mutation G1849T leads to substitution of valine with 
phenylalanine (V617F). This substitution results in constitutively ac -
tive JAK2 which leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation in the absence 
of growth factors. This mutation is found in the majority of BCR-ABL-
negative myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs) and has become a main 
diagnostic test for polycethemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia 
(ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
JAK2 RG kit is intended for use with Rotor Gene 6000 and for the 
detection of JAK2 (V617F) mutation in genomic DNA extracted from 
human cells. This kit is intended for research use only. The analytical 
detection limit of the kit was assessed with serial dilution series of the 
cloned target in wild type genomic DNA and showed a limit of detection 
equal to 0.01% (1:10,000). This sensitivity is achieved only if 5 to 10 
million WBC have been extracted and eluted in 200ul which is equal to 
roughly 100,000 genomes per reaction.
P07.20  Evaluation by standard cytogenetic and FisH of non 
treated patients with LLc-B
P. Botelho , M. Souto, S. Rebelo, M. Inácio, M. Guerra, M. Cunha, O. Moutinho, 
R. Pinto Leite;  
Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal.
The chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common form of 
leukemia in Western countries. The leukemia of B lymphocytes con -
stitutes about 95% of all cases of CLL. The cytogenetic analysis in the 
study of B-CLL is important, allowing detecting chromosomal changes 
associated with this type of leukemia, namely, the trisomy of chromo -
some 12, deletions in loci located on chromosomes 13q14, 11q22-q23, 17p13 and 6q21, with prognostic implications and sometimes thera -
peutics.
The authors present a study consisting in the analysis by cytogenetic 
and fluorescent  in situ Hybridization (FISH) of 25 blood samples of 
patients with B-CLL, before any treatment.
For each sample were made two kinds of culture, with different mi -
togens (pokeweed and TPA). All the technical procedure to obtain 
metaphases was performed according to protocols optimized in the 
laboratory.
GTL bands were applied and FISH technique with the probes for the 
unique sequence of chromosomes 13 and 17, and α-satellite probe for 
chromosome 12 were performed.
The authors present the analytical and clinical data of 25 patients and 
results of cytogenetic and FISH. A bibliographic revue is presented.
Supported by the Commission for Promotion of Research in Health 
Care: Research Project in Applied Health Care - Nº 6/2007
P07.21**  the role of microRNAs in chromosome instability 
driven by telomere shortening in human prostate cancer cells.
Z. Demir , S. Sevli, O. F. Bayrak, A. Celebi, M. Ozen;  
Yeditepe University Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
Chromosomal instability appearing early in tumor progression is a 
hallmark of almost all cancers. The majority of tumors exhibit abnor -
mal karyotypes consisting chromosomal breaks, fusions and trans -
locations. Recent studies demonstrated that microRNAs are located 
in chromosomally instable regions. Previously, we have compared 
karyotypes of commonly used prostate cancer cell lines including 
DU145, PC3, LNCaP and an immortalized prostate cell line PNT1a 
as the presence of common regions of genomic instability. Thirty three 
microRNAs including miR-579, miR-580, miR-1274a, miR-581, miR-
449a, miR-449b, miR-1974, miR-583, miR-1244, miR-584, miR-143, 
miR-145, miR-378 were located on chromosome 5 carrying one of 
the most consistent regions of instability. Prostate cancer cell lines 
and PNT1a cells have been transfected by one of these microRNAs, 
miRI45. PNT1a cells have also been transfected by anti-miR-145. 
Chromosomal preparations were analyzed for any break, aberrations 
or telomeric associations. Cells transfected by miR-145 showed in -
creased number of telomeric associations and clumping. These prepa -
rations had less number of cells in mitosis as well. Our data suggest 
that microRNAs might play a role, in chromosomal instability driven by 
telomere shortening.
This study is supported by a grant (18S051) from The Scientific and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey.
P07.22  Oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic 
hybridization analyses of gain 1q21 in multiple myeloma
R. Zaoralova1,2, P. Nemec1,2, H. Greslikova1,2, J. Smetana1,2, L. Kovarova3,4, R. 
Hajek4,3, P. Kuglik1,2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Babak Research Institute, Faculty of 
Medicine, MU, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Experimental Biology, 
Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department 
of Internal Medicine and Hematooncology, The Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, 
Czech Republic, 4University Research Centre – Czech Myeloma Group, Babak 
Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological 
malignancy. It is characterized by malignant transformation and clonal 
proliferation of B-lymphocytes and their accumulation in bone mar -
row. MM is incurable, although usage of the new drugs significantly 
increased survival of patients in last years. MM is characterized by 
presence of specific genetic changes present in plasma cells. One of 
our fields of interest is to analyze gain on long arm of chromosome 
1, which is currently one of the most studied chromosomal changes 
in MM.
Using oligonucleotide array-CGH we analyzed 41 MM samples with 
gain of 1q21 (CKS1B gene) detected previously by FISH. As input ma -
terial for array-CGH we used DNA from CD138+ cells separated from 
bone marrow using magnetic or fluorescence activated cell separa -
tion.
Taking together 76% (13 of 41) cases had gained not only 1q21 locus 
but whole 1q arm. Moreover, another 17% (7 of 41) had at least 100 MB 
gain anywhere at the 1q arm. It is obvious, that not only CKS1B gene, Cancer cytogenetics200
but other genes are affected as well, for example IL-6R or BCL6. Many 
of them are possibly negative prognostic factors in MM. According to 
the FISH data (in about 95% cases we detect max. two extra copies 
of CKS1B), we did not find any high-level amplification of 1q21. In all 
cases, 1q aberrations were associated with additional copy number 
alterations, including monosomy of chromosome 13 or hyperdiploidy.
Supported by grants and projects MSM 0021622434 and 0021622415, 
IGA NS10207-3/2009 and 10406-3, and LC 06027.
P07.23  t(1;8)(q32;q24): a novel cytogenetic abnormality in 
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
E. Tassano, E. Tavella, C. Micalizzi, C. Panarello, C. Morerio ;  
IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
MYC , one of the first identified oncogenes, codes for a transcription 
factor commonly deregulated in tumorigenesis. Chromosomal trans -
locations joining the immunoglobulin (IG) and MYC  genes have been 
extensively reported in Burkitt and non-Burkitt lymphomas, but data 
concerning MYC  rearrangements with non-IG partners are few. We 
describe a new translocation involving MYC  in pediatric ALL. An 11-
month-old girl came under our observation with abdominal mass and 
skin nodules. Bone marrow (BM) aspirate showed 91% lymphoblast 
FAB L1 morphology. The immunophenotype was positive for CD19, 
CD20, CyIgμ, DR, and negative for CD10 and TdT. Histology of skin 
nodules revealed a neoplastic infiltrate of Burkitt-like lymphoma, posi -
tive for CD19, CD20, DR, λ light chains and negative for CD10, TdT. 
LD-PCR for t(8;14)(q24;q32) was negative. AIEOP LNH 97 protocol 
was started and complete remission (CR) was obtained. Six months 
after the end of chemotherapy the girl experienced BM and skin re -
lapse. The cell population was more immature with pre-B appearance 
and low proliferation index. REC 98 HR protocol induced second CR. 
The girl is now alive and well 8 years after relapse. BM blast karyotype 
at relapse was 46,XX, t(1;8)(q32;q24). FISH analysis with MYC probe 
confirmed the rearrangement. Abnormalities of chromosome 1q are 
common in all forms of B-cell malignancy, mostly as partial duplication 
of the region: FISH analysis has shown that some of these duplica -
tions can be complex. Molecular studies to identify a new non-IG MYC  
partner that could explain the peculiar clinical history of our case are 
ongoing.
P07.24  New chromosomal translocations in patients with 
primary myelodisplastic syndrome
M. Dencic-Fekete1, V. Djordjevic2, J. Jovanovic2, A. Bogdanovic2, D. Antic2, V. 
Milosevic2, B. Mihaljevic2;  
1Institute of hematology, Belgrade, 2Institute of hematology, Belgrade, Serbia.
Cytogenetic analysis is one of the essential methods for determining 
chromosomal aberrations in myelodisplastic syndrome (MDS). Since 
more than 70% of patients with MDS have clonal cytogenetic abnor -
malities, cytogenetic studies play a pivotal role in defining the concept 
of primary MDS, establishing the diagnosis, evaluating prognosis for 
survival and transformation to AML and approaching the molecular ba -
sis of the disease.
Among structural abnormalities, deletions are the most common 
changes in primary MDS, while many of the patients exhibit aneu -
ploidy, too. Translocations are rarely seen in MDS and involve certain 
key genes whose disruptions change the control and the balance of 
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursors.
We report a group of 6 patients with primary MDS, in whose karyo -
types, novel chromosomal translocations were identified by conven -
tional cytogenetic analysis.
Unstimulated bone marrow samples were used for cytogenetic analy -
sis according to the standard method. Chromosomes were HG-band -
ed (HG-modified banded technique) after direct and 24-hour culture 
preparation.
The karyotypes were:
1. 46,XY,der(X)t(X;1)(q28;q12)[11]/46,XY[9]
2. 46,XY,der(14)t(1;14)(p11;p11)[12]/46,XY[8]
3. 46,XX,del(20)(q11)[7]/47,XX,t(4;18)(p16;q11),del(20)(q11),+mar[13]
4. 46,XX,-3,t(5;9)(q13;q34),+13[20]
5. 46,XY,del(20)(q11)[5]/46,XY,t(7;20)(q21;q11)[2]/46,XY[13]
6. 46,XX,t(13;22)(q14;q13)[4]/
47,XX,del(5)(q13q31),t(13;22)(q14;q13),+21[9]
Determination of the genes involved in the translocation’s breakpoints, 
so as their impact on the clinical picture and prognosis, remain to be clarified. Cytogenetic results were correlated with other clinical and 
laboratory parameters and will be presented in the future.
P07.25  A case of angioimmunoblastic t -cell non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma with a neocentric chromosome inv dup(1)(qter--
>q21::q21-->q31-->neo-->q31-->qter)
E. Blom1, F. H. Heyning2, F. Havik1, E. L. den Ouden-Wienhöfer1, W. G. M. 
Kroes1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Medical Center 
Haaglanden, The Hague, Netherlands.
Neocentromeres are rare epigenetic phenomena in which functional 
centromeres are formed onto novel chromosomal locations without 
any alpha-satellite DNA. To date, constitutional human neocentro -
meres have been reported in at least 90 cases. In cancer, however, 
the knowledge is much more limited. Acquired neocentromeres have 
been described in a particular class of lipomatous tumors (atypical li -
pomas and well-differentiated liposarcomas, ALP-WDLPS), 3 cases 
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 1 case of non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
(NHL) and 1 case of lung carcinoma. Here, we report a 66-year-old 
male with angioimmunoblastic T-cell NHL. Cytogenetic analysis of his 
bone marrow showed multiple aberrations including the presence of a 
supernumerary chromosome. Using the FISH-technique, the supernu -
merary chromosome showed to represent an inverted duplication of 
the segments between 1q21 and 1qter. A neocentromere is formed in 
band 1q31. To our knowledge, this is the second reported case of NHL 
(both T-cell) with the presence of a neocentromere. The occurrence 
of neocentromeres in tumor cells, however, may be underestimated 
due to technical limitations during the routine diagnostic chromosomal 
analysis. The prognostic impact is therefore currently unknown.
P07.26  investigation of aneusomy of chromosome 17 and its 
influence on prognosis (some clinical and immunohistochemical 
parameters) amongst some iranian women with sporadic breast 
cancer
F. Behjati1, M. Ataee Kachoui2,1, E. Keyhani1, H. Karbasian3, M. Kadivar4, M. 
Karimlou5, F. Larti1, F. A. Moghadam1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
School of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 3Department of Surgery, Atie Hospitel, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 4Departmnt of Pathology, Atie hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
5Department of Statistics, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is amongst the leading causes of death in women 
worldwide and the most common cancer amongst Iranian women. Un -
fortunately, the current clinical and histological criteria can only help 
60%of women with breast cancer in diagnosis and long term treat -
ment. Therefore, genetic markers both at single gene level and chro -
mosomes can play an important role in improving the diagnosis and 
prognosis of breast cancer patients. The aim of this retrospective study 
was to investigate the role of chromosome 17 copy number assessed 
by Interphase Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) using paraffin 
embedded breast tumor blocks. The study was carried out on 50 Ira -
nian women, with sporadic primary invasive ductal breast carcinoma. 
The age range was 31-84 years with an average age of 48.58. The 
prognostic value of aneusomy 17 in relation to the established clini -
copathological parameters, the immunohistochemical markers of ER, 
PR, P53, age and the duration and status of survival in the patients 
were investigated. The maximum rate of aneusomy 17 was 83% and 
the minimum rate was 39% with a mean rate of 57%. The only positive 
significant correlation was between monosomy 17 and negative status 
of ER in the patients (p<0.05). The relationship between the status of 
aneusomy 17 and all the studied clinicopathological parameters will 
be discussed.
P07.27  chromosomal aberrations in blood cancers
I. Aganovic-Musinovic , M. Mackic-Djurovic, S. Ibrulj;  
Center fopr Genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Cytogenetic studies are important diagnostic and prognostic tool for 
evaluation of therapeutic procedures among 275 hematological pa -
tients, during the period of 2005-2008. in Center for Genetics of Medical 
faculty - University of Sarajevo. Most of malignant hematological dis -
eases are detectable by chromosomal analyses. Many chromosomal Cancer cytogenetics201
abnormalities are associated with particular subtypes of leukemia and 
have prognostic significance. Chromosomal preparations were made 
by standard techniques and GTG bend. We have detected numerous 
abnormalities among analyzed materials as: t(1:18), t (8:13), t (1:19), 
t(3:14), t (3:21), t(9:22), inv(16), del (5), inv (3), inv (11) (p11:q23), izo 
(17), der (11), der (9), tris (8), del (6q), del (13q), that have relevant 
significance for patients.Cytogenetic studies are important to hema -
tologists to predict good or poor response to treatment in patients with 
different types of leukemia. The table below shows the number and 
percentage of abnormal karyotypes among our patients.
types of leukemiaNumber and % of 
normal karyotypeNumber and % of 
abnormal karyotype
ALL 34 (12,36)% 12 (4,36%)
AML 36 (13,09%) 5 (1,81%)
CML 86 (31,27%) 19 (6,90%)
MDS 32 (11,63%) 0
MPS 17 (6,18%) 3 (1,09%)
Lymphomas 26 (9,45%) 5 (1,81%)
TOTAL 231 (84%) 44 (16%)
P08 Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, 
linkage and association methods
P08.01  MMP2 (-10 C/T)  gene polymorphism and susceptibility 
to abdominal aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac occlusive disease
J. Mikolajczyk-Stecyna1, A. Korcz1, K. Pawlaczyk2, G. Oszkinis2, R. Slomski1, 
M. Gabriel2;  
1Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 
2Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening condition af -
fecting 4-9% of population with a risk increasing with age. Aortoiliac 
occlusive disease (AIOD) is characterized by aortoiliac obstruction 
and is caused by advanced atherosclerosis. Both AAA and AIOD are 
considered to have multifactorial etiology and are the most frequent 
reasons for vascular surgery procedures within abdominal cavity. De -
structive remodeling of extracellular matrix related to activity of various 
matrix metalloproteinases associates both of these pathologies. Matrix 
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) plays a major role in the remodeling of 
extracellular matrix in arterial vessels and increased MMP2 expres -
sion in AAA walls was shown in several studies. Different MMP2  gene 
polymorphisms were tested in genetic association studies of vascular 
diseases. The purpose of the present study was to determine if there is 
association between the functional polymorphism in a promoter region 
of MMP2  gene (-1306 C/T ) and susceptibility to AAA or AIOD in Polish 
patients.
Based on PCR-RFLP analysis MMP2  genotypes ( C/C; C/T; T/T) were 
determined in three selected groups: 253 patients with AAA and 282 
patients with AIOD who underwent surgery; 367 individuals from con -
trol group. Genotypes were compared with demographic and clinical 
data of subjects and analyzed in relation to risk factors. The genotype 
distribution and allele frequency of MMP2 (-1306 C/T)  gene polymor -
phism were significantly different between patients with AAA and con -
trol group. No significant differences were found between patients with 
AIOD and control group. conclusion : MMP2 (-1306 C/T)  gene poly -
morphism may be an important factor in development of AAA.
P08.02  Absence of association between genotypes at position 
-262 0f ACE  and Alzheimer’s disease
P. Yenki1, E. Jaberi1, M. Kazemi2, E. Elahi1;  
1Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University College of Science, 
University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Students‘ Scientific 
Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
ACE is a candidate gene for susceptibility to the sporadic form of Al -
zheimer’s disease (AD). ACE consists of 25 exons at locus 17q23, 
and encodes angiotensin converting enzyme. The major role of ACE 
relates to maintenance of circulatory homeostasis. However, it has 
been demonstrated that ACE can degrade amyloid beta peptide in vi -
tro. This peptide is the constituent of amyloid plaques, the hallmark of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Several variations in the ACE gene have been 
reported to be associated with incidence and age at onset of AD. Con -flicting results in this regard have been published with respect to vari -
ant SNP rs4291 at position -262 upstream of ACE in its promoter re -
gion. In the present research, we aimed to investigate the link between 
rs4291 and late onset Alzheimer’s disease through a case-control 
study among Iranians. One hundred patients affected with AD with age 
at onset of more than 65 were selected as cases. The controls were 
100 age-matched non-demented individuals. All cases and controls 
were screened for A/T variations at position -262 by an allele specific 
PCR protocol. No association between genotypes at this position and 
Alzheimer’s disease status was found.
P08.03  The angiotensin converting enzyme I/D polymorphism 
and physical performance.
H. Jaklič1, M. Selingerová2;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics,Dep.of Obsterrics and Gynaecology,University 
Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Sport 
Sciences,Faculty of Physical Education and Sports of the Comenius University 
Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Bacground: There is an assumption that ACE I/D polymorphism rep -
resents one of the possible genetic factors that might be associated 
with athletic excellence. Recent studies identified that an increased 
frequency of I allele amongst elite endurance athletes, long distance 
runners, rowers and mountaineers.
Material and methods: We examined this hypothesis by determining 
ACE I/D allele frequency by PCR analysis amongst 126 children after 
motoric tests using lokomometer. ACE genotype and allele frequen -
cies were compared with 252 healthy controls.
Research came into following results: ACE genotype frequency in the 
whole cohort did not differ from that in sedentary controls (p<0,56). 
We have found positive genotype-dependant association between I/D 
polymorphism and results of motoric tests in 126 children. There was 
an excess of the I/I genotype and I allele incidence in group (n=31) of 
endurance types (regarding the speed and frequency: p≤0,05, p≤0,01, 
respectively).
Conclusion: The frequency of the ACE I/I genotype and I allele was 
significantly increased among endurance types of children, thus we 
could conclude that the ACE I/D polymorphism may represent a ge -
netic factor that contributes to the development of elite athletes. The 
I allele does seem to be associated with enhanced endurance perfor -
mance, probably via a local muscular effect. Further research might 
clarify the exact relationship between ACE I/D polymorphism and ACE 
expression in skeletal muscle and the interaction of this with training, 
capillary density and substrate utilization. The understanding of the 
mechanisms of cellular efficiency might have important applications 
beyond the world of extreme endurance sports.
P08.04  Association of ACTN  genetic variants with physical 
performance of Lithuanian athletes
A. Pranculis , V. Gineviciene, V. Kucinskas;  
Departament of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Homozygosy for the nonsense mutation 577X (c.1729C>T) within 
ACTN3  results in deficiency of α-actinin-3 but does not result in an 
abnormal muscular phenotype. Previous research has found an as -
sociation of the 577R allele with speed/power performance while the 
577X allele may confer an advantage during endurance events.
The aim of the study was to investigate genotype and allele distribu -
tion of ACTN3  gene R577X polymorphism in elite Lithuanian athlete 
groups (compiled according to the athlete qualification and their sport 
orientation (N-149)) and controls (unrelated, untrained individuals (N-
250)). Genotyping was performed by RFLP. The aerobic capacity of 
athletes was measured by using VO2max. The ACTN3  RX genotype 
frequencies in the athletes were: RX- 56.4%, RR-30.9%, XX-12.8% 
(χ2=4.1, p=0.043), in the controls: RX-50.4%, RR-39.2%, XX-10.4% 
(χ2=2.46, p=0.117). Genotype frequencies differed significantly be -
tween the elite and non-elite athletes (p=0.04). XX genotype was more 
frequent in non-elite (19.9%) than in elite (7%) athletes and in speed/
power group (16.7%) compared to endurance (10.4%), mix (14.4%) 
and control groups (10.4%). Irrespective of the athletes genotype VO -
2max value was highest in the speed/power group. RR and RX geno -
typed athletes had higher VO2max values than XX genotyped athletes. 
The results indicate that in Lithuanian athletes XX and RX genotypes 
could be associated with higher speed/power while RR genotype could Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods202
be associated with endurance. It can be therefore concluded that the 
absence of a functional ACTN3  gene in fast-twitch muscle fibers is 
most likely compensated by ACTN2 and other enzymes that take part 
in anaerobic muscle metabolism.
P08.05  Investigation of complement factor H Y402H 
polymorphism in t urkish patients with age-related macular 
degeneration
M. Yılmaz1, D. Yücel2, R. K. Özgül3;  
1Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Hacettepe University,Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, 
Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive degenera -
tive disorder known to be the major cause of visual loss in the elderly, 
especially in well developed countries. AMD has a multi-factorial eti -
ology and is determined by both genetic and environmental factors. 
Family-based and population based studies showed the association 
between some gene variants and AMD. CFH Y402H variant seems to 
be one of the most significant genetic risk factor in AMD cases as pre -
viously reported by several studies. There is still some conflict among 
the results of different studies focused on the relation between CFH 
variant Y402H and AMD in various ethnic groups.
This study inquires association between CFH Y402H polymorphism 
and AMD development in a cohort of Turkish AMD patients. A total of 
95 AMD patients and 87 age-matched control individuals were geno -
typed for this allelic variation. Y402H polymorphism was detected with 
PCR-RFLP method.
Genotype frequencies were highly different between case and control 
groups compared to the heterozygotes carrying the risk allele C (AMD 
patients 71,6%, controls 54,03%). This findings suggest that hetero -
zygote individuals with CT genotype (O.R=2,13, CI% 1,11-4,15) have 
increased risk for AMD compared to homozygotes with TT genotype 
in Turkish population.
P08.06  Association of apolipoprotein E allele-ε4 with late-onset Alzheimer‘s disease in mexican mestizo population
C. Venegas1,2, F. Fernández3, L. Gutiérrez4, E. Alonso5, S. Kofman6,2;  
1Hospital General de Mexico, Servicio de Genética,, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 
2Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. 
DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 4Servicio de 
Geriatría, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición y Ciencias Médicas., Mexico. D.F, 
Mexico, 5Instituto Nacional de Neurología, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 6Hospital 
General de Mexico, Servicio de Genética, Mexico. D.F, Mexico.
Alzheimer Disease (AD) is clinically characterized by global, progres -
sive and irreversible loss of mental faculties. Neuropathalogically for 
neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques; composed mainly by Amy -
loid β-peptide (Aβ). The apolipoprotein E allele-ε4 is the major known 
genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD), with a 
gene-dosage effect increasing the incidence and lowering the age of 
onset according to heterozygote or homozygote ε4 status. The Apoε4 
allele enhances the polymerization and aggregation of Aβ and might 
affect its clearance, increasing Aβ deposition. APOE  allelic frequen -
cies vary between different populations, for example, in a Caucasian 
(ε2: 8%, ε3: 78%, ε4: 14%), Asian (ε2: 5%, ε3: 86%, ε4: 9%), African-
American (ε2: 5%, ε3: 76%, ε4: 19%) and Hispanic (ε2: 3%, ε3: 85%, 
ε4: 12%). 
Materials and Methods: We analyzed the frequency of alleles and 
genotypes for APOE  (ε2/ε3/ε4) and performed a case-control study to 
evaluate the association between APOE  4 allele with LOAD in Mexi -
can Mestizo population. We studied 77 patients with LOAD and 77 sex 
and age-matched control subjects. Genotyping of APOE  alleles was 
performed by TaqMan technology. The association risk was estimated 
using chi-square test and calculation of odd ratios with 95% CI was 
adjusted by age and sex. 
Results: We found different genotype frequencies between cases and 
controls and observed association for APOE  ε4 allele with OR=2.28 
(2.17-4.03) 
Conclusions: These data suggest a genetic association between ε4 
allele with LOAD in Mexican Mestizo population. Our results differ 
from studies reported in the literature. Acknowledgements: CONACyT 
(2004-C01-129)P08.07**  Identification of a novel candidate disease locus for 
anophthalmia/microphthalmia by homozygosity mapping in an irish traveller family
J. P. Casey1, J. Conroy1, R. Regan1, N. Shah1, S. Lynch2, A. Green1,2, S. 
Ennis1,2;  
1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre for Medical 
Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
Rare genetic variants associated with disease are, by their nature, dif -
ficult to identify by traditional genetic analysis methods. Homozygosity 
mapping in consanguineous families has been used successfully in 
the identification of genetic cause in a range of rare conditions. An -
ophthalmia (absence of an eye) and the related condition microph -
thalmia (small eye) are relatively rare conditions estimated at 3 and 
14 in 100,000 births respectively. The aetiology of anophthalmia/mi -
crophthalmia (AM) is not well understood but observed familial clus -
tering suggests a significant genetic component. Several genes have 
been implicated in AM but, to date, mutations in these genes account 
for less than 25% of cases. We present homozygosity mapping in a 
four generation consanguineous Irish family from an endogamous no -
madic group presenting with various forms of AM. Previous analysis 
excluded any causative mutation in known AM genes. Genotyping 
was undertaken using the high density Illumina 1million SNP platform. 
Homozygosity mapping identified a 0.9Mb homozygous segment on 
chromosome 15 shared by all 6 affected individuals but not shared by 
unaffected relatives. The candidate region contains twelve genes, two 
of which are strong functional candidates that are implicated in eye de -
velopment. The candidate region was isolated by NimbleGen’s novel 
sequence capture service and sequence analysis of the region is cur -
rently underway. Results of studies into this novel AM candidate region 
will be presented at the ESHG conference. Identification of a novel AM 
gene would provide valuable insight into the molecular aetiology un -
derlying the disease phenotype and may enhance our understanding 
of the disease network.
P08.08  APO E/C1/C4/C2 gene cluster polymorphisms and risk factor for ischaemic Heart Disease in spanish population.
R. Carreras-Torres , M. Gayà-Vidal, G. Athanasiadis, E. Esteban, P. Moral;  
Faculty of Biology - University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
Atherothrombotic diseases are multifactorial diseases caused by ge -
netic and environmental factors. Among the genes that code for apo -
lipoproteins, APO E is located close to APO C1, APO C4 and APO 
C2 forming the APO E/C1/C4/C2 gene cluster. The APO E plays a 
major role in lipoprotein metabolism and lipid transport. The three iso -
forms (apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4) account for a significant proportion 
of lipid and apolipoprotein variability and have been associated with 
atherothrombotic disease. As far as the APO C1, APO C4, and APO 
C2 genes are concerned, they seem to contribute modestly to plasma 
triglyceride levels. In this work we test 10 SNPs that represent the mo -
lecular variability of the APO E/C1/C4/C2 cluster for association with 
Ischaemic Heart Disease in 101 family trios from Spain with one af -
fected son (N=302 individuals). The results indicate significant disequi -
librium in the transmission of the combined C and T alleles (freq=0.36) 
of SNPs rs405509 (APO E) and rs5167 (APO C4), suggesting that 
interaction among the elements of the APO E/C1/C4/C2 cluster might 
also contribute to the development of the disease.
P08.09  Linkage and association analysis for genetic modifiers 
in a large family with cardiac sodium channel disease.
I. C. R. M. Kolder1, P. G. Postema2, M. P. Van den Berg3, M. M. A. Mannens4, J. 
P. Van Tintelen5, F. van den Heuvel6, S. Kääb7, A. A. M. Wilde2, C. R. Bezzina8, 
M. W. T. Tanck1;  
1Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical 
Center, University of Ams, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of 
Cardiology,Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department 
of Cardiology, Thorax Center, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department 
of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 8Failure Research 
Center, Department of Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
To identify loci modulating electrocardiographic (ECG) parameters, 
we carried out linkage and association analyses at loci harboring 18 
candidate genes involved in cardiac electrical activity in two large 
genealogically-linked kindreds with the sodium channel mutation 
SCN5A-1795insD (3p21-p25). The mutation leads to the prolongation 
of several ECG parameters, including P-wave and QRS duration, PQ 
and QTc interval, ST-elevation as well as slower heart rate. ECGs and 
DNA were available for 217 individuals (101 carriers). Individuals were 
genotyped for 1433 tagging SNPs. Linkage and association analyses 
were performed using SOLAR and PBAT and Kinship, respectively.
As expected, linkage peaks were found for all ECG parameters stud -
ied on 3p21-p25 in the region of the mutation (LOD 4.6-19.5). PBAT 
best association was p=0.04 for P wave on 3p21-p25. Kinship found all 
phenotypes to be highly associated with SNPs on 3p21-p25, with the 
highest association found for rs11708587 with QTc (p=1.2e-23).
Based on the present study, all of the analyses programs tested picked 
up the major known effect of the mutation although PBAT was outper -
formed by Kinship, picking up this major effect in all ECG parameters 
instead of just P-wave. After correcting for our main effect, different loci 
were found both by linkage and association. Both Kinship and SOLAR 
perform well in the present large kinship, but due to time consuming 
IBD calculations, association using Kinship can be regarded as a fast -
er alternative. The lesser performance by PBAT is most likely related 
to the large size of our kindred.
P08.10  rs4307059 and rs4141463 study in an Italian cohort with 
Autism spectrum disorder.
P. Prandini1, E. Trabetti1, A. Pasquali1, P. Muglia2, L. Da Ros2, M. G. 
Romanelli1, G. Malerba1, B. Dalla Bernardina3, L. Zoccante3, F. Boscaini3, G. 
Masi3, F. Nardocci3, R. Scifo3, A. Zuddas3, A. Pascotto3, A. Tiberti3, M. Molteni3, 
P. Curatolo3, L. Margari3, M. Elia3, P. A. Battistella3, A. Parmeggiani3, P. F. 
Pignatti1;  
1University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Fondazione Smith Kline, Roma, Italy, 3The 
Italian Collaborative Study of Autism, Italy.
The genetic component of Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is com -
plex including known chomosomal anomalies, rare genetic variants 
and copy number variants. More recently, a set of common polymor -
phisms on 5p14.1 have been associated with ASD in two independent 
studies (Wang et al, Nature 2009 and Ma et al, Annals Human Genet -
ics 2009) and another SNP on the gene MACROD2 showed asso -
ciation at the genome-wide level (IMFAR, International Meeting For 
Autism Research 2009).
Thanks to Fondazione SmithKline (FSK), a large multicentric study 
has been funded with the aim of collecting biological material (DNA, 
RNA, plasma and lymphoblastoid cell lines) from extremely well-char -
acterized patients, parents and relatives and studying ASD pathology. 
Till now we have collected 533 individuals for 162 familial units, and it 
is planned to recruit a total of 350 families within year 2010.
At the moment we have genotyped 486 individuals (144 families) for 
the two SNPs (rs 4307059, located at 5p14.1 and rs4141463 located 
in the MACROD2 gene) with allelic discrimination TaqMan Assays. We 
performed TDT test (UNPHASED software) and we did not find any 
significant association for any of the two SNPs.
Increasing the number of individuals will allow us to test more complex 
models of transmission (such as parent-of-origin effect, preferential 
transmission to males or females, gene-gene interactions) and inves -
tigate the correlation of affection status with the numerous available 
quantitative phenotypes.
P08.11  Study of Autosomal Dominant non syndromic loci in 
iranian population with Hearing loss
Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1,2, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, K. 
Jalalvand1, K. Kahrizi1, R. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, 
Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular 
Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head 
and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Hearing loss is common at all ages and can be due to environmental 
factors, genetic defects, or a combination of the two. The genetic basis 
of hearing loss is highly complex. About 70% of all cases of the inherited 
forms of hearing loss estimated to be non-syndromic, which are most often sensorineural. Non-syndromal sensorineural deafness is a highly 
heterogeneous condition, which can be divided into DFNA (autosomal 
dominant deafness,~15-20%), DFNB (autosomal recessive deafness, 
~80%), DFN (X-linked deafness, ~1%), and mitochondrial deafness 
(at least 1%). In this study, we selected 20 Iranian families with auto -
somal dominant pattern of inheritance. All of the patients belonged to 
large families who had more than 5 affected members in three genera -
tion. Using linkage analysis method with flanking and intragenic STR 
markers, we studied the following loci: DFNA2, DFNA6, DFNA20/26, 
DFNA9, DFNA8/12, and DFNA3. These genes have a high prevalence 
especially in neighboring countries of Iran. In fact, they are the most 
prevalent among DFNA loci. In our previous studies, we could find 
large deaf families which were linked to DFNA3, DFNA36 and DFNA5 
with novel mutations. Continuing this project, So far three of our fami -
lies have been linked to DFNA2 and DFNA6. Mutation in these genes 
(KCNQ4, GJB3 and WFS1 ) has been shown in many populations. The 
mutation screening for these two families is underway.
P08.12  Investigation on the prevalence of 8 autosomal recessive non syndromic loci in iranian population with hearing loss
M. Babanejad1,2, Z. Fattahi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, K. 
Jalalvand1, S. Saadatmand2, K. Kahrizi1, R. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, 
Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular 
Otolaryngology Research Laboratories,Department of Otolaryngology Head 
and Neck Surgery,University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Hearing loss is the most frequent neurosensory disorder which is high -
ly heterogeneous, and can also occur due to environmental causes. 
Around 50% of the HL cases in developed countries have genetic 
origin. However not much investigation has been done in developing 
countries to show the prevelance of different genes.
Mutations in GJB2  gene are the major cause of recessive non-syn -
dromic hearing loss in the Iranian population. Recent studies indicated 
that the mutation in SLC26A4 gene located in DFNB4, as the most 
prevelant syndromic form of hearing loss, and mutation in TECTA 
gene, as the second most-prevalent genes involved in non-syndromic 
in Iran.
In our previous study we demonstrated several mutations for the genes 
located in the following loci DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB7/11, DFNB9, 
DFNB16, DFNB24, DFNB53 and DFNB59 and we could not find any 
linkage to other previously reported genes. In this study we would like 
to determine the prevalence of these eight loci in our population. Total 
of 91 Iranian families were selected with the following criteria: 1) His -
tory of two or more affected individuals in the family, 2) Families with 
NSARHL, who were negative for the DFNB1, DFNB4 and DFNB21 
loci. Homozygosity mapping with flanking and intragenic STR markers 
used to investigate these 8 loci. So far total of 75 families have been in -
vestigated of which 5 have been linked to DFNB3, 3 to DFB24 and one 
other to DFNB7, 11. The linkage study for remaining families and mu -
tation screening for MYO15A,  RDX and TMC1  genes are underway.
P08.13  Molecular genetic study of genes biotransformation of 
xenobiotics
G. Galikeeva , E. Vasilyeva, E. Vorobyeva, V. Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical Univercity, Ufa, Russian Federation.
In this work we examined the polymorphic variants of genes of en -
zymes of phase II biotransformation of xenobiotics belonging to the 
family of glutathione S-transferases: GSTM1, GSTP1 gene and the 
putative tumor suppressor gene p53.
The material was analyzed in DNA samples from 594 people. All the 
studied sample was divided into 2 groups: residents of areas with 
adverse environmental conditions (189 people) and the comparison 
group - 405 people.
Analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes and alleles of poly -
morphic loci Ile105Val (A313G) and GSTP1 gene polymorphic variants 
of p53 gene (Arg72Pro, dup 16 bp) did not reveal significant differ -
ences between the groups (p> 0.05).
Analysis of the frequency distribution of genotypes of GSTM1 gene 
deletion polymorphism showed a tendency to increase the genotype 
„+“ (p = 0.0598, OR = 0.670) and significant increase in the combina -
tion of genotypes + / / Ile / Val (p = 0.004; OR = 2.205) in the group with 
low ecological load.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
At typing in polymorphic variants of p53 gene (MspI-polymorphism) 
has been shown that the frequency of genotype ww (p = 0.017, OR = 
0.634) and allele w (p = 0.037, OR = 0.707) higher in the comparison 
group, and genotype wm (p = 0.015, OR = 1.601) and allele m (p = 
0.037, OR = 1.416) in the group of persons living in conditions of high 
environmental load. This may indicate that individuals living in areas 
with high environmental stress, more prone to the emergence of dis -
eases such as cancer.
P08.14  Genome-wide association of breast cancer: composite 
likelihood with imputed genotypes
I. Politopoulos , J. Gibson, W. Tapper, S. Ennis, D. Eccles, A. Collins;  
University of Southampton, School of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom.
We describe a composite likelihood-based analysis of a genome-wide 
breast cancer case-control sample from the Cancer Genetic Markers 
of Susceptibility (CGEMS) project. We determine 14,380 genome re -
gions of fixed size on a linkage disequilibrium (LD) map which delimit 
comparable levels of LD. Although the numbers of SNPs are highly 
variable each region contains an average of ~35 SNPs and an average 
of ~69 after imputation of missing genotypes. Composite likelihood as -
sociation mapping yields a single P-value for each region, established 
by permutation testing, along with a maximum likelihood disease loca -
tion S, standard error and information weight. For single SNP analysis 
the nominal P-value for the most significant SNP (msSNP) requires 
substantial correction given the number of SNPs in the region. There -
fore, imputing genotypes may not always be advantageous for msSNP 
testing, in contrast to composite likelihood. For the region containing 
FGFR2 (a known breast cancer gene) power is greatest under com -
posite likelihood with imputed genotypes (χ2
2 increases from 20.6 to 
22.7), and the single SNP-based χ2
2 is 19.9 after correction. Imputa -
tion of additional genotypes in this region reduces the size of the 95% 
confidence interval for location of the disease gene by ~40%. Amongst 
the highest ranked regions, SNPs in the NTSR1 gene would be worthy 
of examination in additional samples. Meta-analysis, that combines 
weighted evidence from composite likelihood across corresponding re -
gions in different samples and refines putative disease locations, is fa -
cilitated through a test for homogeneity. This test is more powerful than 
methods that combine unweighted chi-squares through probability.
P08.15  Molecular genetic study of genes of cardiovascular 
system in athletes
G. Gumerova , E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical University from after M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Introduction: Molecular genetics of sport - a relatively young disci -
pline whose task is to search for polymorphisms in genes that lead 
to individual differences in the development and manifestation of vari -
ous physical qualities of human. Were typing these genes governing 
the operation of the cardiovascular system: renin (ren MboI), which 
cleaves angiotensinogen and angiotensin form I; chymase (CMA1/B), 
involved in the conversion of angiotensin I in the enzyme active vaso -
constrictor angiotensin II; vascular receptor-widening factor - bradyki -
nin (BDKRB).
Materials And Methods: We studied samples DNA of 145 athletes with 
high achievement (candidates for master of sports and the master of 
sports) aged 17-30 years and specialising in different sports. Control 
group consisted of 144 healthy people who are not involved in sports. 
The analysis genetic polymorphism is realized by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and RFLP- analysis.
Results: Analysis of the frequencies of genotypes and alleles of genes 
bradykinin receptor (BDKRB) and chymase (CMA1/B) revealed no sig -
nificant differences between the groups studied. Analysis of the gene 
renin (ren MboI) in athletes compared with the control group showed 
a significant increase in the frequency of genotype ren +/- (76.2% 
against 54.6% in the control group; P = 0.01).
Thus, the renin gene (ren MboI) may be associated with the level of 
physical performance, but also for identifying favorable allelic variants 
of genes, providing a more effective implementation of physical work, 
necessary further study of genetic markers.
This work was partially funded by the grant of Russian State Scientific 
Fond 08-04-97050.P08.16  Investigating ANKH  and ENPP1  in slovakian families 
with chondrocalcinosis 
A. P. Couto1,2, Y. Zhang3, A. Timms3, A. Sims3, M. Santos1, L. Martins1, M. 
Soares1, J. Bruges Armas1,4, J. Sequeiros2, M. A. Brown5;  
1SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2Instituto de Biologia Molecular e 
Celular, Porto, Portugal, 3Institute of Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford, United 
Kingdom, 4IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 5Diamantina Institute, Queensland, Australia.
Familial articular chondrocalcinosis was first reported in 1963. It is 
characterized by multiple calcifications of hyaline and fibrous cartilage 
in the joints and intervertebral disks. Mutations in ANKH  have been 
identified in several pedigrees as a monogenic cause for this disorder. 
ANKH is a key protein in pyrophosphate metabolism since it is the 
responsible for pyrophosphate transport across the cell membrane. 
The objective of this work was to screen ANKH  and ENPP1 , two key 
genes in pyrophosphate metabolism, in Slovakian kindreds with famil -
ial chondrocalcinosis.
DNA samples from 25 individuals (10 affected, 15 unaffected) from 8 
families were obtained. The promoter, coding regions and intron-exon 
boundaries of ANKH  and ENPP1  were sequenced.
Twelve DNA sequence variants, six in each gene, were identified. All 
the variants had been previously identified. None segregated with the 
disease. Due to the high rate of homozygous parents (affected and un -
affected) the genetic informativeness of these families was scarce for 
association studies. Our results suggest that neither ANKH  nor ENPP1  
mutations are the cause of chondrocalcinosis in these families, indicat -
ing that possibly other major genes are involved in the aethiopatho -
genesis of this condition. A possible role of variant K121Q of ENPP1  
needs to be further investigated.
P08.17  Evidence of association between GDF5 polymorphisms 
and congenital dislocation of the hip in a caucasian population
K. Rouault1, V. Scotet1, S. Autret1, F. Gaucher2, F. Dubrana3, D. Tanguy4, C. 
Yaacoub El Rassi5, B. Fenoll6, C. Férec1;  
1Inserm U613 „Génétique moléculaire et génétique épidémiologique“, Brest, 
France, 2Department of orthopedic surgery, Hotel Dieu, Pont l’Abbé, France, 
3Department of orthopedic surgery, CHU Cavale Blanche, Brest, France, 
4Department of physical medicine, Perharidy, Roscoff, France, 5Department of 
orthopedic surgery, CH Cornouaille, Quimper, France, 6Department of pediatric 
surgery, CHU Morvan, Brest, France.
Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH) is a multifactorial disease 
which involves genetic factors that are still unidentified. Recently, a 
functional polymorphism (rs143383) of the 5’UTR region of GDF5 
(Growth/Differentiation Factor 5), previously reported to be associated 
with osteoarthritis, has been associated with CDH in a Chinese popu -
lation. The aim of our study was to determine whether GDF5, known 
to be involved in bone and joint morphogenesis, is also associated 
with CDH in Caucasians. We genotyped three tagSNPs (rs224334, 
rs143384, rs143383) in 239 cases and 239 controls from western Brit -
tany (France) where CDH is frequent, and tested the association using 
both single-locus and haplotype-based approaches. The most signifi -
cant association was observed with rs143384. The T allele of this SNP 
was overrepresented in cases (65.9% vs. 55.9%, p=0.002). Under a 
recessive model, carriers of the TT genotype had a 1.71-fold higher 
risk of developing CDH than carriers of the other genotypes (OR TT vs. 
CT+CC=1.71, 95% CI: [1.18-2.48], p=0.005). At a nominal level, the as -
sociation was also significant with rs143383 (OR TT vs. CT+CC=1.52, 
95% CI: [1.05-2.19], p=0.026). The haplotype carrying the susceptibil -
ity alleles of these SNPs was also more frequent in cases (65.9% vs. 
55.9%, OR=1.53, 95% CI: [1.18; 1.98], p=0.002). This study reports, 
for the first time, the association between GDF5 polymorphisms and 
CDH in Caucasians, and points out another polymorphism of inter -
est that requires further investigation. Reduction in GDF5 expression 
might lead to developmental deficiency of ligaments and capsule in hip 
joint, and therefore contribute to CDH pathogenesis.
P08.18  The spectrum of the most common CFTR gene mutacions at Kaunas medical University Hospital
I. Poceviciene , D. Serapinas, A. Vitkauskiene, I. Nasvytiene, R. Sakalauskas;  
Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common autosomic recesive dis -
ease with a prevalance of 1:1600-1:4000 in Europe. It presents mainly 
with pulmonary or/and gastrointestinaly symptomas and accounts for 
a small portion of male infertility. 95 patients were reffered for genetic Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
counseling with suspition of cystic fibrosis (CF) diagnosis between 
2004-2009. The spectrum of most commom mutations was tested with 
the help of INO-LIPA CFTR 19 mutation detection kit (Innogenetics, 
Belgium).
Results: The CFTR gene mutations were detected in 23.16% from 
all analyzed cases. The most commom mutation, as expected, was 
F508del with a incidence of 81.82% out of all detected mutations. 3 
patients were diagnosed to have CFTRdel2,3 (21kb) mutation, that 
accounts for 13.64% out of all detected. R553X mutation showed 
the incidence of 4.54% (1 patient). As far as F508del is concerned, 4 
patients were diagnosed to be homozygotes (F508del/F508del) and 
10 heterozygotes ( including one patient with detected 2 mutations : 
F508del and CFTRdel2,3). One patient was heterozygote for another 
two mutations: R553X and CFTRdel2,3. In conclusion the spectrum of 
CFTR gene mutations was similar to that reported for European popu -
lation, with especially high incidence of F508del.
P08.19  Role of DRD4 Polymorphism in Attention-Deficit 
Hyperactive Disorders
A. Kocak1, E. Senol1, E. O. Aktas1, O. H. Kok1, H. Ak Celik2, H. H. Aydin2;  
1Ege University School of Medicine Department of Forensic Medicine, 
Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical 
Biochemistry, Izmir, Turkey.
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by hy -
peractivity and difficulty in sustaining attention and impulsivity. Defiant 
and various anxiety disorders, depression, learning disorders, mood 
disorders, alcohol and drug abuse may coexist with ADHD. Previously, 
several SNPs in different genes have been effect on characteristic of 
ADHD. In this study, DRD4 polymorphism investigated in the persons 
(n=90) whom have responsible for two and more traffic accidents. Ge -
notyping and allelic distribution compared with control group (n=100) 
who has no traffic accident history as driver. Adult ADHD Self-Report 
Scale (ASRS) test was performed to determine attention and/or hyper -
activity disorders. DRD4 intronic polymorphism (rs752306) determined 
in both of the groups. No significant difference in the allelic distribution 
has been found between the groups.
P08.20  A family-based association test to detect gene-gene 
interactions in the presence of linkage
L. De Lobel1, L. Thijs2, T. Kouznetsova2, J. Staessen2, K. Van Steen3;  
1Ugent, Ghent, Belgium, 2KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Université de Liège, 
Liège, Belgium.
For many complex diseases, quantitative traits contain more informa -
tion than dichotomous traits. One of the approaches used to analyse 
these traits in family-based association studies is the Quantitative 
Transmission Disequilibrium Test (QTDT). The QTDT is a regression-
based approach that models simultaneously linkage and association. 
It splits up the association effect in a between- and a within-family 
genetic component to adjust and test for population stratification and 
includes a variance components method to model linkage.
We extend this approach to detect gene-gene interactions between 
two unlinked QTLs by adjusting the definition of the between- and 
within-family component and the variance components included in the 
model. To capture the influence of population stratification, we derive 
the bias of the estimated interaction effect and discuss the influence 
on type I error rates. We simulate data to investigate the influence of 
the epistatis model, LD patterns between the markers and the QTLs, 
family structures and allele frequencies on the power and type I er -
ror rates of the approach. Results show that for some of the inves -
tigated settings, power gains are obtained in comparison with other 
techniques (e.g. FBAT-LC/FBAT-MM). We conclude that our approach 
shows promising results for studies where too few markers are avail -
able to correct for population stratification using standard methods 
(e.g. EIGENSTRAT). The proposed method is applied to real-life data 
on hypertension.  
P08.21  Choosing GWAS subjects from risk populations
K. Oexle , T. Meitinger;  
Institute of Human Genetics, TU München, München, Germany.
Power, i.e., sample size is a crucial issue in genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) on disorders generated by a multitude of weak genetic 
effect sizes. Here, we examine the influence of sampling cases and/or 
controls from populations that are subject to an external risk factor (such as smoking, nutritional or metabolic factors). We use an additive 
threshold model and derive the necessary sample sizes as a function 
of the external risk factor’s strength and of the sampling scheme. If 
both cases and controls are sampled from the risk population, a loss 
of power must be expected. The loss of power (i.e., increase of neces -
sary sample size) is even larger if only the cases are sampled from the 
risk population, while the inverse scheme (non-risk cases and risk con -
trols) provides a gain of power since non-risk cases are enriched for 
disease-favouring alleles while risk controls are enriched for protective 
alleles. For small effect sizes we derive simple approximations in ana -
lytically closed form. The principle of our analysis has some analogy 
to the so-called Carter effect, i.e. the phenomenon that the probability 
in a child of a multifactorial disorder with sex dimorphism for liability 
depends on the sex of the affected parent. In summary, we propose 
to optimize GWAS sampling from risk populations in order to minimize 
the necessary sample sizes.
P08.22  Segregation exclusion analysis (SEGEX) efficiently 
identifies genomic regions harboring germ line mutations in 
familial disorders
A. Harutyunyan1, T. Burkard1, T. Klampfl1, T. Berg1, Z. Rudzki2, A. P. C. van der 
Maas3, A. Zimprich4, R. Skoda5, J. Colinge1, R. Kralovics1,6;  
1Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, 
Austria, 2Department of Pathomorphology, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian 
University, Kraków, Poland, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Centre 
Haaglanden, The Hague, Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 5Experimental Hematology, Department 
of Research, Basel University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 6Department of 
Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Recent advances in high-throughput microarray genotyping have fa -
cilitated research in many fields of genetics, including disease gene 
identification in familial disorders. We developed a simple and robust 
algorithm for non-parametric linkage analysis based on SNP array 
data. The algorithm is based on identification and exclusion of all ge -
nomic regions that are not shared between affected members of the 
family, while remaining non-excluded regions are called. Genotype 
data of more than 900,000 SNPs used in the analysis were obtained 
from Affymetrix Genome-wide SNP 6.0 arrays. The method uses only 
affected members of the family and does not take into account mode 
of inheritance or level of penetrance. We have validated the algo -
rithm by analyzing three families with known disease-causing muta -
tions: one family with hereditary parkinsonism caused by mutation in 
LRRK2  gene, two - with hereditary thrombocythemia caused by mu -
tations in thrombopoietin ( THPO ) gene. In family with parkinsonism 
and one of the families with thrombocythemia the algorithm showed 
single genomic region in linkage, which contained LRRK2  and THPO  
genes, respectively. In the other family with thrombocythemia, there 
were 3 regions identified due to smaller family size, THPO  located in 
one of them. In general we observed negative exponential correla -
tion between the total size of called genomic regions and the number 
of meioses separating all family members analyzed. Overall, SEGEX 
performs well with high density SNP genotype data, precisely defining 
regions containing disease-causing mutations and is a useful tool for 
disease gene mapping.
P08.23  Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) ATTRV30M: a 
good model for the study of genetic modifiers for age-at-onset 
(AO)
A. Sousa1,2, A. M. Silva3, L. Maia3, T. Coelho3;  
1ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 3Centro Hospitalar do Porto 
(CHP), Porto, Portugal.
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) ATTRV30M is an autosomal 
dominant systemic amyloidosis, due to a point mutation in the trans -
thyretin (TTR) gene (chr18q12.1). It was first described by Andrade in 
Northern Portugal, in 1952, as a disease beginning mainly between 
25 and 35y of age. It was later shown to present a much wider vari -
ability in AO, among different clusters (Portugal: 34.7, Sweden: 56.7, 
Majorca: 45.7), but also within the same focus. In CHP (Porto), 2331 
patients belonging to 550 different families were diagnosed from 1939 
to 2008. We have previously shown that, in our series, AO varied from 
20-80yrs (mean: 37.1 in women, 32.4 in men). We also reported that 
209 probands (40%) had no affected parent at the time of diagnosis, 
and that these had a much later AO (46.5y) than the ones belonging Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
to families with one affected parent (32.3y). We now studied sex dif -
ferences between probands with or without an affected parent: inter -
estingly, while female probands with an affected parent had a later 
onset (35.8y) than males (30.3), this difference was not significant for 
probands with no affected parent (46.9 and 46.2, respectively). The 
most intriguing feature was the fact that this protection very often fades 
away and next generation manifests with classical AO. Moreover, this 
protection seems to be lost permanently, since in our 70 years’ regis -
try, we never found classical onset parents giving origin to late-onset 
offspring. A cis-acting effect, within or close to the TTR locus, may be 
responsible for some variation between generations.
P08.24  Assosiation study between IL1RA gene polymorphism 
and Febrile convulsion in iranian children
A. Foroughmand1, A. Nozari1, A. Ahadi2, A. Khoshdel3, S. Saleheian4, H. 
Bagheri4, M. Hashem Zadeh Chaleshtori3, E. Farrokhi3;  
1shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2shahre kord 
university, Shahre kord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3medical university of Shahre 
kord, Shahre kord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hajar hospital, Shahre kord, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aim: Fever and seizure is the one of the most reason 
for children registration in hospitals. Some children as their genetic 
structure have less resistance to fever, as recent studeis express posi -
tive corelation between family history for febrile convulsion (type and 
age of onset in childrent ) and disease. So, this study was performed 
to survey about assosiation between Inter Leukine 1 Receptor Antago -
nism gene,  IL1RA gene polymorphism and predisposition to disease.
Method: In this case - control study 100 febrile convulsion (FC) pa -
tients that refered to pediateric department and emergency ward of 
Hajar hospital and also 130 healthy children were selected. The age 
average of the patients group was 3/4±1/4 years and for the control 
group was 3/4 ± 1/2 years. 44 cases of the patients group had a posi -
tive history for FC. After sampling, DNA extraction and PCR reaction 
for IL1RA gene was performed. Finally by the comparision of segments 
size results were analysed.
Results: The genotypes frequency of the IL1RA gene allele1 and 2 in 
the patients group was 56% and 10%, and for control group was 55/4 
% and 6/9% respectively.
Conclusion: Considering to P = 0/93 for allele 1 and P= 0/401 for allele 
2, there was no significance difference between two groups. Based 
on the chi square test, there was no correlation between IL1RA gene 
polymorphism and predisposition to F.C. disease.
P08.25**  Multiple Marker Methods for Analysis of Genome Wide Association studies
A. Kindt1,2, J. Floyd2, S. Knott2, P. Navarro1, C. Haley1,2;  
1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Genome Wide Association Studies have had success at identifying the 
genetic causes of complex trait variation, but generally explain only a 
small fraction of the genetic variance indicating a number of undetect -
ed variants. We investigated the power of different regression models 
to identify associations across the range of minor allele frequencies 
(MAF) for the causative variant. We explored the performance of lin -
ear regression models on simulated traits using single or multiple (3, 
5 or 7) adjacent genotyped markers, haplotypes consisting of 3, 5 or 
7 adjacent markers and single imputed markers. We analysed data 
from a single real chromosome of 453 unrelated individuals genotyped 
with the Illumina’s HumanHap300 Genotyping BeadChip comprising 
317,503 SNPs. We simulated 1,000 traits by omitting 100 genotyped 
SNPs in each of 10 MAF classes (<0.05 to >0.45). In each dataset one 
of the SNPs was treated as causative and set to explain 0.3 of the trait 
variance. The genotyped regressions analysed 16,024 markers, while 
163,157 imputed markers (MACH1.0; CEU HapMap2 as reference 
population) were analysed. We compared the ability of the methods 
to identify the simulated causative variant on the basis of the signifi -
cance of the association. The three-marker method using genotyped 
data performed well at MAF >0.1, but below that the haplotype meth -
ods supersede. The significance of analyses using imputed SNPs was 
greater than analyses using genotyped SNPs for MAF <0.2. However, 
the advantage was slight and has to be weighed against the 10-fold 
increase in the number of tests performed using the imputed data.P08.26  Biotransformation gene polymorphisms and the risk of 
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
O. A. Gra1,2, M. V. Moskalenko3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova1, T. V. Nasedkina2;  
1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation, 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Hematology & 
Transfusiology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GCOP) is the most common 
cause of secondary osteoporosis in long-term use of corticosteroids, 
which leads to significant morbidity and mortality. Glucocorticosteroids 
are widely prescribed drugs, especially in the treatment of allergies, 
thus, the study of risk factors for GCOP in patients with bronchial asth -
ma receiving long-term systemic corticosteroid therapy is an important 
problem of prevention medicine.
The aim of this work was to determine the genetic component in the 
GCOP etiology by the analysis of 8 candidate gene polymorphisms 
together with quantitative indicators of Bone Mineral Density (BMD) 
and Z-criterion in 137 Russian patients with asthma receiving long-
term systemic corticosteroid therapy. The analysis of biotransformation 
gene polymorphism was performed using the low-density “Pharma -
gen-biochip”.
At comparison of BMD indexes of proximal femur for the Z-criterion 
revealed a statistically significant association of gene polymorphism 
MTHFR  677C>T (non-parametric ANOVA Kruskal-Wallis p = 0.0013). 
In addition, for the insertion-deletion polymorphism of GSTM1  also was 
found statistically significant differences by Mann-Whitney U-test (p = 
0.016). Interestingly, that the GSTM1  and MTHFR  genes are local -
ized on 1p chromosome (1p13.3 and 1p36.3 respectively), so we can 
suggest that the chromosome region may be involved in the GCOP 
susceptibility in Russia.
The determination of the GSTM1  and MTHFR  alleles seems to be 
important to identify group of patients with high risk for osteoporosis 
among individuals receiving long-term systemic corticosteroid therapy 
for the timely prevention of disease.
The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re -
search (project no. 08-04-12225).
P08.27  INTERSNP: Genome-wide Interaction Analysis Guided by A Priori information
C. Herold1, F. F. Brockschmidt2, M. Steffens1, M. Mattheisen1, M. P. Baur1,3, T. 
Becker1;  
1Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany, 
2Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have lead to the identifi -
cation of hundreds of genomic regions associated with complex dis -
eases. Nevertheless, a large fraction of their heritability remains un -
explained. Interaction between genetic variants is one of several puta -
tive explanations for the ``case of missing heritability‘‘ and, therefore, 
a compelling next analysis step. However, genome-wide interaction 
analysis (GWIA) of all pairs of SNPs from a standard marker panel 
is computationally unfeasible without massive parallelization. Further -
more, GWIA of all SNP triples is utopian. In order to overcome these 
computational constraints, we present a GWIA approach that selects 
combinations of SNPs for interaction analysis based on a priori infor -
mation. Sources of information are statistical evidence (single marker 
association at a moderate level), genetic relevance (genomic location) 
and biologic relevance (SNP function class and pathway information). 
We introduce the software package INTERSNP that implements a lo -
gistic regression framework as well as log-linear models for joint analy -
sis of multiple SNPs. Automatic handling of SNP annotation and path -
ways from the KEGG database is provided. In addition, Monte-Carlo 
simulations to judge genome-wide significance are implemented. We 
introduce various meaningful GWIA strategies that can be conducted 
using INTERSNP.
Typical examples are, for instance, the analysis of all pairs of non-
synonymous SNPs, or, the analysis of all combinations of three SNPs 
that lie in a common pathway and that are among the top 50,000 sin -
gle-marker results. We demonstrate the feasibility of these and other 
GWIA strategies by application to a GWAS data set and discuss prom -
ising results.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods207
P08.28  Haplotypes analysis of VDR gene and spinal muscular 
atrophy disease
M. F. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, D. Cimponeriu1, N. Butoianu2, C. 
Iliescu2, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1;  
1University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Al. Obregia“ Clinical 
Psychiatric Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Aim: To investigate the relationship between VDR gene haplotypes 
and SMA disease.
Materials and methods: Blood samples were collected from SMA pa -
tients (n=70), and control subjects without heredo-collateral or person -
al antecedents (n=54). The homozygous deletion of SMN1  gene was 
detected in all the patients, meanwhile at least one copy was identified 
in the control lot. The haplotypes of VDR gene polymorphisms ( FokI, 
BsmI, ApaI, TaqI ) were inferred after PCR-RFLP genotyping, using 
SHEsis platform.
Results: A significant relationship was detected in case of fbaT haplo -
type which seems to confer risk for SMA type I disease only (OR=2.801, 
95%CI: 1.139 -6.887, p=0.02). Taking into account that only two SMN2  
copies were found in SMA type I patients, we can speculate either a 
relationship between VDR haplotypes and SMN copies number. The 
results suggested also the importance of performing haplotypes rather 
individual marker analysis, as the single locus study detected a signifi -
cant relationship only for BsmI polymorphism.
For the patient’s lot, we didn’t identify a strong linkage disequilibrium 
relationship regarding BsmI , ApaI, TaqI polymorphisms, as it is usually 
reported. Random sampling or recombination events that could affect 
other genomic regions than 5q11.2-13.3, might be possible explica -
tions for our results. Regarding the control lot, the most prevalent three 
locus haplotypes are baT (31.4%), BAt (28.1%) and bAT (18.2%), as it 
was previously reported in Caucasian population.
Conclusions: The analysis of VDR gene haplotypes should be taken 
into consideration in the studies regarding possible modifier factors of 
SMA disease.
Study supported by grant CNCSIS-IDEI 2152/2008.
P08.29  Comprehensive approach to investigate the genetic 
basis of Hereditary Hearing Loss in iranian population
H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, N. Meyer2, T. Yang2, N. Bazazzadegan1, Y. 
Riazalhosseini1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, S. Yahyavi3, P. 
Imani1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, K. Jalalvand1, K. Jalalvand1, M. Malekpour1, 
N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, S. Azimi1, F. Larti1, Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1, K. 
Kahrizi1, R. Smith2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology 
Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, IA, 
United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head-Neck Surgery, 
Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Genetic testing for deafness in Iran is well established. The popula -
tion is extremely heterogeneous, which means that to determine the 
genetic basis of hereditary hearing loss in the Iranian population, eth -
nic-specific data are required. Over that last several years, We have 
generated and published much of these data by screening over 2000 
families segregating autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness 
(ARNHL). All patients were screened for mutations in GJB2  and GJB6  
in the Deafness Neurosensory Type 1 (DFNB1) locus, and if no mu -
tations were identified, haplotype were reconstructed by typing three 
short tandem repeat polymorphisms flanking 24 known ARNHL loci. 
In a subset of families, genome-wide linkage analysis was completed. 
The most prevalent mutation in this gene was 35delG, although we 
identified 34 different mutations, seven of which are common. We have 
also identified a novel GJB2  mutation in an endogenous population 
with autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ADNSHL) in a 
village in North of Iran. In approximately 50% of these families, we 
have been able to establish genetic causes for deafness. About 15% 
have mutations in GJB2  followed by mutations in SLC26A4 and TEC -
TA. We have also found mutations in PJVK , TMC1 and USH1C, OTOF, 
MYOVIIA, MYO15A, COLLA2, RDX and VLGR1. Finally, we have de -
scribed a new syndrome, a contiguous gene deletion syndrome that 
involves both Deafness and Infertility Syndrome (DIS) in males. These 
data from the Iranian population attest to its diversity and contribute to 
the current body of knowledge regarding the deafness of genetics.P08.30  Genetic background of Severe course of IBD
A. Lozynska-Nelke1, I. Kubinska2, E. Czkawanianc3, P. Krokowicz1, W. 
Meissner1, W. Cichy1, M. Drews1, D. Lipinski1, A. Plawski4;  
1Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department 
of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial, Lodz, 
Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish 
Mother’s Memorial, Poznan, Poland, 4Institute of Human Genetics Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by chronic relaps -
ing inflammation in gastrointestinal tract. IBD is dived into two subtypes 
Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). If it is not possible to 
differentiate these IBDs the patients are diagnosed as indeterminate 
colitis (IC). In our 160 severe IBD patients with average age of diagno -
sis 26 years, the youngest patient was diagnosed when was 3 years 
old and the oldest one was diagnose at the age of 69. In this group 
we investigated frequency of alleles in NOD2/CARD15 gene and 15-
PGHD gene. The 15-PGDH gene codes dehydrogenase which is a 
prostaglandin-degrading enzyme and acts as an antagonist to enzyme 
called cyclooxygenase 2. We also studied frequency of haplotype in 
q31 region on 5th chromosome. We estimated frequency of alleles 
SLC22A4 1672T and SLC22A5 T207C. In studied group we observed 
increased frequency of INV4+39C>T 15-PGDH homozygotes in group 
of patient under 18 years old with UC (12%) in comparison to adult 
patients where the INV4+39C>T 15-PGDH homozygotes were not 
been observed. The frequency of A at position 168 in PGDH gene 
were higher in patient under 18 years old (49%) than in adult patients 
(34%). In NOD2 gene we observed statistically significant differences 
of frequency of P268S, R702W and 2030insC in group of patient with 
severe course of IBD in comparison to unselected IBD patients and 
control group The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Sci -
ence and Higher Education projects no. 2P05A06929
P08.31  Software for multipoint parametric linkage analysis of 
quantitative traits in large pedigrees
T. I. Axenovich ;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Parametric linkage analysis is one of the most powerful tools for map -
ping of traits with known model of inheritance. Several well-known 
programs may be used for this analysis. However these programs do 
not work with the large extended pedigrees from genetically isolated 
human populations and great part of them cannot analyze quantitative 
traits. Large pedigrees with thousands members are available now for 
genetic analysis. Utilizing such pedigrees in linkage analysis is com -
putationally challenging.
We developed software for multipoint parametric linkage analysis of 
quantitative traits using information about SNP genotypes. Mixed mod -
el of major gene and polygene inheritance is implemented in this soft -
ware. Implementation of several algorithms to avoid computational un -
derflow and decrease running time permits application of our software 
to the analysis of very large pedigrees collected in human genetically 
isolated populations. The software assigned for the multipoint para -
metric linkage analysis based on both known (estimated prior to link -
age) model parameters and the ones estimated during the analysis.
We tested our software by performing linkage analysis of adult height 
in large pedigree from Dutch isolated population. Three significant 
and four suggestive loci were identified with the help of our programs, 
whereas VC based linkage analysis, which requires the pedigree frag -
mentation, demonstrated only three suggestive peaks.
The software package MQScore_SNP is available at http://mga.bio -
net.nsc.ru/soft/index.html.
P08.32  Multipoint linkage disequilibrium mapping with 
incorporation of covariates in general pedigrees
Y. Chiu , C. Lee;  
National Health Research Institues, Zhunan, Taiwan.
Complex diseases are often involved a number of genetic and en -
vironmental factors. Incorporating the factors relevant to a complex 
disease as covariates into the disequilibrium mapping can therefore 
enhance the efficiency of a disease locus estimate as well as help dis -
sect the etiology of a complex disease. Previously, we developed two 
approaches to incorporate covariates into linkage disequilibrium map -
ping in the case-parent design. The approaches, including parametric 
and non-parametric modeling, are robust in that no assumption about Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
the underlying genetic model is required, other than the assumption 
that there is no more than one disease gene in the chromosomal re -
gion. In addition to the estimate of a disease locus, the magnitudes of 
the associations between the genetic effect at the disease locus and 
covariates can also be assessed.
In practice, data are often available for larger pedigrees with multiple 
nuclear families or general pedigrees, it would be desirable to have 
the association mapping approaches that can use all potentially in -
formative data. In the present study, we will extend these approaches 
to general pedigrees to make full use of the data available, so as to 
improve the efficiency of estimate for a disease locus. By making full 
use of pedigree data, one can also estimate the relative risks among 
different relatives, which is informative for uncovering the underlying 
genetic model of a disease.
P08.33  Study of polymorphic variants of genes LPL (Hind III, 
s447X) and cEtP (t agiB) in individuals with different levels of 
total cholesterol in the blood
L. R. Kayumova , E. R. Yakshembitova, A. I. Khaidarova, E. V. Vorobieva, V. Y. 
Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Lipoprotein lipase gene LPL (8p22) and the gene ester transfer pro -
tein cholesterol CETP (16q21) is one of the major genes involved in 
the regulation of lipid metabolism. Studied polymorphic variants of the 
HindIII, S447X LPL gene and TagIB gene CETP, as well as an analysis 
of associations studied polymorphic variants of the level of total cho -
lesterol (TC) of human blood plasma.
Material for the study included DNA samples from 380 healthy indi -
viduals. Determining the level of cholesterol carried by standard en -
zymatic methods. Analysis of DNA polymorphic loci of LPL and CETP 
performed by PCR-RFLP.
Results: In the group of persons with high cholesterol showed sig -
nificantly significant increase in the genotype LPL (Hind III) H+/H+ in 
blood (39.19% versus 25.61% in the group of individuals with indica -
tors of cholesterol in normal, P=0,031), and also showed a trend to in -
creased CETP genotype B1/B1 (34% vs. 25%, respectively, P=0.070). 
Revealed a statistically significant increase of genotypes in the study 
of polymorphic variations in a group of persons with high levels of cho -
lesterol (a variant of H+H+/SS/B1B1, P=0.04).
Conclusions: We found that polymorphic markers Tag IB in the gene 
ester transfer protein CETP cholesterol and Hind III in the lipoprotein 
lipase gene LPL associated with the level of cholesterol in the blood, 
and the genotype of CETP B1/B1 and LPL genotype H+/H+ are mark -
ers of high levels of cholesterol in human blood.
This work was partially funded grant from the Ministry of Education of 
Russia „Thematic Plan 2008-2010“.
P08.34  A variant in EDNRA is associated with migraine without 
aura in a group of Portuguese patients
C. Lemos1, J. L. Neto2, J. Pereira-Monteiro3, D. Mendonça4, J. Barros3, J. 
Sequeiros2, I. Alonso1, A. Sousa2;  
1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de 
Neurologia, HSA and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 4ICBAS and Instituto de Saúde 
Pública, Porto, Portugal.
Migraine is a common disabling primary headache, leading to a di -
minished quality of life in migraineurs and their relatives. Anomalies of 
vascular function, with dilatation of cerebral blood vessels and release 
of vasoactive neuropeptides have been implied in its pathophysiology. 
Endothelin type A receptor (EDNRA) mediates the biological effects of 
endothelin-1 (ET-1), leading to vasoconstriction. Our aim was to as -
sess the involvement EDNRA in susceptibility to migraine in a sample 
of Portuguese migraineurs, by a case-control study.
Three tagging SNPs (rs702757, rs5333 and rs5335) were analyzed 
in 188 cases - 111 without (MO) and 77 with aura (MA) - and 287 
controls. A multivariable logistic regression included the three SNPs, 
adjusted for gender. Allelic and haplotypic frequencies were compared 
between cases and controls.
We found a borderline increased risk for the rs702757 T-allele 
(OR=1.44, 95% CI:1.05-1.99) and for the TT genotype (OR=2.34, 95% 
CI: 1.12-4.90) for MO. A trend towards an increased risk for MA regard -
ing the C-allele of rs5333 was also found. The T-C-G haplotype was 
found to be significantly overrepresented in the MO subgroup.Our results reinforce EDNRA as a susceptibility factor for MO, although 
we cannot exclude the involvement of this gene in MA susceptibility in 
our population. Dissecting migraine genetic susceptibility will be cru -
cial to develop better therapeutic strategies, as the risk variants im -
plied and their effects may vary in different populations.
P08.35  Associating mitochondrial DNA variation with complex 
traits
J. L. Elson1, K. Majamaa2, N. Howell3, P. F. Chinnery4;  
1Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United 
Kingdom, 2University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 3Matrilinex LLC, CA, United 
States, 4Institute for Ageing and Health and Institute of Human Genetics , 
Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
Saxena and colleagues produced a set of SNP´s for testing asso -
ciation between common mitochondrial DNA [mtDNA] variation and 
disease; these SNP’s have continued to be used publications. De -
spite concerns however that the SNP’s are not sufficiently accurate 
or comprehensive. The SNP´s where derived from publicly available 
human mtDNA sequences and intended to represent diversity in Eu -
ropean populations. However, 101 (~8%) non-European sequences 
were included and ~16% were from the Finnish population, where rare 
mtDNA clades are overrepresented. Furthermore, ~11% of the mtDNA 
sequences were from patients with type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer and 
Parkinson disease, although many studies have hunted for associa -
tion of these diseases with mtDNA SNP’s.
The SNP’s derived from the above data reliably detect some common 
haplogroup-defining polymorphisms and thus some haplogroups but 
not others. The SNP´s included many homoplasies, i.e. changes that 
have occurred more than once on the phylogeny. The majority of es -
tablished mtDNA haplotypes are defined by a combination of SNP´s. 
Some haplogroups are tagged by a single homoplasy using the Saxena 
SNP´s; by definition a single homoplasy cannot reliably “tag” a single 
mtDNA haplotype. Of the SNP´s identified by Saxena et al. 53% were 
homoplasies associated with two or more haplogroups. In short, math -
matically sound methodology was applied but the data was flawed and 
failing to apply knowledge about the evolution of mtDNA resulted in the 
production of SNP’s not well suited to the purpose. Careful selection 
of SNP´s using knowledge of evolution and biochemical effect will be 
needed to progress.
P08.36  Skew in the human caveolin 1 gene upstream purine 
complex homozygote haplotype compartment in multiple 
sclerosis
M. Zarif Yeganeh1, M. Ghaffarpour2, D. Farhud3, M. Karimlou4, M. Ghabaee2, 
A. Haghighi Nazari2, H. Najmabadi1, M. Ohadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Center of Neurological 
Research, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Clinic, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 4Department of Biostatistics, University of Social Welfare and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Caveolin 1 (CAV1) is a component of the myelin sheath and the ex -
pression of the gene encoding this protein is increased during myelina -
tion in Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes. We sought to investigate 
the homozygote haplotype compartment in a recently identified poly -
morphic purine complex at the upstream region of the human CAV1 
gene in multiple sclerosis (MS). In a case/control study design, the 
region was characterized in 126 cases of MS diagnosed based on 
the Revised McDonald diagnostic criteria, and 460 controls. We re -
port a skew in the homozygote haplotype compartment in the cases 
versus controls both in a qualitative and quantitative respect. Excess 
homozygosity for haplotypes was observed in the MS cases (cor -
rected p<0.012, OR=2.54, CI 1.14-5.64). Furthermore, we observed 
eight homozygote haplotypes in the MS cases that were non-existent 
in the controls (p<0.0003, OR=20.27, CI 2.50-163.8). For the first time, 
our data highlight the CAV1 upstream purine complex as a novel sus -
ceptibility genomic locus in the pathophysiology of MS. Of utmost im -
portance, the region has been conserved across species, including 
mouse, guinea pig, rhesus macaque, and human. The functional effect 
of this region remains to be clarified in the future studies.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods20
P08.37  MMP  sequence variants and serum level correlations 
in Myocardial Infarction 
S. H. Rani1, M. K. Spurthi1, R. G. Kumar1, S. S. Kumar2, N. Pratibha1;  
1Dept of Genetics &Biotechnology,Osmania University, HYDERABAD, India, 
2Dept of Cardiology,Durga Bai Deshmukh Hospital and Research Centre, 
HYDERABAD, India.
Background: Myocardial Infarction (MI) is a common, multifactorial 
disorder and studies have revealed a 5 to 7 fold increased risk to MI 
associated death in first degree relatives of the probands. To date a 
large number of genes are implicated in MI of which Matrix metallopro -
teinases (MMPs) represents a potential candidate gene system in the 
cardiac remodeling and Heart Failure.
Objective: The present study aims to ascertain the association be -
tween potentially functional variants of the MMP-9 gene promoter and 
correlate the same to the serum levels of MMP-9 in the susceptibility 
to myocardial infarction and to identify the asymptomatic first degree 
relatives at risk to MI on family screening.
Methods: The study comprises 150 individuals which include 50 cases 
of angiograpically recorded MI, 50 first degree relatives of the patients 
and 50 age and sex matched healthy controls. Genotyping of MMP 9 is 
based on PCR-RFLP using restriction enzyme sph1 and serum levels 
were estimated by ELISA using commercial antibody.
Results & Conclusions: The frequencies of the MMP 9 genotype were 
significantly varied among the three groups of study and the levels 
seem to be correlated with specific genotypes. Hence it is suggested 
that MMP-9 plays an important role in the onset and prognosis of myo -
cardial infarction and helps in the diagnosis of asymptomatic and pre 
symptomatic individuals in screening.
P08.38  A stochastic model for DNA instability in the inherited 
neuromuscular disease myotonic dystrophy
C. F. Higham , C. Cobbold, D. T. Haydon, D. G. Monckton;  
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by inheriting an expanded 
unstable DNA CTG repeat. Generally, an increase between genera -
tions causes a decreasing age of onset, whilst an increase in the num -
ber of repeats throughout the lifetime of a patient contributes toward 
the progressive nature of the symptoms. We are interested in model -
ling mathematically the evolution of repeat length through the lifetime 
of patients as this has potential for improving prognostic information as 
well as providing a deeper understanding of the underlying biological 
process.
Diagnosis of DM1 is usually confirmed by establishing CTG repeat 
length but the interpretation of this length is compromised by not know -
ing the inherited allele length and levels of DNA instability which vary 
among individuals due to environmental and genetic factors.
Quantitative data, collected from small pool PCR analysis of allele 
length in blood cells from DM1 patients reveals the variation within and 
between. This rich source of data opens up the possibility of model -
ling with a stochastic process. By calibrating a new continuous-time, 
discrete-state stochastic model to this data, we infer the unknown in -
herited allele length for each patient and quantify the mutational force 
which has led to their observed distribution of alleles.
We show that these quantitative traits improve prognostic information 
for age of onset and could be used as biomarkers to identify trans-act -
ing genetic, epigenetic or environmental effects. We conjecture that 
these trans-acting genetic modifiers also apply in the general popula -
tion where they will affect ageing, cancer, inherited disease and human 
genetic variation.
P08.39  OTOF (DFNB9) mutations are very rare in autosomal 
recessive Non-syndromic Hearing Loss in iranian population
N. -. Bazazzadegan1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, M. Babanejad1, K. Jalalvand1, N. 
Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, R. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research 
Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University 
of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Hearing impairment is the most common genetic sensory defect in hu -
mans worldwide. It is estimated that profound hearing loss occurs in 
4 out of every 10,000 children. About 70% of hereditary SNHL is non-
syndromic (DFN) and at least 80% of these cases have autosomal 
recessive (DFNB) inheritance . To date, genetic studies have shown that mutations in 79 loci and 28 genes are associated with DFNB. Mu -
tations in OTOF  gene are a cause of neurosensory non-syndromic 
recessive deafness, DFNB9. OTOF  gene contains 48 exons which 
encodes a transmembrane protein, otoferlin. Several mutations in this 
gene have been found in Lebanese, Pakistani, Turkish, Colombian 
and Spanish families. Recently we observed an Iranian ARNHL family 
which showed linkage to otof gene. Mutation detection of this gene 
revealed a missense mutation in exon 27, so we decided to screen our 
population for this gene.
Ninty one ARNHL families with two or more affected individuals origi -
nated from different ethnic groups of Iran were selected for this study. 
All the families were subjected to homozygosity mapping using flank -
ing STR markers of OTOF gene. After screening all the families, no 
linkage was established. So in comparison with other countries such 
as our neighboring country, Pakistan, OTOF mutations are very rare 
in Iran. 
P08.40  Common polymorphism in Per3 gene, dietary composition and time structure of energy intake in the central-European caucasian population
J. Stastny1, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, P. Bienert1, J. Lipkova1, Z. Piskackova2, Z. 
Brazdova2, A. Vasku1;  
1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Recent studies have demonstrated a tight relationship 
between circadian rhythmicity and the development of obesity and its 
related traits. In this study, we investigated possible associations of the 
VNTR polymorphism in the Per3 gene with obesity-related anthropo -
metric traits and behavioral patterns.
Methods: The total of 330 volunteers of various BMI and age distribu -
tion originating from the Czech Caucasian population were enrolled 
in this study in order to evaluate the relationship of VNTR Per3 with 
anthropometric parameters related to obesity and dietary composition 
and time patterns of food intake (based on 7-day native food records). 
The allele-specific PCR-based method was used to determine the 
VNTR Per3 genotypes.
Results: No differences were observed in genotype or allele frequen -
cies between the obese cases (BMI≥30) and the non-obese individ -
uals (BMI<30) (pg = 0.92; pa = 0.86). The VNTR Per3 was further 
associated with the energy value of lunch on average working day 
(p < 0.02). When analyzing the dietary composition, the VNTR Per3 
polymorphism was associated with the total daily energy derived from 
carbohydrates (p < 0.01) and fat (p < 0.02) , whereas the 55 homozy -
gotes expressed the highest daily intake of carbohydrates and fat, re -
spectively. No association with aberrant behavioral patterns - extreme 
snacking or extreme portion sizes was observed.
Discussion: This is the first study to investigate the relationship be -
tween VNTR polymorphism in Per3 gene and behavioral patterns of 
the food intake in humans; VNTR seems to influence rather the quali -
tative dietary structure than the time patterns of food intake.
P08.41  Association study between G-protein-coupled receptor 
kinase 5 gene and Parkinson’s disease
P. Tarantino1,2, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. 
Provenzano1,2, V. Scornaienchi1, V. Greco1, A. Gambardella1,3, A. Quattrone1,3, 
G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Csenza), Italy, 2Department of 
Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, 
Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
The major component of Lewy Bodies, the pathological hallmark of 
Parkinson’s disease is α-synuclein, most prominently phosphorylated 
at serine 129. It is not clear which is exactly the contribution of mem -
bers of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase family (GRKs). However, it 
has been shown that the GRK5 phosphorylates Ser 129 in vitro and 
enhances α-synuclein toxicity. Moreover, a genetic association study 
performed in an Japanese population revealed haplotypic associa -
tion of the GRK5 gene with susceptibility to sporadic PD. We aimed 
at investigating whether four polymorphisms within the GRK5 gene 
(rs871196, rs2420616, rs7069375, rs4752293) could represent a risk 
factor for sporadic PD in Southern Italy. We genotyped 446 patients 
with PD and 450 controls for these markers and we did not find any 
significant association with the disease at allelic, genotypic and hap -Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods210
lotypic level. Our results indicate that the GRK5 gene does not confer 
risk to sporadic PD in our sample from southern Italy.
P08.42  Per3 VNTR polymorphism and chronic heart failure
J. Lipkova1, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, J. Stastny1, P. Bienert1, M. Hlavna1, L. 
Spinarova2, A. Vasku1;  
1Department of pathological physiology, Faculty of medicine, Masaryk 
university, Brno, Czech Republic, 21st Clinic of Cardioangiology, St Ann´s 
Masaryk University affiliated Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: The human homologue of Drosophila clock gene PERI -
OD3 (PER3) gene has been recently demonstrated to affect circadian 
expression of various proteins in variety of tissues including heart. Al -
terations in the circadian patterns of variety of circulatory functions are 
frequently observed in cardiovascular diseases. No studies of Per3 
gene on chronic heart failure (CHF) patients have been conducted 
so far, therefore the aim of the study was to investigate the effect of 
variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the coding 
region of the circadian clock Per3 gene on CHF.
Methods: This case-control study comprised a total of 371 patients of 
Caucasian origin with chronic heart failure (functional classes NYHA 
II-IV, ejection fraction (EF) < 40%) and 332 healthy controls of similar 
age and gender distribution. The study subjects were genotyped for 
Per3 VNTR polymorphism using an allele-specific PCR-based meth -
odology.
Results: No significant differences in genotype or allele frequencies of 
Per3 VNTR were observed when comparing CHF cases and control 
(pg = 0.30, pa = 0.52); moreover, no significant differences were ob -
served when comparing CHF cases according to their etiology (pg = 
0.87, pa = 0.91). In the multivariate regression modeling, no predictive 
function of VNTR Per3 polymorphism on ejection fraction or NYHA 
class, hyperlipidaemia or type II diabetes risk was observed.
Discussion: Based on the results of the presented study, we do not 
consider the Per3 VNTR polymorphism a major risk factor for chronic 
heart failure or a factor modulating severity of the CHF in the investi -
gated Caucasian population.
P08.43  Evaluating the PHARMAchiptm array: Pharmacogenetic 
profile assessment in Spanish control population.
R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, B. Almoguera1,2, B. Gomez-Dominguez1,2, C. Villaverde-
Montero1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, R. Lopez-Rodriguez3,4, M. Roman3,4, P. 
Dorado5, A. Llerena5, F. Abad-Santos3,4, C. Ayuso1,2;  
1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), 
CAIBER Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en 
Red (CIBER) de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Clinical 
Pharmacology Department, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, CAIBER 
Unit, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red (CIBER): 
Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5CICAB, Clinical 
Research Centre, Extremadura University Hospital and Medical School, 
Badajoz, Spain.
Objectives: 1) To determine the analytical and clinical validity of PHAR -
MAchip array before its routine use in clinical practice; 2) To investi -
gate the frequencies of important allelic variants in 36 genes involved 
in pharmacogenetics in Spanish control population.
Methods: 437 unrelated Spanish controls that were genotyped using 
the PHARMAchip. Analytical validity was determined for CYP2D6 and 
SLC6A4 genes and results obtained by the array were compared to 
PCR-based methods. Clinical validity was also determined for CY -
P2D6. Allelic frequencies were calculated and statistically analysed.
Results: Sensitivity (S) and specificity (SP) values of the array ranged 
from 98-100% for CYP2D6 alleles. For SLC6A4, S and SP were of 
96.5 % and 97.9%, respectively. For the diagnosis of poor metabolizer 
status, S was 87.5% and SP 98.6%. For ultra-rapid metabolizer status, 
both values were 100%. All genes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilib -
rium, with the exception of ADRB2. In terms of metabolizers status, the 
percentages of poor, intermediate, extensive and ultrarapid metaboliz -
ers were similar to those described in other Caucasian populations.
Conclusions: To best of our knowledge, this population-based study 
shows for the first time the allelic distribution of 90 pharmacogenetic 
variants among Spanish population. The availability of this genetic in -
formation, and the functional significance of these polymorphisms af -
fecting drug metabolism, should facilitate their application to pharma -
cogenetic profiling. PHARMAchip is an accurate, rapid and updatable 
tool for assessing an individual’s genetic background in relation to drug response. Nevertheless, cost-effectiveness should be further analyzed 
before its implementation in clinical practice.
P08.44  Search of associations of IL12A , IL12B , IL12RB1  
polymorphisms with tuberculosis, bronchial asthma and 
ischemic heart disease
N. P. Babushkina , M. V. Golubenko, A. N. Kucher;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Polymorphisms in IL12A  (rs568408), IL12B  (rs32122 and rs321227), 
IL12RB1  (rs3746190 and rs11575926) were studied in the population 
sample (Russians, Tomsk) and in three samples of patients collected 
in the same population: (1) ischemic heart disease combined with hy -
pertension, (2) tuberculosis, (3) bronchial asthma. For the study, DNA 
collections of the Institute of Medical Genetics were used. For all SNPs, 
no deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was detected. Compari -
son of patient groups with population sample revealed an association 
of IL12A  (rs568408, allele G and genotype GG) with bronchial asthma. 
For allele G carriers, OR=1.65 (I=1.01-2.7; χ2=4.01 (p<0.05)). For gen -
otype GG, OR=2,00 (I=1.12-3,58; χ2=5,56 (p<0.05)). Comparison of 
different patients groups has shown differences in genotypes frequen -
cies in the same locus between asthma group and ischemic heart dis -
ease (χ2=6,65, p<0.05), as well as between asthma and tuberculosis 
(χ2=8,006, p<0.05). There were no significant associations for individ -
ual SNPs in IL12RB1  gene, but the genotypes combinations were dif -
ferent in cases and controls. In particular, we found that combination of 
genotype CC rs3746190 with AG rs11575926 in IL12RB1  is protective 
for all three diseases studied: for ischemic disease (OR=0,08 (l=0,00-
0,62; χ2 = 7,32 (p<0.05)), tuberculosis (OR=0,10 (I=0,01-0,54; χ2=9,37 
(p<0.005)), and asthma (OR=0,23 (I=0,05-0,97; χ2=4,04 (p<0.05)). 
So, we have shown involvement of SNPs in IL12A  (rs568408) and 
IL12RB1  (rs3746190 combined with rs11575926) into pathological 
phenotype in different diseases.
P08.45  The effect of peroxisome proliferator - activated 
receptors polymorphisms on the physical performance of 
Lithuanian athletes
V. Ginevičienė1,2, L. Tubelis2, V. Kučinskas1;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian 
Olympic Sports Center, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Variation in genes involved in lipid, glucose metabolism and energy 
homeostasis is expected to have a role in the physical performance. 
Although the polymorphisms of PPARA  intron 7 G/C (rs4253778) and  
PPARG  Pro12Ala (rs1801282) have been suggested to influence 
variation in skeletal muscle function, data has been conflicting. We 
have investigated the genotype and allele distribution of PPARA  and 
PPARG  polymorphisms in Lithuanian athletes (N=193) and controls 
(N=250). The athletes were stratified into three groups: endurance 
(N=77), power (N=51) and mixed (N=65). There were 43 ‘elite’, 52 
‘sub-elite’, 98 ‘non-elite’ athletes. Genotyping was performed by PCR-
RFLP. The results of the present study imply that the PPARA  C allele 
is more common in the athlete group than in the general population of 
Lithuania (G/C 77.5/22.5% vs G/C 82.8/17.2%, P=0.046). Genotype 
frequency did not differ between all athletes and controls, but differed 
significantly between the ‘elite‘ athlete group and the controls (GG/
GC/CC: 51.2/37.2/11.6% vs 69.2/27.2/3.6%; P = 0.018). Moreover, 
the frequency of CC genotype was higher in elite athletes (11.6%) 
than sub-elite (7.7%) and non-elite (2%) athletes. No significant dif -
ferences between the athletes and controls were found according to 
the allele and genotype frequencies of the PPARG  polymorphism. The 
present findings suggest that there is an association between PPARA  
G/C polymorphism and physical performance in Lithuanian athletes. 
Conversely, the importance of PPARG  polymorphism in athletic per -
formance is not straightforward and can be masked by other genetic 
and non-genetic factors as no association was found with athletic suc -
cess.
P08.46  A Common Polymorphism in the Cannabinoid Receptor 
1 (cNR1) Gene is Associated with Pre-eclampsia in the central-European caucasian Population
J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, P. Bienert1, Z. Dostalova2, J. Chovanec1, A. Vasku1;  
1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Oncogynecology, Masaryk Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods211
Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Endocannabinoids have been recently suggested to 
play a fundamental role in early placental development. The aim of 
the study was to investigate associations of three SNPs in the endo -
cannnabinoid type I receptor gene (CNR1) (rs1049353, rs12720071 
and rs806368) and their haplotypes with pre-eclampsia, a severe 
pregnancy-associated condition characterized by abnormal develop -
ment and remodeling of spiral decidual arteries.
Methods: The case-control study comprised a total of 115 pre-eclamp -
tic women and 145 healthy pregnant controls, all originating from the 
Czech Caucasian population. Using PCR-based methods, we tested 
rs1049353, rs12720071 and rs806368 in CNR1 gene and haplotypes 
were constructed.
Results: Significant difference in genotype distributions of rs806368 (p 
< 10^-5) was observed when comparing the cases and the controls; 
the cases presenting with significantly higher proportion of heterozy -
gotes. In the regression modeling, the rs806368 served as a predic -
tor for pre-eclampsia development (beta = 0.15; p = 0.04). Haplotype 
analysis revealed presence of 4 common haplotypes; the AAC hap -
lotype being less frequent in pre-eclamptic cases compared to the 
controls (p < 0.008), whereas the prediction role of AAC haplotype for 
pre-eclampsia onset (beta = -0.18; p = 0.03) was confirmed further by 
analysis of regression model. None of investigated polymorphisms or 
haplotypes was associated with IUGR development.
Discussion: This is the first study focusing on relationship between 
SNPs in CNR1 gene and pre-eclampsia risk. Although limited by a 
relatively small sample size, the study clearly indicates that rs806368 
in the CNR1 gene may act as attractive susceptibility marker for pre-
eclampsia in humans.
P08.47  Novel IL1RA  gene mutation and haplotype block 
structure of the OSMR  mutation region in familial primary 
cutaneous amyloidosis
M. Lin1,2, D. Lee3,4, T. Liu5, Y. Lin6, Y. Liu5, K. Arita7, Y. Chang4,3, J. A. McGrath8, 
S. Tsai9,6;  
1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 
2Department of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Genome Research Center, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Department of Life Sciences 
and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan, 7Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan, 8St John‘s Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics 
and Molecular Medicine, The Guy‘s, King‘s College and St Thomas‘ School 
of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 9Division of Molecular and Genomic 
Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is an itchy skin disorder as -
sociated with amyloid deposits in the superficial dermis. The disease 
is commonly found in Southeast Asia and South America. Autosomal 
dominant PCA has been mapped previously to 5p13.1-q11.2 and 2 
pathogenic missense mutations in the OSMR  gene, which encodes 
the interleukin-6 family cytokine receptor oncostatin M receptor beta 
(OSMRβ), were reported. We investigated 29 Taiwanese pedigrees 
with PCA and previously reported 10 had heterozygous missense mu -
tations in OSMR : p.D647V (1 family), p.P694L (6 families), and p.K697T 
(3 families). The mutation p.P694L was found to be associated with the 
same haplotype in 5 of 6 families with PCA. Of the other 19 pedigrees 
that lacked OSMR  pathology, 8 mapped to the same locus on chromo -
some 5, which also contains the genes for 3 other interleukin-6 family 
cytokine receptors, including interleukin-31 receptor A (IL31RA), which 
can form a heterodimeric receptor with OSMRβ through interleukin-31 
signaling. In one family, we identified a point mutation in the IL31RA  
gene, c.1562C>T, that results in a missense mutation, p.S521F, which 
is also sited within a fibronectin type III-like repeat domain as observed 
in the OSMR  mutations. PCA is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
but our study shows that it can be caused by mutations in 2 biologi -
cally associated cytokine receptor genes located on chromosome 5. 
The identification of OSMR  and IL31RA gene pathology provides an 
explanation of the high prevalence of PCA in Taiwan and new insight 
into disease pathophysiology.P08.48  The PTPN22 Gene Influences Genetic Predisposition to 
Ulcerative colitis and crohn’s Disease.
L. M. DIAZ-GALLO1, M. Gómez-García2, C. Cardeña3, L. Rodrigo4, A. Nieto5, 
G. Alcain6, I. Cueto6, M. López-Nevot2, N. Festen EAM7, R. Roberts8, A. 
Zhernakova9, B. Z. Alizadeh10, J. Martin1;  
1Instituto de Biomedicina y Parasitología López Neyra, Armilla Granada, Spain, 
2Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 3Hospital Clínico 
San Cecilio, Granada, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, 
Oviedo, Spain, 5Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cadiz, Spain, 6Hospital Virgen de la 
Victoria, Málaga, Spain, 7University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands, 8Department of Pathology University of Otago, Otago, New 
Zealand, 9Universitair Medish Centrum Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Unit of 
Genetic Epidemiology & Bioinformatics University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, Netherlands.
The PTPN22  gene, encoding the lymphoid_tyrosine_phosphatase-
LYP, is an important risk factor for human autoimmunity. Recently a 
novel polymorphism (R263Q;rs33996649) within the catalytic do -
main of LYP has been associated with reduced risk of SLE. And the 
R620W;rs2476601 LYP variant is a risk factor of several autoimmune 
diseases. Based on this, we evaluated the role of both polymorphisms 
in ulcerative colitis (UC) and Cohn’s disease (CD).
A total of 2176 CD patients, 1764 UC patients and 2950 healthy con -
trols, from an initial case-control set of Spanish Caucasian ancestry 
and two independent cohorts of European-ancestry (Dutch and New 
Zealand) were included in the study. Genotyping was performed us -
ing TaqMan® allelic discrimination assay for the rs33996649 and 
rs2476601 polymorphisms in the PTPN22 gene. Meta-analysis was 
performed to test the overall effect of each polymorphism in UC and 
CD (Including for the R620W: 5305UC, 7081CD, 9502 healthy controls 
and for R263Q: 2085UC, 2434CD, 3102 healthy controls).
We found that the R263Q PTPN22  polymorphism is significantly as -
sociated with UC in the Spanish population (P=0.017,OR=0.64,95%C
I=0.43-0.94) and the meta-analysis confirmed this association (P=0.0
07pooled,OR=0.69,95%CI=0.52-0.90). Although, the R263Q polymor -
phism is not significant associated to CD (P=0.29pooled,OR=1.13,95
%CI=0.89-1.43), we found through the meta-analysis, that the C allele 
of the R620W PTPN22  variant is a risk factor to develop CD (P=0.000
1pooled,OR=1.29,95%CI=1.13-1.46) but is not for UC (P=0.08pooled,
OR=1.09,95% CI=0.95-1.25) in the Caucasian population.
Our data suggest that the A allele of the R263Q PTPN22  polymorphism 
reduced the risk of UC. While, the C allele of the R620W PTPN22  poly-
morphism is a risk factor to CD.
P08.49  Development of real-time PCR assay and comparison with RFLP genotyping of 49A/G ctLA-4
A. Bicek1, A. Fratnik Steyer2, M. J. Mandelc Mazaj3, T. Pajic3;  
1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Nuclear Medicine, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Veterinary Faculty, Institute for 
microbiology and parasitology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University Medical Centre 
Ljubljana, Department of Haematology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) has a role in control -
ling immune response delivering a negative signal to T-cell activation. 
A single nucleotide polymorphism at position 49 in the exon 1 of the 
CTLA-4 gene (49A/G) has been associated with several autoimmune 
diseases. In order to analyze the 49A/G polymorphism a conventional 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by the restriction fragment 
length polymorphism method (RFLP) has been described. Although 
RFLP has widely been accepted as suitable method, more automated 
and faster genotyping method might be needed for routine use and 
population studies. In our previously described study the genotyping 
of 49A/G polymorphism by RFLP using BseXI enzyme was carried 
out. Here are reported data on the design of primers and MGB-probes 
used in the real-time PCR assay to detect the 49A/G polymorphism. A 
comparison of the used RFLP and the new real-time PCR assay has 
been done on 45 samples. Four results were found to be discordant 
between the two methods. Three samples defined as heterozygotes 
(AG) by the RFLP method were identified as mutant homozygotes 
(GG) using the real-time PCR assay. In one case RFLP-defined wild 
type homozygote (AA) was identified as heterozygote. Cause of these 
discordant results could be incomplete enzyme restriction in RFLP 
which is avoided in real-time PCR assay. In addition, using real-time 
PCR method a possible cross-contamination is minimized. Therefore, 
it could be concluded that the developed real-time PCR assay gives Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods212
more accurate results than RFLP and is more appropriate for 49A/G 
CTLA-4 genotyping.
P08.50  Identification of a novel locus for autosomal dominant 
Restless Legs syndrome in an irish Pedigree
E. B. Skehan , M. M. Abdulrahim, N. A. Parfrey, C. K. Hand;  
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
Introduction: Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) is a common neurologi -
cal sleep-related disorder, which affects 5-10% of the general popula -
tion. The disorder is characterised by an irresistible urge to move the 
lower limbs associated with unpleasant sensations. Symptoms pres -
ent while at rest, generally in the evening, and are relieved, at least 
partially and temporarily, by movement. The condition is predominantly 
an autosomal dominant disorder. Molecular genetic approaches have 
identified six distinct genomic regions. No specific gene within these 
loci has been reported thus far. Association mapping has highlighted a 
further five areas of interest.
Aim: The goal of this research was to map and identify the gene re -
sponsible for the syndrome in a newly identified autosomal dominant 
Irish RLS family (RLS3002).
Method: Eighteen members of the RLS3002 family participated in the 
study; eleven affected and seven unaffected members. All known RLS 
loci and associated regions were examined for linkage. A genome wide 
linkage analysis scan was then conducted.
Result: Linkage was excluded from all published RLS loci. The ge -
nome-wide scan identified a region of linkage with a maximum LOD 
score of 3.59, at a theta value of 0. A genetic region which corresponds 
to 2.5 Mb was defined by haplotype analysis. A number of candidate 
genes have been identified and are the subject of further study.
Conclusion: We have successfully identified a novel locus for auto -
somal dominant Restless Legs Syndrome, which will enable us to at -
tempt to identify the causative gene in this family.
P08.51  Pharmacogenetics of stroke (Geno-tPA study): genetic 
background predicts hemorrhagic transformation after 
thrombolytic therapy in ischemic stroke
A. del Río-Espínola1, I. Fernández-Cadenas1, D. Giralt1, M. Gutiérrez2, M. 
Quintana3, M. Mendióroz1, S. Domingues-Montanari1, M. Ribó3, J. Serena4, V. 
Obach5, J. Martí6, M. Freijo7, J. Montaner1;  
1Neurovascular Resarch Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biochemistry 
Department. Vall d‘Hebrón Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neurology Department. 
Vall d‘Hebrón Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Josep Trueta, Girona, 
Spain, 5Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant 
Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain.
Background: t-PA is the unique treatment for acute ischemic stroke 
management. Despite its global beneficial effect, 20-30% of t-PA treat -
ed patients suffer hemorrhagic transformations (HT).
Methods: Two cohorts of 540 and 360 stroke t-PA treated subjects 
were analyzed. 162 SNP were genotyped in both cohorts using SN -
Plex technology. Results robustness was assessed by bootstrap 
analysis. Baseline protein and mRNA levels of associated genes were 
determined in 140 individuals. Finally, a predictive model was gener -
ated with clinical and genetic data.
Results: 9 SNP were independently associated with HT appearance 
in the first 540-cohort. One of them, located in a gene related to blood 
brain barrier permeability, resisted Bonferroni correction and was vali -
dated in the replication cohort using either dominant model or addi -
tive model [Table 1]. Furthermore, it was consistently associated in 
bootstrap analysis. This variant correlated with plasmatic protein levels 
(p=0.016) but not with baseline mRNA levels (p=0.669). Another SNP 
was associated in bootstrap analysis, which was in the threshold of 
significance [Table 1]. This SNP influenced protein activity (p=0.004) 
and was associated with intrahospitalary death (p900= 0.00048).
The predictive model allowed us to predict HT up to 50% occurrence 
with higher predictive capacity than clinical data alone.
Conclusion: genetic background is underlying HT appearance after 
thrombolytic therapy and might be a useful tool to predict hemorrhagic 
complications in acute stroke management.AA540 B-carriers540 p540 AA360 B-carriers360 p360
SNP_1 30.5% 15% 8.8*10-5 25.7% 15.5% 0.02
SNP_2 25% 18.1% 0.102 24.9% 12.9% 0.011
A-alelle540 B-alelle540 p540 A-alelle360 B-allele360 p360 Bootstrap
SNP_1 25.8% 14.7% 0.0002 23.1% 14.6% 0.0136 964/1000
SNP_2 23.9% 17.3% 0.074 23% 11.5% 0.004 722/1000
P08.52  -1082A genetic variant of interleukin-10 gene promoter linked to schizophrenia in a spanish schizophrenic population
B. Almoguera1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, R. Lopez-Rodriguez3,4, M. Roman3,4, J. 
Lopez-Castroman5, P. Dorado6, J. Fernandez-Piqueras7, E. Baca5, A. Llerena6, 
F. Abad-Santos3,4, C. Ayuso1,2;  
1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), 
CAIBER Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en 
Red (CIBER) de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Clinical 
Pharmacology Department, CAIBER Unit, Hospital Universitario de la 
Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red (CIBER): 
Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5Psychiatrics 
Department, IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz. CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain, 6CICAB, 
Clinical Research Centre, Extremadura University Hospital and Medical School, 
Badajoz, Spain, 7Genetics Department, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Schizophrenia aetiology is predominantly genetic with up 
to 80% heritability presumably caused by the interaction of a cluster of 
genes, each contributing with small increase in the global risk. Massive 
information is emerging from association studies that give rise to mul -
tiple candidate genes no consistently replicated. The aim of this study 
is to analyze the relationship of variants in genes previously linked 
to schizophrenia, namely SLC6A4 , HTR2A , DRD3 , COMT , GRIN2B, 
TNFα  and IL-10.
Subjects and methods: 261 unrelated schizophrenic patients and 437 
controls were genotyped for the genetic variants selected, through 
PHARMAChip , a Pharmacogenetic tool with polymorphisms involved 
in the therapeutic outcome. Pearson’s χ2 test, Bonferroni correction and 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were used to assess genetic association.
Results: IL-10 -1082A allele and A/A genotype were significantly in -
creased in schizophrenic patients compared to controls (χ2=7.75; 
p=0.005 and χ2=11.57; p=0.0007 respectively). IL-10  genotypes did 
not deviate from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Discussion: Three single nucleotide polymorphisms have been de -
scribed in the promoter of the IL-10  gene, which define three hap -
lotypes in Caucasian populations. These haplotypes are known to 
influence IL-10 production with  high, intermediate and low producing 
haplotypes. High producing allele -1082G and haplotype have been 
linked to schizophrenia. We found the low producing allele -1082A as -
sociated to schizophrenia. Thus, haplotype distribution investigation is 
needed to elucidate the role of interleukin 10 in schizophrenia. Insuf -
ficient sample size or exclusion of causative role could be the explana -
tion for the lack of association found in the remaining genes
P08.53  Association of G72/G30 polymorphisms with 
schizophrenia in the populations from Bashkortostan (Russia).
A. Zainullina , A. Kazantseva, T. Noskova, A. Gareeva, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Recently, the nested genes G72 and G30 on chromosome 13q32-q33 
have been implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia. We hypothesized 
that polymorphic changes in this gene region might be associated with 
schizophrenia in populations from Bashkortostan (Russia). We investigat -
ed four SNPs (rs2391191, rs3918342, rs978714 and rs1341402) in 351 
patients (131 Russians, 112 Tatars and 108 Bashkirs) with schizophrenia 
and 423 control subjects (115 Russians, 168 Tatars and 140 Bashkirs). 
Case-control comparisons were based on association analysis, linkage 
disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype frequency estimations. The T/T geno -
type (rs3918342) associated with an increased risk (OR = 1,87; CI 95% 
1,08 - 3,24) of schizophrenia in Russians patients. Maximum likelihood 
analysis of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of a link -
age disequilibrium between the two loci rs2391191 and rs1341402 in 
subjects of the Bashkirs (D’= 52%), Russians (D’= 75%), Tatars (D’= 
59%) descent. Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the CG 
haplotype (p=0.081) among Tatar patients compared to control.Conclu -
sions: Our findings suggest that the genes G72/G30 may be associated 
with schizophrenia; however, the effect is influenced by ethnicity.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods21
P08.54  Evidence of the future synpolydactyly genetic 
heterogeneity in sPD1 locus
O. A. Schagina , E. L. Dadali, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscov, Russian Federation.
Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare limb deformity showing a distinctive 
combination of syndactyly and polydactyly. SPD is characterized by 
webbing between 3/4 fingers and between 4/5 toes. Three loci have 
been identified at chromosomes 2q31 (SPD1), 22q13.31 (SPD2) and 
14q11.2-q12 (SPD3).
The five generation Russian family was ascertained. A detailed pedi -
gree was constructed and 15 subjects were physically examined. Eight 
subjects were found to be affected. Five members has syndactyly of 
the third and fourth fingers both hands, one member of one hand and 
two members has syndactyly of the third and fourth hands fingers and 
polydactyly of the fifth toe in the feet.
To test the candidate locuses for linkage with the phenotype segregat -
ing in the Russian family, microsatellite markers from region 2q31-q32 
(SPD1: D2S1776, D2S326, D2S2314, D2S324, D2S311, D2S164, 
D2S2250 and intragenic CA repeat of HOXD13 intron 1); from region 
22q13 (SPD2: D22S1141, D22S928, D22S274) were selected. Two 
microsatellite markers flanking the SPD1 candidate interval (D2S2314, 
D2S324) and intragenic CA repeat revealed significantly high LOD 
scores (Zmax ≥2) indicating a strong evidence of linkage between 
this locus and the phenotype segregating in the Russian family. How -
ever at research of all coding, not coding and regulatory regions of 
HOXD13 gene it was not revealed any nucleotides substitutions ex -
cept rs72923424. Polyalanine repeat expansion mutations were not 
found too.
The received results can testify about future genetic heterogeneity of 
synpolydactyly in SPD1locus and possible involving of others locus 
2q31-q32 HOX genes to SPD pathogenesis.
P08.55  Association of type 1 diabetes to the MHC2TA gene and 
genotype frequencies among controls with age
A. Gyllenberg1, S. Asad1, M. Janer2, B. Van Yserloo3, J. L. Hoehna3, E. A. 
Rutledge3, L. Padyukov4, B. McNeney5, J. Graham5, F. Piehl1, C. Törn6, M. 
Orho-Melander7, E. Lindholm7, C. Graff8, K. Åkesson1, M. Landin-Olsson6, Å. 
Lernmark9,6, T. Olsson1, I. Kockum1;  
1Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Institute for Systems Biology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Molecular and Genetics Core, 
Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, United States, 4Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of Statistics and Actuarial Sciences, 
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 6Department of Medicine, 
University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden, 7Diabetes and Cardiovascular 
Disease, Genetic Epidemiology,University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden, 
8Department of Neurobiologi (NVS) Karolinska University Hospital Novum, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 9Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States.
The MHC2TA gene, which is crucial in expression of MHCII molecules, 
has been reported to associate to a wide range of diseases like Rheu -
matoid Arthritis (RA), Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and Myocardial Infarction 
(MI). These results have been replicated with varying results depend -
ing partly on which control group was used. Linkage to chromosome 
16p13 where MHC2TA is situated has been reported to type 1 diabetes 
(T1D). Here we test whether the gene is associated to T1D and MS 
with correction for age and if there is a change in genotype frequency 
depending on age in the MHC2TA gene among the controls.
Several markers in the MHC2TA gene were genotyped using mainly 
Taqman allelic discrimination in two large materials of MS and T1D 
patients. Also >10000 controls from studies of RA, MS, T1D, MI and 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) was typed for 3 SNP markers. The controls 
were divided into 5 years intervals with respect to age at disease on -
set/sampling. Chi-squared test was used to detect significant associa -
tion; Chi-squared Test for Trend in Proportions was used to detect the 
overall trend in genotype over age, and logistic regression was used to 
control for age-differences.
The results shows significant association to T1D (RS11074930 p=0.03, 
RS11074932 p=0.008, RS3087456 p=0.02) but not to MS for the 3 mark -
ers when correcting for age, also there is a significant difference in the 
genotype distribution for all 3 markers with respect to age among controls. 
This could have several causes that need to be further investigated.P08.56  The efficiency of multiple splitting strategy for linkage 
analysis
I. Zorkoltseva ;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
The large pedigrees from isolated populations are very informative for 
multipoint linkage analysis of complex traits. However, to analyze them 
by using existing programs for linkage analysis, it is necessary to split 
the pedigree into non-overlapping fragments of the suitable size. This 
splitting can be done in various ways to produce multiple sub-pedi -
grees sets with quite different characteristics. Each of these sets would 
be informative to detect linkage signals on different chromosomal re -
gions. We proposed to use several splittings for genome-wide linkage 
maximizing LODscore on all the splittings for each marker. The main 
problem which arises due to multiple testing is generating a correct 
genome-wide significance threshold for linkage result. To assess the 
empirical type I error and the efficiency of our strategy, we performed 
a simulation study of a quantitative trait. We split the complex pedigree 
including 1500 members by use programs Jenti (Falchi & Fuchsberg -
er, 2008), PedCut (Liu et al., 2008) and PedStr (Kirichenko et al., 2009) 
into three sub-pedigrees sets. The threshold corresponding to signifi -
cance level depended from splitting and varied within 5%. The same 
threshold for maxLODscores increased by 14 % of average threshold. 
However, power of the analysis was retained and the detection of QTL 
position became more accurate. We believe the use of several split -
tings instead of one, is quite effective strategy for search of genes of 
complex traits.
P08.57  Vitamin D receptor genetic polymorphism and bone mineral density in iranian postmenopausal women
M. Daneshpour, N. Ahmadi, S. Poormohammadvali-Behnami , F. 
Hosseinpanah;  
Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Objective: Osteoporosis is one of the most important medical prob -
lems facing the aging population especially postmenopausal women. It 
is a common disease with a strong genetic component. Polymorphism 
of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene has been reported to play a ma -
jor role in variations for genetic regulation of bone mass. To clearance 
of its role BsmI polymorphism were studied in Iranian postmenopausal 
women.
Methods: 128 women from Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (TLGS) 
study (53 postmenopausal, 75 premenopausal) were selected who 
underwent BMD testing, serum 25(OH) D, calcium, phosphorus and 
bone mass were measured, they had genotyping for the VDR alleles 
using polymerase chain reaction methods and restriction fragment 
length polymorphism with Bsm1 based on the present (b) and the ab -
sent (B).
Results: In current study the respective frequencies of VDR genotype 
were BB 18%, Bb 52% and 30% bb. After adjusting the influence of 
age and menopausal status, the analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) 
revealed that the presence of the bb genotype increases the BMD in 
premenopausal individuals (Femoral neck, p 0.005; Trochanteric, p 
0.047; Total femoral, p 0.051; Lumbar spine (L1-L4), p 0.007).
Conclusion: It was found that there is significantly association between 
VDR gene polymorphism with bone mineral density in different meno -
pausal situation. These finding suggest that the ethnic diversity in VDR 
genotype frequencies, the association between the genotypes and 
bone mass might be in part responsible for the ethnic differences in 
bone mass.
P08.58  Identity-by-descent probability estimation for multiple sNP markers
G. R. Svischeva , I. V. Zorkoltseva, T. I. Axenovich, T. I. Axenovich;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Availability of dense SNP maps has opened new possibilities for iden -
tity-by-descent (IBD) calculations. Development of the new methods 
for large pedigrees is actual because large number of individual ge -
nome sequences will be available soon. Application of recursive meth -
ods of approximate IBD computation is the most acceptable for the 
large complex pedigrees and large number of analysed markers. One 
of such approaches had been proposed by Wang et al. (1995) for ar -
bitrary pedigrees with complete marker information. But its application Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods21
to the multipoint genotype data is not expedient, because in this case 
many related pairs may be non-informative. The problem was solved 
by recursive multi-point approach proposed by Pong-Wong et al. 
(2001). This approach permits to obtain effective IBD probabilities by 
genotypes of informative flanking loci due to specifying transmission 
of alleles of non-informative locus from parents to offspring but only 
with individuals whose parents and grandparents were genotyped. To 
find effective IBD estimates with all individuals of large complex pedi -
gree with ungenotyped generations, we develop a universal approach 
combining these recursive methods, witch expands limits of their ap -
plication. The approach makes it possible to compute quickly and suf -
ficiently exactly IBD estimates using any multipoint genotype data.
J08.1  A study of anthropometric trait in Korean Twin chort
J. Lee1, Y. Kim2, M. Lee3, M. Go2, N. Kim4, J. Lee2, B. Han2, J. Sung5;  
1Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome 
Science,National Institute of Health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Division of Structural and Functional 
Genomics, Center for Genome Science,National Institute of Health, Korea 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 
3Division of BioBank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Science, National 
institute of health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, 
Korea, Republic of, 4Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, 
Korea, Republic of, 5Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of.
We surveyed the 1520 respondents drawn from the Korean Genome 
and Epidemiology Study (KoGES), which is an ongoing prospective 
twin cohort study and also genotyped 1,861 samples from the Korean 
Genome and Project (KoGAP). This study is to assess the impact of 
their influence including single nucleotide polymorphisms from Korean 
Twin. Genomic DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was 
used for this study. We recruited twin pairs first using a population-
based twin cohort in Korea. These twins were of Korean ancestry, to 
analyze their genome association within 1 ethnicity. There were 1298 
individuals from 374 twin pairs who have clinical, epidemiological and 
genotyping data, including 224 monozygotic and 169 dizygotic individ -
uals. We performed a Genome -wide association study, typing cases 
and controls on a single platform using the Affymetrix Genome-Wide 
Human SNP array chip (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP chip). Genotype calls were 
determined by Birdseed algorithm.
For clinical, epidemiological and genotype data related to anthropome -
try in Korean twin cohort data, we tried to analyze heritable and signifi -
cances. Especially, we showed the differences of metabolic traits using 
generalized estimating equations(GEEs) were performed on age- and 
sex-adjusted data.
J08.2  Genetic component in polyaetiology models of chronic 
generelaized periodontitis with an aggressive current.
A. I. Zinoveva1, O. A. Shсhagina2, N. V. Komarova2, V. G. Atrushkevich1;  
1MGMSU, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2RCMG, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Prevalence of inflammatory diseases periodontis in age group of 35-44 
years on the world makes 94.3 %. In disease development periodonts 
assume presence genetic components. The basic directions of search 
candidate genes were made among markers of infringement of a bone 
metabolism. On the basis of a clinical picture and the given laboratory 
analyses (raised level PTH and decrease CALC), for studying have 
been chosen polimorphisms genes CALCR, COLIA1 and PTHR1, ear -
lier defined as hereditary factors of decrease bone mineral density .
Research objective was to definite genetic components of chronic ge -
nerelaized periodontitis with an aggressive current (AgP). Research of 
polymorphic variants COLIA1  (rs1800012) and CALCR  (rs1801197), 
was spent by a Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification 
(MLPA), for PTHR1 research has been chosen VNTR from promoter 
region, genotypes was carried out by a amplification fragments lengths 
polymorphism (AFLP). The research was made on DNA samples of 
151 person of both sexes which have divided into 3 groups. 1st group 
included patients with AgP, middle age 38.9±5.7, 2nd group includ -
ed patients with a system osteoporosis (OP) middle age 68.2±5.4, 
3rd group has made casual populations sample (CPS), middle age 
45.7±5.3.Groups AgP OP CPS
Alleles  
CALCRN=43 % N=40 % N=78 %
T 61 0.71 53 0.68 120 0.77
C 25 0.29 23 0.32 36 0.23
COLI1A1 N=43 % N=40 % N=77 %
G 44 0.51 68 0.76 124 0.82
T 42 0.49 8 0.24 28 0.18
PTHR1 N=43 % N=40 % N=82 %
5 65 0.76 56 0.76 106 0.67
6 21 0.24 18 0.24 51 0.32
9 0 0 0 0 1 0.01
The results of researches have shown authentic distinction on CO -
LI1A1 in group AgP in comparison with CPS (p≤0,05) .
J08.3  Association between +12545GT CollAl genotypes 
with different stages of caries in children with chronic 
gastroduodenitis.
D. A. Kuzmina1, M. V. Moskalenko2, M. M. Kostik3, S. V. Azanchevskaya4, A. O. 
Sidorkin5, B. T. Moroz1, V. P. Novikova3, V. I. Larionova3;  
1Medical Academy of Postgraduate Study, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2“Gene“, Ltd, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3State 
Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4City‘s 
Hospital #4, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5City‘s Hospital #2, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Collagen I type is one of structural proteins of connective tissue. The 
changes of collagen structure associated with any connective tissue 
disorders, with symptoms of gastrointestinal involvement.
The aim of our study were children with caries and chronic gastro -
duodenitis. Methods: We included 70 children aged 12-17 years, with 
different stages of caries and chronic gastroduodenitis with morpho -
logical approve. Morphological changes ranged from different degree 
of fibrosis of mucous stomach membrane: 27 with intensive, 26 with 
moderate and 16 without fibrosis. Dental examination was revealed 
different stages of caries. Molecular testing of +12545GT polymor -
phism of CollA1 gene was carried out by RFLP.
Results: ss genotype of CollA1 gene was revealed in 5 patients with 
decompensate caries (7,5%). Ss genotype was determined in 53,7% 
with decompensate and in 28,3% with compensate caries (p<0,05) and 
in 11,9% of children without caries p<0,05). Frequency of SS genotype 
decreased relatively to degree of caries (p<0,05).
Children with intensive stomach mucous membrane fibrosis have rare 
SS genotype compare with children without fibrosis (33,3% compare 
72%) and frequently Ss (42,6% compare 28%) and ss genotypes (24% 
compare 0%), chi-square=20,11, p=0,0004, C=0,58. We have no de -
tected significant differences in genotypes distribution of CollA1 geno -
types between patients with moderate fibrosis and without it.
Conclusion: children with Ss and ss genotypes more frequently have 
decompensate caries (53,7% and 7,5%) and also have more signifi -
cant fibrosis changes in stomach mucous membrane (Ss - 42,6% and 
ss - 24%). Children with decompensate stages of caries need in wide 
endoscope and morphological examination.
J08.4  Association between a polymorphism in the G-protein β3 
subunit gene and unipolar depression
T. Noskova , E. Khusnutdinova;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre RAS, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
A dysfunction of the serotonergic system can lead to development 
of unipolar depression (UD). There are 14 different serotonin recep -
tors, 13 of which are G-protein-coupled receptors. The T-allele of the 
C825T polymorphism of the GNB3 gene coding G-protein β3 subunit 
was found to be associated with the expression of a short splice vari -
ant termed G3βs, a biologically active Gβ-protein that may be associ -
ated with enhanced signal transduction. A total of 230 patients with UD 
(95 Russians and 123 Tatars) were included in this study. The control 
group included 357 individuals (83 Russians and 274 Tatars) without 
a personal/family history of any psychiatric disorders. The C825T 
polymorphism of the GNB3 gene was analyzed using PCR technique. 
There were no statistical differences between UD patients and healthy 
controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the GNB3 polymor -
phism investigated. But we found the tendency to increase *C-allele in Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods21
patient group of Tatars ethnicity: χ2 = 3,403, P=0,065.
The research was supported by the Russian Humanitarian Research 
Fund (the grant number 08-06-00579a).
J08.5  Analysis of interaction between rs2476601 and rs10818488 
sNPs in causing risk for rheumatoid artheritis
S. Ahmadlou1, A. Salimzadeh2, M. Akhyani3, M. Keramatipour1;  
1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Rheumatology Section, Sina Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Alborz 
Hospital, Karaj, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease with a 
complex etiology affecting 1% of the world population. It appears that 
RA requires the complex interaction of genetic and environmental fac -
tors with the immune system, and ultimately in the synovial tissues. 
The role of genetic elements in determining both the risk of developing 
RA and the severity of the disease had already been acknowledged. 
Association studies in various populations have reported a number 
of genetic variations affecting the individual susceptibility to RA. The 
strongest association has been reported from genes within the HLA 
region, particularly the HLA-DRB1 gene.
The rs2476601 SNP of PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase non -
receptor 22) gene can be named as the second polymorphism that 
has been repeatedly reported to be associated with RA. The associa -
tion of another SNP, rs10818488 located near TRAF1 gene, has been 
recently picked up by genome wide association studies. So far there 
is no report investigating the possible association of rs2476601 and 
rs10818488 SNPs with RA in Iranian population. Therefore the aim 
of this study is to determine the possible association of these SNPs 
with RA in Iranian population using family-based (parents-child trios) 
as well as population-based case-control studies.
In addition to testing for association, analysis of interaction between 
the two SNPs will be performed on obtained data.
Currently the genotyping of samples are being carried out. The results 
will be presented at the meeting.
P09 complex traits and polygenic 
disorders
P09.001  Genetic risk factors underlying Achilles tendinopathy: the
 IL-1β,  iL-1RN and iL-6 genes
A. V. September1, E. Nell1, K. O‘Connell1, M. Collins1,2;  
1UCT/MRC Research Unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, 
Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa, 2Medical Research Council of South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa.
An increase in the incidence of overuse injuries such as Achilles tendi -
nopathy (TEN) was noted. A number of extrinsic and intrinsic risk fac -
tors have been suggested to be associated with increased risk includ -
ing genetic elements within the COL5A1 , TNC, MMP3 , GDF5  genes.
The aim was to investigate if functional polymorphisms within genes 
encoding proteins involved in tendon signalling pathways such as IL-
1β (rs16944 and rs1143267 ), IL-1RN ( rs2234663),  IL-6 (rs1800795) 
were associated with AT in a South Africa (SA) and an Australian 
(AUS) case-control study.
171 TEN (89 SA and 82 AUS) and 356 asymptomatic control subjects 
(CON) (158 SA and 198 AUS) were genotyped using RFLP analy -
sis. Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact tests were applied (significance 
p<0.05).
The rs16944:TT genotype (OR=3.4, 95% CI 1.2-9.6; p=0.018) and 
rs1143627: C allele (OR=1.7, 95% CI 1.0-2.7; p=0.048) in IL-1β  were 
significantly over represented in the SA male CON group. No differ -
ences were noted between the AUS male/female or SA female groups. 
No associations were observed for IL-RN in either population.
The GG genotype (OR = 2.1, 95% CI 1.2-3.6; p=0.017) and G allele 
(OR = 1.5, 95% CI 1.0-2.2; p=0.044) of IL-6 rs1800795 was significant -
ly over represented in AUS TEN, however no differences were noted 
in the SA groups.
In conclusion, the rs16944:TT and rs1143627:C in IL-1β  are associated 
with reduced risk of TEN; IL-6 rs1800795:GG and G allele are associ -
ated with increased risk of TEN. This provides preliminary evidence for 
the involvement of the inflammatory pathway in the development of AT.P09.002  Epistasis between neurochemical gene polymorphisms 
and risk for ADHD
R. Segurado1, M. A. Bellgrove2, F. Manconi3, M. Gill1, Z. Hawi1;  
1Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College, 
Dublin, Ireland, 2The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute and 
School of Psychology, Brisbane, Australia, 3Department of Neurosciences ‚B. B. 
Brodie‘, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
A number of genes with function related to synaptic neurochemistry 
have been associated with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. 
However, susceptibility to the development of common psychiatric dis -
orders by single variants acting alone, can so far only explain a small 
proportion of the heritability of the phenotype. It has been postulated 
that the unexplained “dark heritability” may at least in part be due to 
epistatic effects, which may account for the small observed marginal 
associations, and the difficulties with replication of positive findings. 
We undertook a comprehensive exploration of pair-wise interactions 
between genetic variants in 24 candidate genes involved in monoami -
nergic catabolism, anabolism, release, re-uptake and signal transmis -
sion, in a sample of 177 parent-affected child trios using a case-only 
design. Marker-pairs showing large effects and statistical significance 
were further explored with a case-pseudocontrol design using condi -
tional logistic regression. We detected a number of interaction odds 
ratios greater than 4.0, including an interesting correlation between 
markers in the ADRA1B and DBH genes in affected individuals, and 
several further interesting, but smaller effects. These effects are no 
larger than you would expect by chance under the assumption of inde -
pendence of all pair-wise relations, however independence is unlikely. 
Furthermore, the size of these effects is of interest and attempts to 
replicate these results in other samples are anticipated.
P09.003  clinical validation of age of onset predictor for late-
onset Alzheimer’s Disease.
O. Makeeva1, V. Markova1, J. Arbuckle2, S. Brewster2, A. D. Roses3;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 
2Zinfandel Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Durham, NC, United States, 3Duke University, 
Durham, NC, United States.
A variable, polyT length mutation within intron 6 of the TOMM40  gene, 
adjacent to the APOE  locus, is correlated with age of onset differences 
for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). [http://www.nature.com/tpj/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/tpj200969a.html]  
APOE4  is a well established risk factor 
for AD and 98% of the time is linked to long forms of the polyT variant. 
Linked to APOE3  strands, however, are two distinctly different sizes of 
the polyT repeat, each with distinct evolutionary strand histories within 
the LD area defined by TOMM40  and APOE and each conferring dif -
ferent disease risk. These data have been replicated, but clinical vali -
dation is necessary before use in prediction. A prospective diagnostic 
validation study designed to follow normal individuals between the age 
of 62-87 years, combined with a therapeutic clinical trial of a potential 
„delay of onset“ medicine in the high risk group, has been accepted by the FDA  Voluntary Exploratory Data Submission review group.  An 
international study involving sites in Russia, England, Switzerland, 
Australia and the US has initiated identification of normal volunteers 
so that, once an Investigational New Drug application is in place and 
a clinical trial with appropriate informed consents can be launched, recruitment into the study will be accelerated.  The evolution of the 
TOMM40 polyT mutations is currently being studied in ethnic-specific 
populations. The design of the therapeutic trial, the results of the pre-
recruitment studies [www.opalstudy.org], and the implications of differ -
ent risk allele frequencies and evolutionary histories for multinational 
clinical trials will be presented.
P09.004  Analysis of genes influencing on development of 
alopecia areata of patients from European part of Russia
E. D. Nefedova1, K. N. Suvorova1, A. V. Abrukova2, T. A. Vasileva3, N. V. 
Petrova3, R. A. Zinchenko3;  
1Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate education, course of the skin 
and veneral disorders in childhood, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Medical 
genetic consultation, Cheboxary, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for 
Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Alopecia areata (AA) is a chronic autoimmune dermatosis with genetic 
predisposion, primarily affecting the hair and nails. Detection of genes 
influencing on development of AA is important for understanding the Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
pathogenesis of the disease.
We have examined the 105 patients living in the European territory 
of Russia with various forms and stages of AA, including 43 children 
aged from 3 to 17 years and 62 adult patients aged 19 to 75 years. 70 
(66,7%) patients were diagnosed with mild forms of alopecia areata, 
and 35 (33,3%) patients had severe forms - alopecia totalis (AT) and 
alopecia universalis (AU).
Subject to clinical features and accompanying diseases we have di -
vided ours patients into groups. The first group included patients with 
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (with endocrinopathy, 
chronic skin and mucous candidosis, AA), verified by the mutation in 
AIRE gene R257X in each case. The second group included patients 
with severe form of AA. Two patients were recognized with the muta -
tion in phospholipase gene LIPH (deletion of the 4th exone). A woman 
having combination of total form of AA and ichtiosis vulgaris was rec -
ognized with the mutation 2284del14 in FLG gene.
The third group included patients with various forms of AA. 28 patients 
were diagnosed with combination of AA and other autoimmune diseas -
es (autoimmune tyreoiditis, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, vitiligo). We have examined the polymorphism of the TNFA, 
IL1A, IL1B, IL1RN genes in this group of patients. Some distinctions 
were revealed.
P09.005  Genetic analysis of FUS gene in an italian cohort of 
sporadic ALs patients.
W. Sproviero1,2, C. Ungaro1, R. Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, A. 
Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1,3, M. Muglia1, A. Gambardella1,4, F. L. Conforti1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2University “Magna 
Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Anesthetiological, Psichiatric and 
Neurosciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4University “Magna 
Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy.
FUS (fused in sarcoma) or TLS (translocation in liposarcoma), a DNA/
RNA-binding protein, is the cause of ALS6, a dominant autosomal in -
herited form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Its main role in 
the neurodegeneration is highlighted by the presence of cytoplasmic 
accumulation of its mutant protein form in ALS patients, absent in nor -
mal individuals, in SOD1-mutated ALS patients and in sporadic ALS 
patients positive for TDP-43 aggregates.
The FUS gene (chromosome 16p11.2) is encoded by 15 exons and 
most of the ALS-linked mutations discovered are clustered in the high -
ly conserved extreme C-terminal region.
To further define the frequency and spectrum of FUS mutations, we 
have screened a cohort of 320 Italian patients with sporadic ALS (sALS) 
coming from South Italy, by analyzing first exons 15 and 14 (mutational 
hotspots for sALS cases) and then exons 5 and 6. These exons have 
been analyzed by DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chro -
matography) screening, except for exon 15 directly sequenced.
We have identified two missense mutations, already described, in 4 
patients. The R521G substitution has been observed in 2 patients, as 
well as the P525L mutation has been found in other 2 cases. In our 
screening we found also polymorphic variants some of which are novel 
(3’-UTR variant, c.*41G>A; c.1393+34G>T and c.337-17del[AAAA].
The results of this study combined with other data collections confirm 
that mutations in FUS gene have an important role in pathogenesis of 
ALS, accounting for at least 1% of the sporadic form of the disease 
also in our cohort.
P09.006  Grading the credibility of genetic associations 
in Alzheimer’s disease using the Venice criteria: practical 
considerations following from the Alzgene database
L. Broer , M. Schuur, J. C. van Swieten, C. M. van Duijn, C. A. J. W. Janssens;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
The epidemiological credibility of genetic associations in Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) in the ‘top list’ of the Alzgene database is graded using 
the so-called Venice criteria. We aimed to evaluate the robustness of 
these criteria.
Hypothetical results from simulated studies were added to the meta-
analyses of these associations that were graded with strong credibility 
or with moderate or weak credibility due to inconsistency of replica -
tion (high between-study heterogeneity (I2)) or low summary odds ratio 
(OR < 1.15). Robustness was quantified as the sample size needed to 
change the grading.
For most associations graded with strong credibility, the grade changed to weak credibility because of small summary OR after the addition 
of studies with effects similar to the lowest/highest published OR and 
sample sizes ranging from 80 to 2000 . For half, new studies could 
introduce large I2 when their sample sizes were 400 to 1600. These 
associations ended up with a small summary OR and one became 
non-significant. Two out of four associations graded with moderate and 
weak evidence because of I2 >25%, could not become strong evidence 
because of one outlier in each analysis. Finally, associations with weak 
credibility due to small OR only became non-significant when new 
studies with no effect had sample sizes ranging over 3400 to 6600.
The Venice criteria are very helpful criteria to grade the credibility of 
genetic associations, but its practical usefulness may be limited due to 
outliers and small effects. Further guidance is needed on how to deal 
with these situations.
P09.007  Overexpression of human amyloid precursor protein 
causes neurodegeneration and impairment of cognitive 
functions in transgenic Drosophila melanogaster
D. Rodin1, G. Kislik1, M. Vitek2, S. Sarantseva1;  
1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics, Gatchina, Russian Federation, 2Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States.
Alzheimer disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized 
by accumulation of amyloid deposits, neurofibrillar tangles, neuron 
death. The main component of amyloid plaques is amyloid-β-protein 
(Aβ) - a cleavage product of amyloid precursor protein (APP). Accord -
ing to the main hypothesis primary molecular defects of AD are associ -
ated with Aβ secretion, real mechanisms that lead to neurodegenera -
tion remain unclear.
In our study, transgenic Drosophila melanogaster was established as 
a model to analyze AD-like pathology caused by APP overexpression. 
Drosophila  has α- and γ-secretases and does not have activity of β-
secretase . Therefore flies do not generate Aβ. We expected that an 
elav-GAL4c155 -UAS-driven APP695 and APP695-Swedish overex -
pression in neural cells of Drosophila  may induce specific effects of 
APP independently from Aβ secretion. We showed a strong deficit of 
presynaptic proteins in mushroom bodies in flies that expressed full 
size human APPs. Transgenic lines of Drosophila  that expressed APP 
or APP-Swedish  exhibited a progressive neurodegeneration with nu -
merous vacuoles in the cortex and neuropil and impairment of cogni -
tive functions. We suggest that impairment of cellular functions of APP 
and secretion of neurotoxic forms of Aβ may independently contribute 
to the synaptic loss in AD.
We used novel peptide mimetics of Apolipoprotein-E, COG112 or 
COG133 as therapeutic preparation. Selection of apoE-mimetics 
derived from the receptor-binding region of apoE was based on the 
ability of these peptides to mimic the functional anti-inflammatory and 
neuroprotective effects of the intact apoE protein. The development of 
neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits was corrected by injections 
of COG112 or COG133.
P09.008  Genetic association of CCR2 & CCR  polymoephisms 
with Alzheimer’s disease
M. Mohaddes Ardebili1,2, J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Rezazadeh1, T. Yeghaneh1, F. 
Biuckagazadeh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2These authors contributed 
equally to this work, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Chemokines participate in the regulation of immune and inflammatory 
responses by interacting with their specific receptors on related im -
mune and inflammatory cells such as B-lymphocytes, T-lymphocytes 
and antigen-presenting cells. Chemokines and their receptors are 
therefore considered to mediate inflammation and tissue damage in 
autoimmune disorders. The recent studies have revealed the geno -
types of chemokine receptors (CCR) and their related polymorphisms 
in a number of autoimmune and infectious diseases. We used the 
polymorphic DNA markers (CCR2-64I) and (CCR5Δ32) to study the 
association of CCR2 and CCR5 gene mutations with Late-onset Al -
zheimer’s disease (LOAD) and the relation between clinical features 
and genotypes in affected individuals. A total of 150 patient samples 
and 150 healthy controls from west northern Iran (Eastern Azerbaijan) 
were genotyped for the two polymorphisms by the PCR-RFLP method 
and genotype frequencies were statistically determined. No significant 
linkage was determined between CCR5Δ32 and the disease of inter -Complex traits and polygenic disorders217
est. However the gene CCR2  was appeared to be significantly linked 
to the disease, as it could be concluded from statistical analysis.
P09.009  the association of the regulatory region of the Ps-2 
gene with Alzheimer‘s disease
V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, A. La Russa1, P. Spadafora1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, F. 
Condino1, G. Di Palma1, M. Caracciolo1, G. Nicoletti1,2, R. Cittadella1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Pianolago 
di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia,, 
Catanzaro,, Italy.
There has been increasing evidence that variants in the promoters and 
regulatory regions of presenilins (PS1 and PS2) genes may be rele -
vant in the pathogenesis of familial AD (FAD) by altering transcriptional 
activity. Also, some of those have been reported as risk factors for 
sporadic AD (SAD) development. Firstly, the PS2 promoter contains 
multiple putative binding sites for transcription factors and variants in 
this regulation sequence increases the expression of this gene in vitro 
experiments. The specific objective of our study was to examine these 
genetic variants so as to further explore the pathogenesis of FAD and 
SAD, in an independent series of Southern Italy samples. Clinical data 
and blood sample were collected from 289 AD patients, after inform 
consent. The control group consisted of 324 subjects matched for 
ethnic background, gender and age. Genomic DNA was isolated from 
blood and a polymorphism, located in the 5’ regulatory region of the 
PS2 (deletion of adenosine at the 24914 site), was assessed by PCR-
RFLP (Dde I). There was no statistically significant difference in allelic 
and genotypic frequency distribution between cases and controls. We 
also tested whether the different genotypes were associated with clini -
cal features but no significant differences were detected. To conclude, 
our data suggest that this polymorphism,  despite a biological plausibil -
ity, do not constitutes a risk factor for AD in our population. However 
additional intensive association studies with enlarged sample size in 
different populations are needed, for clarifying the substantial role for 
PS2 gene promoter polymorphisms in AD.
P09.010  Effect FAD mutations on Ps1 mediated cell adhesion 
and synapse formation
A. L. Schwarzman1, S. Sarantseva1, M. Vitek2;  
1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Gatchina, Leningrad’s district, Russian Federation, 2Division of Neurology, Duke 
University Medical Center,, Durham,, NC, United States.
Growing body of evidence suggests that synaptic loss/dysfunction 
occurs in the very early stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The 
mechanism(s) by which synaptic dysfunction occurs is not understood. 
The early-onset familial AD (FAD) caused by mutations in the prese -
nilin 1 (PS1) gene also demonstrates that memory loss and synaptic 
dysfunction occur in the absence of amyloidogenesis or neurofibrillar 
degeneration and precede neuronal death. Recent data indicate that 
PS1 plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion and synapse forma -
tion. Therefore, we analyzed effect of FAD mutations on PS1-medi -
ated cell-cell interactions using confocal microscopy and a quantita -
tive assays based on the measuring of number of cellular aggregates 
and single cells in suspension. L cells stably transfected with induc -
ible GFP-PS1 constructs bearing FAD mutations E318G and G209V 
showed decreased aggregating activity in comparison with wild-type 
GFP-PS1. L cells stably transfected with GFP-PS1 constructs, which 
had a truncated N-terminus, C-terminus or deleted hydrophilic loop of 
PS1 completely failed to form intercellular contacts and or demonstrat -
ed very low aggregating activity. In addition we showed that embry -
onic neurons transfected with GFP-PS1cDNA bearing FADmutations 
displayed a low number of morphological synapses in comparing with 
neurons expressing wild type GFP-PS1.
P09.011  Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alterations as 
a pathogenic model in sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral sclerosis
S. Lattante1, I. Mancuso1,2, G. Marangi1, M. Murdolo1, D. Orteschi1, C. 
Limatola3,4, F. Grassi3, S. Di Angelantonio5, A. Conte6,2, P. Tonali6,7, G. Neri1, M. 
Sabatelli6,2, M. Zollino1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, 
Italy, 2I.CO.M.M. Association for ALS research, Roma, Italy, 3Dipartimento di 
Fisiologia e Farmacologia-Centro di Eccellenza BEMM, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, Roma, Italy, 4Neuromed IRCCS, Isernia, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Biologia 
Cellulare e dello Sviluppo-CRIN Sapienza Università di Roma, Roma, Italy, 6Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 
7Fondazione Don Gnocchi IRCCS, Roma, Italy.
Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (sALS) is a multifactorial neu -
rodegenerative disorder, with unknown aetiology and pathogenesis. 
We performed a mutational analysis of genes encoding for neuronal 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits (nAChRs), considered as 
candidate genes for their role in motorneurons survival and glutama -
tergic pathway. Calcium trafficking mediates nAChRs neuromodulat -
ing effects, including regulation of cell survival and glutamate release. 
We sequenced all exons and flanking intronic regions of CHRNA3, 
CHRNA4 and CHRNB4 genes in 245 patients (all normal for SOD1) 
and in 450 healthy control subjects. We found 15 missense variants 
in patients (6.1%) and 6 variants in controls (1.3%). This difference is 
statistically significant (p=0.001; OR 4.48, 95% CI 1.7 to 11.8). Mis -
sense variants were located within the cytoplasmic loop of the recep -
tor, which has a crucial function in modulating channel ionic properties. 
Tested functionally by mutagenesis, cellular transfection and electro -
physiological studies, the observed variants were found to disrupt the 
receptor properties. Receptors underwent impaired desensitisation 
and prolonged channel opening, causing a subsequent increase of in -
tracellular Ca2+. We suppose that these mutations could be an impor -
tant predisposing factor in ALS. Supporting this hypothesis, tobacco 
smoking is the only proven risk factor for ALS.
Interestingly, three patients with ALS (and none of controls) had a rare 
missense variant in two distinct subunits of nAChR. These results sug -
gest that epistasis is a major component of the genetic architecture of 
complex diseases like ALS.This study highlights a possible pathogenic 
model in sporadic ALS, consisting in a cholinergic dysfunction, that 
could be pharmacologically targeted.
P09.012  Association study of the interleukin iL17A gene in caucasian patients with Ankylosing spondylitis - Preliminary 
results
M. Soares1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, M. R. Santos1,2, J. P. Pinheiro1,2, A. Martinho3, 
H. Alves4, J. E. Fonseca5,6, F. Pimentel7, J. Branco7, R. Amorim8, J. Bruges 
Armas1,2;  
1SEEBMO - HSEAH, 9700-856 Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2IBMC - Instituto 
de Biologia Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 
3Centro de Histocompatibilidade do Centro, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Centro de 
Histocompatibilidade do Norte, Porto, Portugal, 5Unidade de Investigação de 
Reumatologia – IMM, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 6Serviço de Reumatologia – Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 7Serviço de Reumatologia – Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal, 
8Serviço de Medicina Interna – Hospital Caldas da Rainha, Caldas de Rainha, 
Portugal.
Introduction: IL-17 mediates proinflammatory responses and induces 
inflammatory cytokine and chemokine production. High expression of 
IL-17 has been detected in the synovial fluid of spondyloarthropathies 
(SpA)-affected patients. Furthermore, murine arthritis models deficient 
in IL17A have shown reduced inflammation.
Objective: Our aim was to investigate IL-17A as a candidate gene for 
Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS), a member of the group of the seronega -
tive SpA, which characteristic pathological lesion is the inflammation 
of the enthesis. AS has a strong genetic association with allele B*27 of 
the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I.
Patients and Methods: Genomic DNA samples from 283 HLA-B27 pos -
itive individuals were obtained; from those, 139 were diagnosed with 
AS and the other 144 individuals, although HLA-B27+, were healthy 
and thereby used as controls. The IL17A promoter, coding regions and 
intron-exon boundaries were sequenced in the 3130 xl Genetic Analy -
ser AB.
Results: 5 DNA genetic variants on IL17A gene were identified: -197 
G>A (5’UTR region), 27+18 G>A (intron 1), *162 G>A (exon3/3’UTR), 
*1248 C>T (exon3/3’UTR) and *1252 C>T (exon3/3’UTR). None of 
these variants was disease specific. Allele frequencies in affected and 
unaffected individuals were compared using the Fisher’s exact test. 
No statistical significant difference was observed. Conclusion: Our 
genomic DNA results suggest that IL-17A is not involved in the aetio -
pathogenesis of AS in this population. On the other hand, the number 
of individuals analysed in this study could be insufficient to evaluate 
small genetic effects. Further studies should be performed with larger 
sets of individuals.Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
P09.013  A common copy number variant (cNV) encompassing 
two metalloprotease-disintegrin (ADAm) genes is associated with lung function in the EcRHs cohort
M. Bustamante1,2, F. Castro-Giner1,3, R. de Cid4, J. Gonzalez1,3, G. 
Escaramis2,5, D. Jarvis6, N. Probst-Hensch7,8, J. Heinrich9, M. Imboden7,8, J. 
Anto1,3, M. Wjst10, M. Kogevinas1,3, X. Estivill2,5;  
1Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, 
Spain, 2Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), 
Barcelona, Spain, 3Municipal Institute of Medical Research (IMIM-Hospital 
del Mar), Barcelona, Spain, 4CEA, Institut de Genomique, Centre National 
de Genotypage, Evry, France, 5Public Health and Epidemiology Network 
Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain, 6Respiratory 
Epidemiology and Public Health Group, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 7Swiss Tropical and Public Health 
Institute, Basel, Switzerland, 8University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 9Institute 
of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 10German 
Research Center for Environmental Health, Helmholtz Centre GSF, Munich, 
Germany.
Only few studies have investigated the impact of Copy Number Vari -
ants (CNVs) on asthma. We performed a pooling Comparative Ge -
nomic Hybridization (CGH) in order to identify CNVs related to asthma, 
and, in a second stage, we characterized one of the identified CNVs 
and explored its effect on asthma phenotypes in a European popu -
lation-based cohort study (ECRHS). Three pools of DNAs from non-
atopic asthmatic, atopic asthmatic and control individuals were ana -
lyzed by CGH with the Agilent 244K array. A loss on chromosome 8 
was detected in the DNA pool from non-atopic asthmatic individuals 
compared with the DNA pool from the control sample. The CNV was 
located in a cluster containing several ADAM  genes and encompassed 
the 3’ of the ADAM5P  gene and the ADAM3A  gene. The breakpoints 
were identical in the individuals analyzed by sequencing. The CNV 
was genotyped in the HapMap individuals with a FAM labeled PCR 
based method, and the minor allele frequencies were 8% in YRI, 14% 
in CHB and 45% in CEU. A SNP (rs11985201) was found to be in high 
linkage disequilibrium with the CNV (r2>0.8), and thus it was used as 
a proxy to explore the effect of the CNV on asthma phenotypes. In 
the ECRHS cohort (n=2129), the tag SNP was associated with lung 
function, mainly with predicted Forced Expiratory Volume in the first 
second (FEV1%) (p=0.0067), and predicted Forced Vital Capacity 
(FVC%) (p=0.014). In summary, a common CNV that encompasses 
ADAM5P  and ADAM3A  genes was associated with lung function in 
the ECRHS cohort.
P09.014  study of gene-gene interactions for bronchial asthma 
in Russians from Volga-Ural region of Russia
Y. Fedorova1, A. Karunas1, G. Gimalova2, I. Skachkova2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Bronchial asthma (BA) is a complex chronic respiratory disease re -
sulting from interactions between multiple genes and environmental 
factors. In this study we have genotyped 21 polymorphic markers in 15 
genes of cytokines (IL4, IL4RA, IL10, TNFA, IL1B, IL1RA), biotransfor -
mation of xenobiotics (CYP1A1, CYP2D6, GSTT1, GSTM1, MTHFR, 
NAT2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19), and a disintegrin and metalloprotease 
33 (ADAM33). A total of 295 unrelated participants of Russian ethnic 
group were recruited, including 172 patients with BA and 123 non -
asthmatic individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia. We found 
significant associations of IL4(-590C>T), ADAM33(11434C>A) gene 
polymorphisms with asthma susceptibility. Genotype -590T/T and al -
lele -590T of IL4 gene were associated with an increased risk of atopic 
asthma (OR=5,04, 95%CI 1,78-14,21; OR=1,88, 95%CI 1,25-2,83, ac -
cordingly). Also we found increased frequencies of ADAM33*11434A/
A genotype and ADAM33*11434A allele among patients with severe 
asthma compared with controls (OR=3,14, 95%CI 1,55-6,37; OR=2,02, 
95%CI 1,20-3,38, accordingly). The associations remained significant 
after an adjustment for age. Generalized multifactor dimensionality re -
duction (GMDR) method was used to analyze gene-gene interactions 
for bronchial asthma. One two-locus model had a minimum prediction 
error (testing accuracy 0,59) and a maximum CV consistency (8/10). 
This model consisted of TNFA(-308G>A) and ADAM33(11434C>A) 
loci. Significant gene-gene interactions between TNFA (-308G>A), 
IL10 (-627C>A), IL4 (-590C>T), IL4RA (Ile50Val), IL1RA (VNTR), IL1B 
(3953C>T) loci were detected for atopic asthma in Russian children (testing accuracy 0,69; CV consistency (10/10)). For non-atopic asth -
ma, significant interactions were found between IL4 (-590C>T), IL1RA 
(VNTR), ADAM33 (11434C>A) loci in Russian adult, with CV consis -
tency (10/10) and testing accuracy 0,68.
P09.015  An association of cc16 gene polymorphism with 
asthma in children
V. Tikhonova , A. Voitovich, D. Korostovsev, V. Larionova;  
St.Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Background: Clara cell secretory protein 16-kDa (CC16) is an anti-
inflammatory protein produced mainly by Clara cells in the distal re -
spiratory lung epithelium. A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of 
the CC16 gene (A38G) was previously reported to be associated with 
asthma. 
Objective: To investigate allele and genotype frequencies of the CC16 
gene polymorphism in children with asthma. 
Patients and methods: Study group: 136 children aged 3 -17 years old 
including 70 boys and 10 girls with mild asthma and 41 boys, 15 girls 
with severe asthma. Control group: 127 healthy children (67 boys and 
47 girls) aged 4-17 years old. Genetic polymorphism of CC16 was 
identified by PCR-RFLP (Laing et al., 1998). The data were compared 
by Chi-square test. 
Results: Both allele and genotype distribution of the CC16 gene poly -
morphism were similar in asthma patients and in controls being line 
with previously reported date. No difference was found when compar -
ing CC16 gene polymorphism between groups: mild asthma - severe 
asthma, severe asthma - control, mild asthma - control. However 
we observed a significant difference in prevalence of 38A allele in 
asthmatic girls compared to girls from control group (88% vs 58%, 
χ2=7.528, p=0.023, OR=1.5 95% CI=1.17 -1.95). Additionally, of 38A 
allele frequencies was significantly higher in asthmatic girls compared 
to asthmatic boys (88% vs 64%, χ2=8.414, p=0.015, OR=1.5 95% 
CI=1.23 - 1.89). 
Conclusion: We proposed that CC16 gene polymorphism A38G might 
be predisposing factor of asthma development in girls.
P09.016  ABcG1 transporter in reverse cholesterol transport and 
atherosclerosis development.
V. Miroshnikova1, E. Demina1, P. Kurjanov2, A. Vinogradov3, A. Denisenko3, A. 
Schwarzman1;  
1Petersburg nuclear physics institute, Gatchina, Russian Federation, 2Saint-
Retersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg institute of experimental medicine, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Transport of excess cholesterol by high density lipoproteins (HDL) from 
macrophages in the periphery back to the liver, called reverse choles -
terol transport (RCT), plays an important protective role in the develop -
ment of atherosclerosis. Macrophage ATP binding cassette transporter 
G1 (ABCG1) mediates cholesterol effluence to HDL. However it’s role 
in human atherosclerosis development is undiscovered.
The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of ABCG1 gene 
expression variations on atherosclerosis development. Human periph -
eral blood monocytes were obtained from 25 volunteers: 15 patients 
with angiographically proved atherosclerosis and 10 healthy blood 
donors. Monocytes were cultured with macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (M-CSF) for 24 hours. ABCG1 mRNA levels in monocytes de -
rived macrophages were measured using real time PCR and normal -
ized to beta-actin. ABCG1 gene expression level in macrophages of 
patients with atherosclerosis doesn’t significantly differ from the same 
value for healthy control: average macrophage ABCG1 mRNA levels 
for patients and for healthy individuals are 0.87±0.66 and 1.26±0.55, 
respectively, (p=0.076). Simultaneously there is positive correlation be -
tween macrophage ABCG1 mRNA level and HDL cholesterol (R>0.65, 
p<0.02). These results suggest that ABCG1 transporter regulates HDL 
metabolism and cholesterol content and thereby protects against ath -
erosclerosis.
The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research 
(grant 06-04-49609).Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
P09.017  investigating the relationship between premature 
atherosclerosis and Heme oxegenase 1, Heme oxygenase 2 and 
Kalirin gene in myocardial infarction
M. Zamani , S. Ale yasin, N. Sharbaf Shoar;  
NIGEB, Pajoheshgah, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Atherosclerosis is the most important cause of Cardio-vascular dis -
ease and early and sudden unset which its occurrence is related to 
various factors. Oxidant and oxidative stress are among the environ -
mental factors which cause endothelial vessels hurt. Heme oxygenase 
1and 2 and Kalirin genes decrease oxidative stress and restrict hurt of 
endothelial vessels. The aim of this study is investigating the SNPs of 
promotory region of Heme oxygenase 1and Heme oxygenase 2 genes 
and study of kalirin genes in patients and control group.
Method: Blood sampling was done on 150 patients and 100 normal 
persons.
Results: investigating of promotory part of Heme oxygenase 1, shows 
that SNPs No.rs1805173, rs13057211 and rs3074372 with (P<0.001) 
were meaningful, but SNPs No.rs13057211 and rs3074372 weren’t 
meaningful.
By investigating the Heme oxygenase 2 in the exon 5, substitutions of 
A to G in K89E codone (AAG to GAS) were observed as meaningful 
(P< 0.01).
By investigating of SNPs (rs578477) and (rs 9289231) in kalirin gene 
show that significant and meaningful correlation with premature ath -
erosclerosis (P< 0.01).
Discussion: The investigation of the results shows that there is correla -
tion in Iranian population to affecting premature atherosclerosis with 
SNPs of promotory part of Heme oxygenase 1 the substitution of A to 
G Heme oxygenase 2 and above mentioned SNPs (in result section)of 
kalirin genes show that there is a meaningful correlation to increasing 
susceptibility to premature atherosclerosis among Iranian population.
P09.018  Detection of epistatic effects of FCER1A variants on 
eczema risk
H. Baurecht1,2, E. Rodríguez1, A. Naumann1,3, S. Wagenpfeil3,2, N. Klopp4, H. 
Wichmann4, J. Ring1,5, K. Van Steen6, S. Weidinger1,5;  
1Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany, 2Graduate School of Information Science in Health 
(GSISH), Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Institute for 
Medical Statistics and Epidemiology IMSE, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg, Germany, 5ZAUM – Center for Allergy and Environment, Division 
of Environmental Dermatology and Allergy, Helmholtz Zentrum/Technische 
Universität München, Munich, Germany, 6Systems and Modeling Unit, 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium.
Allergic diseases are mostly driven by high levels of total and aller -
gen-specific IgE levels. The high-affinity receptor for IgE is composed 
of three subunits FCER1A , FCER1B , FCER1G  and represents the 
central receptor of IgE-induced reactions. A genome-wide association 
analysis revealed associations between functional FCER1A  variants 
and total serum IgE levels. Linkage and association of FCER1B  vari-
ants with IgE and atopic diseases had been reported by previous stud -
ies. The FCER1G  subunit has not yet been investigated with regard to 
atopy. Filaggrin ( FLG) is the strongest known risk gene for eczema, in 
particular the allergic subtype of eczema.
We investigated the association of FCER1A , FCER1B  and FCER1G  
variants with IgE in a large population-based cohort. We further tested 
for epistatic effects using the model-based multifactor dimensionality 
reduction method (MBMDR) and inverstigated a potential interaction 
between FLG and FCER1A  variants in a eczema case cohort and 
population controls.
We found association of three strongly correlated FCER1A  variants 
with total and specific IgE levels as well as allergic sensitization. No 
associations could be detected for FCER1B  and FCER1G . After ad -
justing for FLG effects, a significant epistatic effect of the FCER1A  
variants rs10489854 and rs2511211 on eczema risk revealed.
We conclude that FCER1A  variants by themselves and in combina -
tion have an impact of IgE levels and act synergistically to influence 
eczema risk.P09.019  Association analysis of two common filaggrin 
mutations (2282del4 and R501X) and atopic diseases in Volga-
Ural region of Russia.
A. S. Karunas1, G. F. Gimalova1, Y. Y. Fedorova1, E. R. Gumennaya2, S. 
Levashova3, N. N. Ramazanova3, A. R. Biktasheva3, R. R. Murzina3, E. I. 
Etkina3, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Dermatovenerologic 
dispensary of Bashkortostan Republic, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State 
Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Atopic diseases, such as atopic dermatitis (AD), bronchial asthma 
(BA) and allergic rhinitis (AR), are common multifactorial diseases. 
Recent studies have suggested that epidermal barrier defect may play 
a crucial role in the development of atopic diseases. Filaggrin is a key 
protein involved in skin barrier function. Mutations in the FLG gene 
are an important predisposing factor for AD, BA with AD and systemic 
allergies. Two mutations (2282del4and R501X) in the FLG gene are 
common in people of European origin.
The purpose of this study was analysis of the role of FLG mutations in 
the susceptibility to AD, BA and AR in Russians, Tatars and Bashkirs 
from Volga-Ural region of Russia. The atopy group consisted of 519 
BA patients, 284 AD patients and 265 AR patients; the control group 
included of 266 individuals. The carrier frequency of 2282del4 muta -
tion was 10% in AD Russian patients, 14.2% in Tatars and 21.4% in 
Bashkirs. In AR group, the frequency of 2282del4 was 7.54% in Rus -
sians, 14.28% in Tatars and Bashkirs. This mutation was present in 
15.78% asthma Russian patients with AD, 22.22% in Tatars and 25% 
in Bashkirs. The frequency of 2282del4 was significantly lower in con -
trol group (2.36% in Russians, 1.76% in Tatars and 5.8% in Bashkirs). 
The R501X mutation was rarely found in our cohort: only 1,76% atopy 
patients carried R501X mutation.
The data of this study revealed a strong association of the FLG muta -
tion 2282del4 with AD, BA with AD and AR in Russians, Tatars and 
Bashkirs.
P09.020  A large public health effect of a common variant on 
chromosome 11q13 (rs7927894) on eczema, asthma, and hay 
fever
I. Marenholz1, A. Bauerfeind2, J. Esparza-Gordillo1, T. Kerscher1, R. Granell3, J. 
Henderson3, Y. A. Lee1;  
1Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-
Delbrück-Centrum (MDC) for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 
3Department of Community-based Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
In a genome-wide association study for eczema, a common variant on 
chromosome 11q13.5 (rs7927894) has been identified as a suscepti -
bility locus in four study populations from Central Europe. We aimed to 
determine the effect of this risk variant on various allergic diseases on 
the population level. More than 7,400 individuals from a large English 
birth cohort born in 1991 and 1992, were genotyped for rs7927894. 
Association analyses were performed for eczema, asthma, hay fever, 
allergic sensitization, and combinations of these phenotypes. The ef -
fect of the risk variant on eczema was restricted to individuals with 
atopic eczema (OR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.07-1.60). In contrast, no associa -
tion of rs7927894 with non-atopic eczema was observed. Moreover, 
we detected association with concomitant asthma (OR, 1.50; 95% CI, 
1.14-1.97) and hay fever (OR, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.15-2.06). The popula -
tion attributable risk fraction for atopic eczema was estimated to be 
23.8%. The rs7927894 risk allele is a common variant that confers a 
moderate risk for atopic disease, but carries a large public health effect 
on atopic eczema and allergic airways disease. Furthermore, the as -
sociation with atopic eczema as well as concomitant asthma and hay 
fever points to a key role in the atopic march.
P09.021  Identification and characterization of copy number 
variations in 50 children with autism
H. Sorte1, E. Sponheim2, K. Eiklid1, E. Gjevik2, O. Rodningen1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevaal, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway, 2KPH-BU, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests in the first 
three years of life. The group of pervasive developmental disorders 
(PDDs), also termed autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), includes the 
prototypical autism as well as PDD-not otherwise specified (PDD), Complex traits and polygenic disorders220
Rett syndrome and Asperger’s disorder. Autism is characterized by 
difficulties in managing social interaction and communication, and a 
limited, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of reactions and behavior. 
ASDs are etiologically heterogenous, and only 10% of the cases are 
due to known medical conditions (chromosomal imbalances, genetic 
disorders like Fragile X, Rett syndrome or Tuberous sclerosis).
The emerge of new high-resolution screening methods allows for de -
tection of submicroscopic genomic aberrations. One of these methods; 
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) offers 
the possibility of detecting copy number variations (CNVs, deletions or 
duplications) associated with autism.
We present the results of applying aCGH for identification of causal 
CNVs in 50 children diagnosed with autism. Genomic DNA was ex -
tracted from buccal cells and aCGH was performed using 44k and 
105k human genome CGH oligo microarrays (Agilent Technologies 
Inc.). Causal CNVs were identified in 9 (18%) of the patients. Two pa -
tients had large aberrations (unbalanced translocation between chro -
mosome 8 and chromosome 12, idic(15)). Five patients had smaller 
CNVs in or close to genes previously associated with autism, and 
two patients had CNVs not previously reported. Further analyses are 
needed to determine the significance of these aberrations. Our data 
demonstrates the utility of aCGH as a powerful diagnostic tool for de -
tection of genomic imbalances in ASD.
P09.022  common variants in cadherin 10 gene show 
association with autism spectrum disorders in Finnish 
population
M. Muona1, K. Rehnström1,2, H. Kilpinen1,2, P. J. Wagner1, L. Peltonen1,2;  
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge 
CB10 1SA, UK, United Kingdom.
Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are severe neurodevelopmental 
disorders that are highly heritable, but phenotypic and genetic het -
erogeneity have made it challenging to identify predisposing variants 
across populations. Although 10-20% of ASD cases are known to be 
caused by rare high-penetrance mutations, cytogenetic abnormalities, 
and de novo DNA copy number variation, genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) with large sample sizes have also revealed common 
genetic variants associated with ASDs. Recently, several candidate 
genes have been shown in independent studies to be associated with 
ASDs in different populations. To test for association between ASDs 
and genetic variants in these genes in the Finnish founder popula -
tion, we have genotyped 79 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in eight candidate genes in families with autism (n=142) or Asperger 
syndrome (AS; n=121) and performed association analyses. In the au -
tism study sample, the most significant association was observed with 
an intronic SNP in CDH10 , rs1505874 ( P=0.000066). In the AS study 
sample, the most significant association was also observed in CDH10, 
but with intronic rs6867043 ( P=0.000774). In a recent GWAS (Wang 
et al.  2009), signals with a strong genome-wide significance were ob -
served in six SNPs located between CDH10  and CDH9 . Results from 
our study support the role of CDH10  in ASDs using an independent 
sample. To our knowledge, this is the first replicated association be -
tween ASDs and CDH10  reported. CDH10 is involved in neuronal cell 
adhesion and in the development of synaptic complexes so our results 
further support the hypothesis that neuronal cell-adhesion are impli -
cated in the etiology of ASDs.
P09.023  Association of CTLA- and PTPN22  genes 
polymorphisms with autoimmune thyroiditis in t atar population
E. Biktagirova , O. Kravtsova;  
Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation.
Autoimmune thyroiditis (AITD) is a common disorder characterized by 
the presence of thyroid-specific antibodies against a variety of antigens 
of thyroid tissue, such as thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and thyroglobulin 
(TG). Current evidence suggests that susceptibility to AITD is likely to 
be influenced by the combined effects of several genes and their in -
teractions with environmental factors. We genotyped CTLA-4 variants: 
-1661 G/A, -318 T/C,+49 G/A and variant 1858 T/C of PTPN22 gene 
in 161 Tatar AITD cases and 137 age/sex matched healthy individuals. 
Genotypes were determined by the PCR-RFLP method as described 
earlier. Data was analyzed using Chi-square test and 95% confidential 
interval (CI). The frequency of CTLA-4 -1661 G allele and genotype A/G and +49 G/A G allele and genotype GG carriers was significantly 
higher in patients than in controls (P=0.04, OR 1,84, 95% CI 2.31-1.4; 
P=0.001, OR 2,0 95% CI 1.62-2.31 respectively). We showed that the 
carriers of A/G, T/C and G/G genotypes of -1661 A/G, -318 T/C and +49 
G/A polymorphisms have an increased risk of genetic predisposition to 
the AITD in Tatar women (OR 7.87, 95% CI 2.03-3.25). Also strong 
association was observed between the increased level of antibodies to 
TPO (> 1000 ME/l) and GG genotype of +49 G/A polymorphism (OR 
1.3, 95% CI 1.5-4.1); and antibodies to TG (> 100 ME/l) and genotypes 
A/G and G/G of CTLA-4 -1661 A/G and +49 G/A polymorphisms (OR 
1.56, 95% CI 2.25-3.6; OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.9-2.75 respectively).
P09.024  strategies to identify new mutations in patients with 
Bardet--Biedl syndrome.
I. Pereiro , T. Piñeiro-Gallego, A. Fernandez-Araujo, D. Valverde;  
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology. Faculty of Biology, 
Universidad de Vigo, Spain.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM 209900) is a rare multiorganic dis -
order which a variable phenotype that includes retinal dystrophy, poly -
dactyl, mental delay, obesity and also reproductive tract and renal ab -
normalities. The combination of the late onset of some of the features 
of BBS, such as renal disease and loss of vision, and the existence of 
other genetic syndromes with similar cardinal manifestations can lead 
to confusion amongst clinicians and the possibility of misdiagnosis. 
Until now 14 genes (BBS1-BBS14) have been involved in 70% of the 
families, indicating that additional mutations in known BBS genes and 
new BBS genes remain to be identified.
We utilized a BBS genotyping chip by Asper Ohthalmics to performa 
first screening of the samples. The latest version of the chip contains 
107 mutations from BBS1-7, BBS9, BBS10 and BBS12. In the case 
of BBS8, only SNPs have been included. In five cases a single het -
erozygous mutation was found in BBS1 (p.M390R), BBS2 (p.Y89C) 
and BBS10 (C91fsX). The entire open reading frame of the gene con -
taining those mutations was directly sequencedin order to detect an 
additional novel causative mutation within that gene. Novel mutations 
were detected in BBS1 and BBS10 families, two missense mutation 
and two deletions, respectively. Nevertheless, no additional mutations 
were detected in the BBS2 coding sequence.
The combination of the BBS genotyping chip and sequencing of genes 
where a heterozygous mutation was detected, seem to be a good 
strategy to find new BBS mutations.
P09.025  case - control association study of candidate genes 
and genome - wide association study in Bulgarian patients with 
bipolar affective disorder
A. Yosifova1,2, T. Mushiroda3, M. Kubo4, A. Takahashi5, Y. Kamatani6, 
D. Stoianov7, R. Vazharova1, I. Dimova1, S. Karachanak1, I. Zaharieva1, 
S. Hadjidekova1, V. Milanova8, N. Madjirova9, I. Gerdjikov7, T. Tolev10, N. 
Poryazova11, G. Kirov12, M. Owen12, M. O‘Donovan12, D. Toncheva1, Y. 
Nakamura2,13;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory for International Alliance, RIKEN Center for 
Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Pharmacogenetics, 
RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 4Laboratory for 
Genotyping development, Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 
5Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, 
Japan, 6Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan, 7DPB “St Ivan Rilski” Novi Iskar, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 8Department of Psychiatry, Aleksandrovska Hospital, Medical 
University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 9UMBAL “St Georgi”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 
10Department of Psychiatry, Dr. Georgi Kisiov Hospital, Radnevo, Bulgaria, 
11Regional Dispensary for psychiatric diseases, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 12Department 
of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, School of Medicine, Henry 
Wellcome Building, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 13Laboratory of 
Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Bipolar affective disorder is a severe psychiatric illness characterized 
by episodes of mania and depression. Although the etiology is not 
clear, epidemiological studies suggest it is a result of an interaction of 
genetic and environmental factors. Genetic studies performed so far, 
however, failed to identify the definite genetic variants associated with 
the disease. Our study encloses two approaches. The candidate gene 
approach was conducted prior to and as a part of the genome - wide Complex traits and polygenic disorders221
association scan. In the first screening of the candidate gene approach 
191 SNPs were genotyped in 94 Bulgarian patients and 184 Bulgarian 
healthy individuals. SNPs that revealed P value less than 0.05 were 
genotyped in the second screening using an additional independent 
set of samples consisting of 78 cases and 372 controls. One variant, 
rs1800883, in the HTR5A gene revealed a significant level of P value 
(P=0.000097; odds ratio=1.80 (95%CI, 1.27-2.54); corrected P=0.017) 
suggesting the plausible role of this gene in the pathogenesis of bipo -
lar disorder in Bulgarian population. In the second stage, we conduct -
ed a genome-wide association scan followed by a replication study of 
the top 100 SNPs. The GWAS was performed on 188 BAD patients 
and 376 control subjects genotyped on the Illumina 550 platform. The 
replication study was conducted on 122 BAD cases and 328 controls. 
Although our GWAS did not reveal any strong association and none 
of the top 100 SNPs reached the Bonferroni-corrected P value in the 
replication study, the plausible involvement of some variants cannot be 
entirely discarded.
P09.026  mtHFR 677tt and PON1 55mm homozygotes are 
associated with early occurrence of coronary artery disease but 
not aortoilliac occlusive disease
E. Strauss1, J. Gluszek2, W. Supinski3, K. Waliszewski4, W. Majewski4, A. L. 
Pawlak1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
2Department of Hypertension University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
3Regional Hospital, Gorzow Wielkopolski, Poland, 4Department of General and 
Vascular Surgery University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C>T, 1298A>C 
and paraoxonase 1 (PON1) -108C>T, L55M, Q192R polymorphisms, 
which influence homocysteine metabolism were studied for the pos -
sible specificity of involvement in early development of the atheroscle -
rotic diseases: coronary artery disease (CAD) and aortoilliac occlusive 
disease (AIOD).
Altogether 619 men, age below 60 years, were recruited: 300 subjects 
with CAD, 144 men with advanced stage of AIOD (scheduled for elec -
tive surgery) and 175 control men without symptoms of vascular dis -
eases. The severity of CAD was examined by coronary angiography 
and expressed by the number of affected vessels (one-vessel, two-
vessel or three-vessel disease). The differences in allele, haplotype 
and genotype distributions were studied.
The frequency of MTHFR 677TT homozygotes in CAD (10,3%) was 
higher than in AIOD (4,2%; OR=2,7; p=0,03). The frequency of this 
genotype in CAD subjects with three-vessel disease was 4,9-fold high -
er than in AIOD (p=0,001) and 4,1-fold higher than in CAD subjects with 
one-vessel disease (4,8%; p=0,01). The frequency of PON1 55MM 
homozygotes in CAD patients was twice of that in the AIOD+control 
group (p=0,01), but no associations were seen between PON1 poly -
morphisms and advancement of CAD.
In conclussion, the MTHFR 677TT genotype seems to be the spe -
cific risk factor for both early occurrence and advancement of CAD, 
whereas the PON1 55MM increases risk only of CAD development 
before 60. Presented analysis shows that the studied genetic back -
ground in CAD differs from that in AIOD. Supported by grants MNiI 
N40208131/2499 and 2P05C03828.
P09.027  Genetic factors for congenital anomalies of the kidneys 
and urinary tract (cAKUt): results from the AGORA project
K. Y. Renkema1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, I. A. L. M. van Rooij2, N. Roeleveld2, 
A. M. van Eerde3, J. C. Giltay3, W. F. J. Feitz4, A. Reginensi5, A. Schedl5, F. 
Schaefer6, B. Franke1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and 
HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
3Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Urology, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Inserm U636, Nice, 
France, 6Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg University Hospital, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
Congenital Anomalies of the Kidneys and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) oc -
cur frequently in man and comprise the most common cause of end-
stage renal failure in children. Disorders belonging to the spectrum of 
these anomalies include renal agenesis, multicystic kidney dysplasia, 
and duplex collecting system. Not much is known about the origin of CAKUT. Alterations in genes expressed during nephrogenesis are 
considered important, with the final phenotypic outcome depending on 
additional modifying genetic and environmental factors. The aim of this 
study is to identify genetic factors involved in CAKUT aetiology. From 
the AGORA biobank of the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen -
tre over 700 CAKUT case-parent triads and 10 families with multiple 
affected members were included in this study, comprising a unique and 
well-documented CAKUT cohort. Mutation analysis of CAKUT candi -
date genes is ongoing by sequencing coding regions and intron-exon 
boundaries. Several interesting genetic variants were identified and 
subsequently functionally tested in vitro . In addition, linkage analysis 
was performed in a large CAKUT family with 10 affected individuals. 
This demonstrated suggestive linkage at a 9 Mb locus on chromosome 
1. Deep sequencing of this linkage interval is performed to identify 
the genetic variants involved. In an additional 4 families, genome-wide 
exome sequencing was performed. Identification of genetic factors in -
volved in CAKUT facilitates the understanding of its pathogenesis and 
enables the design of genetic diagnostic screening tests with a view to 
early detection and recurrence risk estimations for CAKUT.
P09.028  Association between eNOS gene polymorphisms and 
cannabinoid dependence
S. Oguzkan Balci1, M. Nacak2, A. Baransel Isir3, S. Pehlivan1, T. Sever1, A. 
Aynacıoglu2;  
1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of 
Medicine, Department of Forensic Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey.
Endothelial nitric oxide (eNOS) regulates the production of vasodila -
tory nitric oxide (NO). Recent studies demonstrated that association 
between eNOS polymorphism and/or NO production and behavioral 
changes. The aim of this study whether polymorphisms in eNOS gene 
are associated with cannobinoid users in Turkish population.
Our study, 94 cases cannobinoid users and 100 age-and sex-matched 
healthy controls were tested for two polymorphisms which were Glu -
298Asp (G894T) and intron 4 VNTR polymorphisms in eNOS gene. 
Genotyping were performed by PCR and/or RFLP.
The distribution of AA, AB and BB genotypes for intron 4 VNTR poly -
morphism was 59%, 28% and 13% in cases compared with 72%, 25% 
and 3% in the controls (p=0.008). The allele frequency of A and B 
was 0.729, 0.271 in cases compared with 0.845, 0.155 in the controls 
(p=0.006). Also, the distribution of GG, GT and TT genotypes for Glu -
298Asp polymorphism was 46%, 40% and 14% in cases compared 
with 65%, 35% and 0% in the controls (p=0.03). The allele frequency 
of G and T was 0.660, 0.340 in cases compared with 0.825, 0.175 in 
the controls (p=0.0001). The observed genotype counts was deviated 
significantly from those expected according to the Hardy-Weinberg 
Equilibrium (p=0.008 for intron 4 VNTR, p=0.03 for Glu298Asp).
This study is the first to search eNOS gene polymorphisms in canna -
binoid users. We conclude that two eNOS gene polymorphisms were 
associated with either distribution of genotypes and the allele frequen -
cies in cannabinoid users. Identification of genetic events in addiction 
may provide clues about etiology and therapeutic targets.
P09.029  Novel Variations in cardiac troponin t Gene associated 
with cardiomyopathy - An indian study
P. Nallari1, D. S. Rani2, N. Calambur3, K. Thangaraj2;  
1Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India, 2Centre for 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 3Care Hospital, Hyderabad, 
India.
Cardiomyopathy, a group of primary cardiac muscle disorders includ -
ing dilated (DCM) and hypertrophic (HCM) cardiomyopathy, is one of 
the major causes of heart failure and sudden death. The disease is 
phenotypically heterogeneous. Some individuals remain asymptom -
atic throughout life, others develop progressive symptoms, or experi -
ence SCD. The genetic basis for disease are mutations identified in 
sarcomeric genes.
Cardiac troponin T (cTnT) mutations in particular predispose the af -
fected to SCD. Troponin T (TnT), together with troponin C (TnC), tro -
ponin I (TnI), and tropomyosin, act as regulatory proteins of the sarco -
mere. TnT is the most important regulatory protein of the sarcomere, 
and exists in many alternatively spliced isoforms. Expression studies 
have shown that residues 70-170 forming a part of TnT tail are crucial Complex traits and polygenic disorders222
for TnT binding to tropomyosin, tropomyosin binding to actin, and sta -
bilization of the complex.
The cTnT gene was screened in 309 cardiomyopathy patients (162 
HCM, 147 DCM) and 176 controls. The study identified 2 missense 
mutations, 5 silent mutations, 14 intronic variations. Of the 21 varia -
tions obtained , 11 are novel variations. We identified a novel R144W 
missense mutation in exon 10 in DCM , predicted to inhibit the force 
generation by blocking calcium activation of thin filament. The mutation 
also results in loss of recognition site of several restriction enzymes 
and thus can be used as diagnostic test. Insilico analysis of other vari -
ations revealed that they are likely to alter the splicing efficiency or 
effect the binding capacity of snRNPs , which will be discussed.
P09.030  investigation of causative mutation in four generation 
family with celiac disease using next generation sequencing and 
genome wide genotyping array
A. Szperl , C. C. van Diemen, C. Wijmenga;  
University Medical Center and Groningen University, Groningen, Netherlands.
Celiac disease (CD), caused by a strong immune response to gluten, 
is the most common food intolerance in Western populations. CD is 
strongly associated to human leukocyte a antigen (HLA) DQ2/DQ8 
gene which explains some 35% of the heritable risk. A genome-wide 
association study for celiac disease identified 26 other loci which to -
gether explain only another 5% of the heritable risk. To identify ad -
ditional CD genes we performed whole-genome linkage in a four-
generation Dutch family. We identified a dominantly inherited linkage 
region at chromosome 9p21-13 and a second one on chromosome 
6q25 from the model-free analysis. We hypothesize that these regions 
may contain a high risk mutation that plays a causal role in the disease 
development in this family.
In order to investigate copy number variation (CNVs) and find new 
candidate loci which could have been missed in the linkage analysis 
due to the large spacing between microsatellites, we genotyped 32 out 
of 46 family members (18 affected, 14 unaffected including 4 spouses) 
using a high-density SNP CytoChip array. We performed CNV analysis 
using two independent algorithms and found a duplication on chro -
mosome 9q34.3 which segregates through all four generations and 
is present in 8 affected and 1 unaffected family members, but is not 
present in the spouses. Although we did not find any interesting genes 
in this region, our duplication might contain regulatory sequences af -
fecting the expression of others genes.
We are currently applying a high-throughput exome sequencing ap -
proach to identify point mutations and/or small deletions in linkage 
regions.
P09.031  Allele-specific gene expression (ASGE) of novel celiac 
disease associated sNPs
S. S. Amundsen1, L. M. Sollid1, B. A. Lie2;  
1Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, Oslo 
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, 
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Eleven SNPs within eight genomic regions displayed strong genetic 
association with celiac disease (CD) in GWAS and follow-up stud -
ies: rs2816316 (1q31, RGS1 ), rs13015714 and rs917997 (2q11-12, 
IL18RAP ), rs6441961 (3p21, CCR1/CCR3/CCR2 ), rs17810546 
and rs9811792 (3q25-26, IL12A/SCHIP1 ), rs1464510 (3q28, LPP), 
rs13119723 and rs6822844 (4q27, KIAA1109/Tenr/IL2/IL21 ), 
rs1738074 (6q25, TAGAP ) and rs3184504 (12q24, SH2B3 ). Of these, 
only rs3184504 locates within the coding region of a gene.
Intronic and intergenic SNPs have to a great extent, and surprisingly, 
showed to be subject to allele-specific gene expression (ASGE) and 
are hence consistent with the existence of numerous unannotated 
gene transcripts in the human genome. The source of ASGE is as -
signed to cis-acting factors such as polymorphisms in the flanking re -
gions of the gene.
The aim of our study is to explore cis-effects by performing correla -
tion of gene expression and SNP genotypes, as well as to investigate 
ASGE of SNPs found in transcripts from CD relevant tissue.
So far we have studied expression of five SNPs. Two SNPs, rs1464510 
(early intron of LPP) and rs1738074 (UTR of TAGAP ), showed to be 
expressed and all heterozygous individuals will next be subjected to 
ASGE analysis for these SNPs. For the untranscribed SNPs (e.g. 
rs2816316, rs17810546 and rs9811792) we will perform real-time PCR expression of neighboring genes and correlate gene expression 
with SNP genotypes.
P09.032  Association of a complex CNV region on 8p21.2 with 
child and adult obesity in the French population
J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, A. J. De Smith1, L. J. M. Coin2, R. G. Walters1,2, 
J. E. Asher1, J. C. Andersson1,3, J. L. Buxton1, D. Meyre4, P. Froguel1,4, A. I. F. 
Blakemore1;  
1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Molecular 
and Clinical Medicine and Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, 
The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4CNRS 8090-Institute of 
Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.
Obesity is a growing public health concern exhibiting a high level of 
heritability, much of which is unaccounted for. We have sought to in -
vestigate the contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) to the ge -
netic susceptibility to child and adult obesity.
We have applied our novel CNV prediction algorithm cnvHap to Illu -
mina GWAS data from child and adult obesity case-control cohorts 
from Northern France. CNVs were identified within a region on 8p21.2 
encompassing a SNP showing marginal association with obesity in 
the combined child and adult obesity dataset (p=5.68x10-4). Further 
investigation of this CNV region (CNVR) revealed it to encompass two 
variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) and a 3,975bp deletion.
The 3,975bp deletion and surrounding VNTRs were subsequently 
genotyped using a combination of PCR and fragment analysis in the 
Northern French child obesity cohort of 688 cases and 592 controls 
and adult obesity cohort of 693 cases and 776 controls. This revealed 
significant individual associations of both VNTRs and the deletion with 
obesity (p<0.05). Since these variants are each only weakly signifi -
cant, we consider it likely that the genotyped VNTRs and deletion are 
tagging an as yet unidentified causal variant in this region.
Detailed investigation of the 8p21.2 region has highlighted the complex 
genomic architecture of many CNVRs, and emphasises the benefits of 
the application of an approach combining bioinformatics and molecular 
biology to CNV discovery and genotyping.
P09.033  Systematic evaluation of the clinical significance of 
inherited and de novo copy Number Variations in families with 
Autism spectrum Disorders
M. Poot1, E. van Daalen2,3, C. Kemner2,4, N. E. Verbeek1, M. V. de Jonge2,3, 
T. Dijkhuizen5, P. Rump5, R. Houben2, R. van ‘t Slot1, B. van der Zwaag1, 
W. G. Staal2,3, F. A. Beemer1, J. P. Burbach3, H. K. Ploos van Amstel1, R. 
Hochstenbach1, E. H. Brilstra1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Neuroscience 
and Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 4Developmental Psychology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands.
Array-based studies have detected a wealth of copy number variations 
(CNVs) in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Since some 
CNVs also occur in healthy individuals their contributions to the patient‘s 
phenotype remain largely unclear. We systematically evaluated the clini -
cal significance of de novo  and inherited CNVs containing genes being 
transcribed in the brain, by taking into account the Social Responsive -
ness Scale (SRS) scores of patients and both parents. Thus, CNVs were 
grouped into four categories. First, de novo  CNVs in families with both 
parents having normal SRS scores, and second, CNVs inherited from 
a carrier parent with an elevated SRS score. These are the most likely 
to be causally related to ASD. The genes in these two categories par -
ticipate in pathways probably associated with ASD, such as contactin-
based cell communication ( CNTN5 , CNTN6 ), phosphoinositol signaling 
(PIK3CA ), and regulation of neurotransmitter levels ( KCNMB4 , TPH2 ). 
The de novo  CNVs found in patients with at least one parent scoring 
higher than 1 SD above the mean on the SRS, and the CNVs inher -
ited from an unaffected parent, while the other parent has an elevated 
SRS score, are likely to exert a minor contribution to the phenotype. 
Our analysis also indicates that in 6 out of 48 ASD patients two or more 
genetic etiologies may be involved. This study extends the scope of 
genome wide CNV profiling beyond de novo  CNVs in sporadic patients, 
and may constitute a first step toward uncovering the missing heritability 
in genome wide screening studies of complex psychiatric disorders .Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
P09.034  Genome wide analysis of coeliac disease patients with 
atypical HLA risk genotypes
K. I. Löytynoja1, E. Einarsdottir1, K. Kaukinen2, K. Kurppa3, M. Mäki3, D. A. van 
Heel4, P. Saavalainen1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of 
Gastroenterology and Alimentary Tract Surgery, Tampere, Finland, 3Paediatric 
Research Centre, Tampere, Finland, 4Centre for Gastroenterology, London, 
United Kingdom.
Coeliac disease is a multifactorial disorder caused by the ingestion of 
gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. The genes encoding the 
HLA DQ2 and DQ8 heterodimers are the strongest genetic risk factors 
for the disease, roughly 90% of patients carry DQ2 in cis (DQ2.5) or 
trans (DQ2.2 and DQ7) and 5-10% have DQ8. These HLA variants are 
also common in the general population, implicating additional genetic 
factors in disease susceptibility.
A recent GWA study of coeliac disease revealed up to 40 risk loci for 
CD, and included 647 samples from the Finnish population. 24 Finn -
ish patients were found to not carry the most common DQ2.5 or DQ8 
risk haplotypes. We performed a more detailed HLA typing and found 
out that 15 of these carried only half of the DQ2 risk molecules, ei -
ther DQ2.2 (n=15) or DQ7 haplotype (n=1) alone. 1 patient was totally 
negative and 7 had the trans genotype (DQ2.2 + DQ7).
We performed an HLA stratified genome wide association analysis and 
found an association on chromosome 1 (p<10-5) in the group of pa -
tients and controls without the DQ2.5 or DQ8 haplotypes. Furthermore, 
we have performed detailed phenotypic analysis of these individuals to 
determine possible atypical coeliac disease in individuals with atypical 
HLA risk variants.
P09.035  A tWO-WAY APPROAcH FOR DEtEctiNG LOci 
cONFERRiNG sUscEPtiBiLitY t O cOLOREct AL cANcER
C. Fernández-Rozadilla1, R. Tarrío1, M. Magdalena1, J. Clofent2, L. de 
Castro3, A. Brea-Fernández1, X. Bessa4, A. Abulí4, M. Andreu4, R. Jover5, X. 
Llor6, A. Castells7, S. Castellví-Bel7, Á. Carracedo1, C. Ruíz-Ponte1, A. E. G. 
Gastrointestinal Oncology Group8;  
1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, CIBERER, Genomics 
Medicine Group, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain, 2Gastroenterología Hospital la Fe, Valencia, Spain, 
3Digestivo Hospital do Meixoeiro, Vigo, Spain, 4Gastroenterología Hospital del 
Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 5Gastroenterología Hospital Universitario, Alicante, 
Spain, 6Section of Digestive Disease and Nutrition, University of Illinois, 
Chicago, IL, United States, 7Gastroenterología Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, 
Spain, 8Asociación Española de Gastroenterología, Barcelona, Spain.
Complex diseases, such as colorectal cancer (CRC) are thought to fol -
low a polygenic model of inheritance in which many low-penetrance al -
leles in several susceptibility loci interact to determine which individu -
als finally develop the condition. Following this premise, the determina -
tion of such susceptibility loci has mainly focused o two directions: the 
whole-genome approaches, and the candidate gene selection, in which 
the screening involves a series of genes that are particularly thought to 
be involved in the evolution of the disease. We have followed the lat -
ter approach by two different means: the selection of candidate genes 
derived from the fifteen mouse Susceptibility to colorectal cancer  (Scc) 
regions, and the determination of the variation in the genes belonging 
to two pathways related to tumorogenesis: Wnt and BMP4. In total, 
190 SNPs were chosen from 41 genes to be genotyped in stage one in 
515 cases and 515 controls belonging to the EPICOLON I project. The 
three top-associated SNPs were further replicated in an independent 
series of 933 cases and 955 controls (EPICOLON II). Although none 
of the SNPs were finally proved to be associated with the disease, we 
believe the CYR61  gene and its surrounding region should be further 
investigated in orther to clarify any possible association with CRC.
P09.036  t ranscriptome analysis in complex Regional Pain 
Syndrome: new insights into inflammatory and neuroplasticity 
signaling pathways
M. F. Gosso1, D. de Rooijen2, A. M. de Rooij2, J. T. Kamphorst1, E. Alsina-
Sanchis1, J. van den Dool2, J. Marinus2, J. van Hilten2, A. M. J. M. van den 
Maagdenberg1,2;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background: The molecular basis of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome 
(CRPS) is not known and its diagnosis remains essentially clinical. A 
constellation of clinical manifestations are present in CRPS accounting 
for central and peripheral alterations (e.g., pain, edema, inflammation, 
hyperalgesia, allodynia) in which immunological and neurotransmitter 
system imbalance have been indicated to play a pivotal role. Gene 
expression studies using peripheral blood samples have been broadly 
used for the study and identification of metabolic candidate pathways 
as well as immunological diseases. We propose that such a study is 
also worthwhile in CRPS with its mixture of central and peripheral hall -
marks in which circulating immune cells may be taken as a surrogate 
of neuronal systems hallmarks.
Methods: The study was performed on well characterized CRPS cases 
and matched controls and involved in vitro stimulation of whole pe -
ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) before and after stimulation 
with inflammatory triggers. After RNA isolation, amplification and fluo -
rescent labelling, analysis was carried out using Illumina’s BeadChip 
8v3 protocol. Differentially expressed were analyzed using Ingenuity 
Pathway analysis (IPA v7).
Results: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between CRPS cases 
and matched-controls were significantly observed only after in vitro 
exposure to inflammatory triggers. Similar basal expression patterns 
between CRPS cases and matched controls were detected.
Conclusions: Preliminary results showed evidence of subtle but sig -
nificant changes among molecules involved in inflammatory pathways 
(only) after in vitro exposure to inflammatory triggers. The study opens 
a new window for the identification of common inflammatory molecules 
that may be involved in CRPS development.
P09.037  SMURF1  is involved in cardiac development and 
congenital heart defects
K. D. Ajbro1,2, K. Møllgård2, M. L. Vestergaard1,2, C. A. Clement3, S. T. 
Christensen3, R. Burdine4, B. Thienpont5,6, K. Devriendt5, E. Bendtsen7, N. 
Tommerup1,2, L. A. Larsen1,2;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department 
of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department 
of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States, 
5Center for Human Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
6Laboratory of Molecular Signalling & Laboratory of Developmental Genetics 
and Imprinting, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Fertility 
Clinic, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital of 
Odense, Odense, Denmark.
Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are characterized by a large spec -
trum of structural anomalies of the heart. Occurring in about 1 % of 
newborns CHDs are the most common developmental anomaly. Ar -
rayCGH screening identified a 486 kbp de novo  duplication of 7q22.1 
in a patient with coarctation of the aorta. The region contains three 
genes; TMEM130 , TRRAP  and SMURF1 . Bioinformatics prioritization 
identified SMURF1 , a regulator of TGF-beta signalling, as a strong can -
didate gene for heart development and CHD. SMURF1 interacts with 6 
known heart proteins and is highly expressed in human embryonic and 
fetal heart. Immunohistochemical analysis of human fetal hearts re -
vealed that the SMURF1 protein show strong, spatially and temporally 
restricted expression during heart development. During differentiation 
of the P19.CL6 mouse stem cell line, which can differentiate into beat -
ing cardiomyocytes, SMURF1  expression is up regulated.
The functional effect on cardiac development for SMURF1  was inves -
tigated using the zebrafish as a model. Together, our findings suggest 
a function for SMURF1  in heart development and CHD.
P09.038  COPACETIC, a genome-wide association study on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (cOPD).
J. Smolonska1, H. M. Boezen1, B. van Ginneken2, B. de Hoop2, A. E. Dijkstra1, 
M. Platteel1, D. S. Postma1, M. Oudkerk1, W. P. Mali2, J. Lammers2, H. J. M. 
Groen1, P. Zanen2, C. Wijmenga1, *. COPACETIC consortium3;  
1University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Medical 
Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3EU.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by 
persistent, progressive airway obstruction. COPD is a complex dis -
ease which develops due to an interplay of environmental factors like Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
tobacco smoking and genetic factors which are still largely unknown. 
The aim of our study is to identify novel genetic factors for COPD using 
a genome-wide association study (GWAS). Study participants were 
recruited from the Nelson study, a CT-based lung cancer screening 
trial in heavy-smokers of Dutch/Belgium descent (>20 pack years). 
DNA samples were genotyped using Illumina Human610-Quad arrays. 
COPD was defined both as obstruction (FEV1/FVC10% of lung vol -
ume with a density 70% and FEV1%pred >90. To gain statistical power 
we also used blood bank controls with unknown smoking history which 
were genotyped using Illumina Human670-Quad arrays.
Association tests performed on 1030 obstruction cases and 1799 con -
trols resulted in 81 SNPs with p value < 1x10-4. The top 384 SNPs 
for obstruction were selected for a currently ongoing replication in five 
independent (population-based) cohorts comprising a total of 3,603 
obstruction cases and 7,207 controls.
Our GWAS study on COPD is unique since it includes both CT scan 
data and lung function for each participant, as well as a detailed smok -
ing history. Therefore we expect to identify loci associated with COPD 
in heavy-smokers and possibly also loci that distinguish between the 
different COPD phenotypes emphysema and airway obstruction.
P09.039  β-defensin gene cluster copy number analysis in Celiac 
Disease
N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, F. 
Sanchez-Valverde3, L. Castaño1,4, J. C. Vitoria5,4, J. R. Bilbao1,2;  
1Immunogenetics Lab, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain, 
2Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, 
University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Department of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 4Department 
of Pediatrics, University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 5Pediatric 
Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain.
BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a complex, immune-mediated 
disorder of the intestinal mucosa with a strong genetic component. 
The nature of CD pathogenesis remains unclear, but both innate and 
adaptive immune responses are involved in the development of the 
disease. Human β-defensins are highly inducible, anti-microbial pep -
tides which form part of the innate immunity. Genomic copy number of 
β-defensin gene cluster is polymorphic (with most individuals possess -
ing 4 copies) and has been associated with autoimmune or inflamma -
tory disorders including psoriasis or Crohn’s disease.
AIM: Our aim was to determine whether β-defensin cluster copy num -
ber variants are associated with CD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DEFB4 , DEFB103  and DEFB104  gene 
copy number was performed by real-time PCR using specific Taqman 
probes and primers in 376 CD patients and 376 control individuals. 
Gene-specific experiments were performed in sextuplicate (duplicate 
for each defensin gene) using 4 ng of genomic DNA. Raw data were 
normalized to endogenous Rnase P  gene and were analyzed using 
Copy Caller software assuming 4 to be the most common copy num -
ber. Comparisons between groups were performed using χ2.
RESULTS: The distribution of samples in to >4, 4 and <4 copy number 
bins was 25.9%, 42.5% and 31.6% for patients and 33.5%, 37.0% and 
29.5% for controls, respectively.
COMMENTARY: β-defensin gene cluster copy number distribution dif -
fered between celiac and non-celiac groups, showing a trend to small -
er proportion of high copy numbers in CD-patients.
P09.040  Genetic variations of mGP gene promoter and the risk 
of coronary artery disease
M. Keramatipour1, P. Ahmadi1, M. Abiri1, S. Sadeghiyan2, M. Pedram1;  
1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Department of Cardiology, Tehran Heart Center Hospital, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is a major cause of death worldwide 
. Positive family history among patients points to the significance of 
genetic elements in the risk of CAD. Two single nucleotide polymor -
phisms (SNPs) at -7 & -138 positions on Matrix- Gla Protein (MGP) 
gene have been suggested to play a role in susceptibility to CAD. Such 
a role is possibly due to the effect of these SNPs on the level of gene 
expression.
This study aims to investigate the association of these SNPs with CAD 
in Iranian population and their possible effects on MGP gene promoter activity in cultured cells.
To achieve these goals, a population-based genetic association study 
is being conducted on appropriate groups of patients and controls. 
Analysis of the preliminary data obtained from genotyping shows an 
excess of A allele at position -7 and T allele at position -138 among 
patients. The observed differences are not significant at this point, but 
genotyping of proposed sample size has not been completed yet.
On the other hand, four appropriate vectors that express GFP under 
the control of different haplotypes of MGP promoter have been con -
structed. To assess the effects of haplotypes on promoter activity, vec -
tors were transfected into the Hek293 cells and relative expression of 
GFP was quantified. Analysis of data revealed significant differences in 
GFP expression by different haplotypes of promoter (Student’s T-test: 
.p<0.0005). The maximum and minimum activities are seen by promot -
ers containing A-T and G-C haplotypes respectively.
P09.041  Study of rs10757274 and rs2383206 polymorphisms on 
chromosome 9 as cAD genetic risk factor in sample of iranian 
population
S. Aleyasin , T. Navidi;  
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the major cause of death worldwide. 
genome-wide association studies have reported several SNPs on 
chromosome 9p21.3 associated with increasing CAD risk. Association 
of rs10757274 and rs2383206 were studied with CAD in 111 cases 
and 100 controls from Iranian population. Pairs of primers were de -
signed to amplify DNA fragments containing SNPs by Mismatch PCR-
RFLP technique. The frequencies of genotypes AA, AG and GG For 
rs10757274 in cases respectively were 11.7%, 36.9% and 51.4% and 
in controls were 12%, 54% and 34%. These frequencies for rs2383206 
in cases were 9%, 36% and 55% and in controls were 9%, 53% and 
36% respectively. Statistical analysis showed significant associations 
between rs10757274, (P=0.029) and rs2383206, (P=0.036) polymor -
phisms in Iranian population. Association analysis of GG/GG haplo -
type for rs10757274, rs2383206 presumed a significant increase in 
the risk of CAD. Frequency of GG/GG haplotype was 43% in cases 
(P=0.014, X²=6.058). The risk of CAD with 90% confidence intervals 
(CI) were estimated between 34 to 52 percent.
P09.042  Association of CETP  gene polymorphisms with 
coronary heart disease in t atar population
R. Ismagilova , O. Kravzova;  
Kazan State University, Kazan, Russian Federation.
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is one of the HDL modify -
ing proteins that have both pro- and anti-atherogenic properties. Cho -
lesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene polymorphism is known to 
be associated with changes in lipid profiles. Primary hyperlipidemia is 
considered to be a major risk factor for atherosclerosis and coronary 
heart disease (CHD).
Herein, we investigated the association of several polymorphisms in 
the CETP gene (Val421Ile, -971G/A and -629C/A) with genetic suscep -
tibility to CHD in Tatar population.
The study included 125 patients with coronary heart disease and 135 
health individuals Genotypes were determined by the PCR-RFLP 
method as described earlier. Data was analyzed using Chi-square test 
and 95% confidential interval (CI).
Plasma CETP activity was significantly ( P<0.001) higher in primary 
combined hyperlipidaemic individuals than in controls. Plasma HDL-
C was higher in both groups, in the B2B2 genotype than in the B1B1 
and B1B2 genotypes, whereas the serum TG concentrations and 
CETP activity were lower in B2B2 genotype compared with other 
genotypes (B1B1 and B1B2). The genotype and allelic frequencies 
for this polymorphism differed significantly between hyperlipidaemic 
and nonmolipidaemic individuals ( P<0.05). In both groups, CETP Taq 
1B polymorphism (presence of B2 allele) correlated significantly with 
HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) (r=0.201 and r=0.452 in control and patient 
groups respectively) and CETP activity (r= -0.123 for controls and r= 
-0.192 for patients).Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
P09.043  Platelet glycoprotein receptor Polymorphism as a risk 
factor for coronary thrombosis - A Hospital based study.
S. Dayakar1,2, S. Komandur3, P. S. Rao4, B. Shyamala Sesikeran2, M. D. 
Sadhnani1;  
1Institute of Genetics Hospital for Genetic Diseases,Ameerpet,Osmania 
University, Hyderabad-500016, India, 2Apollo Hospitals Educational and 
Research Foundation,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India, 3Department of 
Molecular Medicine,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India, 4Heart Institute, 
Apollo Health City,Jubilee hills, Hyderabad-500033, India.
The GPIIb/IIIa  complex is an integrin class of adhesion molecule re -
ceptors expressed abundantly on platelet membrane with an important 
role in platelet physiology. The receptor mediates the interaction of ac -
tivated platelets with ligands, including fibrinogen, von Willebrand fac -
tor, vitronectin, and fibronectin. Polymorphisms in platelet membrane 
glycoprotein genes can alter their antigenicity, regulate their expres -
sion levels, and modulate their functional properties. It is also known to 
be involved in the pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes. Hence 
in this study, we analyzed the PlA2 polymorphism at position 1565 in 
exon 2 of the glycoprotein IIIa gene by allele specific restriction diges -
tion PCR to identify its importance in the pathogenesis of myocardial 
infarction (MI). The study cohort included 97 patients with a diagnosis 
of MI and 112 normal individuals. A1A1 genotype was seen in 57/97 
(58.7%), A1A2 in 20/97 (20.61%) and A2A2 in 20/97 (20.61%) patients 
with MI; while in control group, 94/112(83.92%) had A1A1 genotype, 
14/112 (12.5%) A1A2 and 4/112 (3.57%) carried A2A2. The prevalence 
of PlA2 was 2.4 times higher among the case patients than among the 
controls (41.23% Vs 16.07%, P = <0.0001). This study suggests a 
strong association between the Pl A2 polymorphism of the glycoprotein 
IIIa gene and acute coronary thrombosis. Hence, genotyping will en -
able identifying the risk of an individual to develop MI and also take 
prophylactic measures.
P09.044  Variety of inflammatory bowel disease genotypes in 
Russian patients.
V. A. Kadnikova1, P. V. Shumilov2, O. A. Schagina1, A. V. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 
State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Inflammatory bowel disease includes two clinical subtypes: Crohn’s 
disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC).
Association of several SNPs of NOD2, DLG5, TLR4, OCTN1, OCTN2, 
IL1, IL10 and TNFα genes with CD and UC was shown.
We investigated these SNPs in our samples. Samples from 108 unre -
lated patients with CD, 107 unrelated patients with UC and 179 popula -
tion controls from Russia were examined. DNA was screened for such 
SNPs as R702W, G908R, c.ins3020C of NOD2 gene, R30Q of DLG5 , 
D299G of TLR4 , L503F of OCTN1 , c.-207G>C of OCTN2 , VNTR of 
IL1, c.-1082G>A of IL10 and c.-308G>C of TNFα  gene.
The allele frequency is shown in table.
Allele fr-cy  
SNPsN CD UC
R702W 0.03 0.04 (p>0.673) 0.03 (p>0.99)
G908R 0.01 0.01 (p>0.99) 0.02 (p>0.75)
c.ins3020C 0.04 0.18 (p<0.001) 0.03 (p>0.83)
R30Q 0.07 0.18 (p<0.001) 0.06 (p>0.739)
D299G 0.13 0.07 (p<0.056) 0.06 (p<0.007)
L503F 0.29 0.38 (p<0.017) 0.38 (p<0.021)
c.-207G>C 0.34 0.37 (p>0.59) 0.36 (p>0.718)
VNTR 0.27 0.31 (p>0.449) 0.27 (p>0.847)
c.-1082G>A 0 0 (p<0.0001) 0 (p<0.0001)
c.-308G>C 0.12 0.12 (p>0.896) 0.1 (p>0.594)
Association with investigated SNPs with CD was found for c.ins3020C 
of NOD2 , R30Q of DLG5, L503F of OCTN1 , c.-1082G>A of IL10; and 
with UC for D299G of TLR4 , L503F of OCTN1 , c.-1082G>A of IL10.
On the basis of given results it is possible to assume that NOD2, 
DLG5, OCTN1 and IL10 genes play a part in development of Crohn’s 
disease. And TLR4, OCTN1 and IL10 genes play a part in develop -
ment of ulcerative colitis.P09.045  single clone intron deletion detected on BAc Array led 
to the diagnosis Duchennes muscular Dystrophy in boy with 
mental retardation and behavioural disturbances
S. Vaeth1, U. Eriksen2, S. Pedersen1, M. Schrøder1, U. Jensen1;  
1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 
2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Risskov, Aarhus, Denmark.
Background:
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a X-linked recessive disor -
der caused by mutations in the DMD gene, which encodes the protein 
dystrophin. One third of DMD cases are caused by de novo mutations 
in the DMD gene. The absence of dystrophin causes progressive, non-
reversible muscle cell degeneration. DMD can be associated by mild 
mental retardation and neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism and 
ADHD.
Case study:
A five year old boy was referred to us by Children’s Psychiatric Hospi -
tal. The indication for genetic analysis was mental retardation. The boy 
also showed general developmental delay and attention deficit.
Chromosome analysis and Southern Blot analysis for Fragile X syn -
drome gave normal results. BAC Array CGH (Cytochip 2.0) revealed 
a single clone deletion on Xp21.2 in intron 2 of the DMD gene. To 
confirm the BAC Array results, we made a MLPA analysis, which sur -
prisingly revealed a duplication of exon 3-7 of the DMD gene, which 
will often give a DMD phenotype. Finally, we did a follow-up study in 
an oligonucleotide array-CGH analysis (Agilent 180K), where the com -
plex DNA copy number changes were not clearly resolved.
The referring physician later confirmed that the boy also had muscle 
weakness. Elevated level of creatine kinase confirmed the diagnosis.
P09.046  Association of the variable number of tandem repeats (VNtR) polymorphism in 3’-untranslated region (3’UtR) of the 
dopamine transporter gene DA t1/sLc6A3 with alcoholism in 
Russian population of siberian region
A. V. Marusin1, I. A. Goncharova1, M. I. Rachkovskiy2, E. V. Beloborodova2, N. 
A. Bokhan3, V. A. Stepanov1;  
1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian state medical 
university, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Menthal Health, Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation.
Some studies have reported that the A9 allele of the VNTR of the gene 
which encodes the dopamine transporter (DAT1/SLC6A3) is associ -
ated with alcohol dependence and alcoholism withdrawal symptoms. 
We investigated VNTR polymorphism of DAT1 gene in three groups: 
alcoholic men, men and women with alcoholic, viral and mixed etiol -
ogy cirrhosis and apparently health men control group. The genotype 
frequencies obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all groups. The 
association of DAT1 VNTR with alcoholism was found (p=0.059 in gen -
otype level and p=0.025 in allele level). In patients with liver cirrhosis 
statistically significant genotype frequencies difference between men 
and women was revealed (p=0.038). In this group, and in subgroups of 
men and women no correlation DAT1 variability with age, cirrhosis, al -
coholism and virus carrying period, alcohol doze, cirrhosis severity, cir -
rhosis etiology, stage of alcoholism, smoking were found. There were 
no differences (in allele frequency) between control and total group 
of cirrhosis patients as well as between alcoholic and mixed etiology 
cirrhosis men and women. Comparison of 10/10 genotype frequencies 
against other genotypes revealed near significant difference between 
alcoholic and mixed etiology cirrhosis (p=0.059). At the some time, 
patients with cirrhosis only with alcoholic etiology significantly differed 
from control (p=0.033) due to decreased frequency of 10/10 genotype. 
Thus, DAT1 VNTR polymorphism is associated with the alcoholism 
without cirrhosis and alcoholic cirrhosis but not with cirrhosis mixed 
(alcohol and virus) etiology in Russian population of Siberian region.
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re -
search (project no. 09-04-99083-r_ofi).
P09.047  Variations in the 7q32-q34 region containing CHRM2 , 
PTN and DGKI  are associated with dyslexia in Finnish and 
German populations.
H. Matsson1, K. Tammilies1, M. Zucchelli1, P. Onkamo2, H. Anthoni1, J. Nopola-
Hemmi3, H. Lyytinen4, P. H. T. Leppanen4, G. Schulte-Körne5, A. Warnke6, J. 
Schumacher7, M. M. Nöthen8, J. Kere1,9, M. Peyrard-Janvid1;  Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, 
Sweden, 2Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 
3Department of Child Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, 
Finland, 4Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, 
Finland, 5Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics 
and Psychotherapy, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Department 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, 
University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8Department of Genomics, Life and Brain 
Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Medical Genetics, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
We present a genetic study on dyslexia using samples from two in -
dependent populations. Dyslexia is a common disability in children 
with adequate educational opportunities, intelligence, neurological 
and sensory functions. The DYX1C1 , ROBO1, DCDC2 and KIAA0319  
genes have so far been the most studied but clearly there are more 
genetic factors accounting for the complex phenotype of reduced cog -
nitive activities of reading and writing. We present here results from 
a fine-mapping approach in Finnish and German dyslectic cohorts. A 
previously reported region of suggestive linkage (NPL=2.8) with dys -
lexia was restricted with 15 additional markers followed by genotyping 
of 143 SNPs spanning the region. To increase the power and study the 
effect of stratification for severity of the phenotype we then genotyped 
50 SNPs across 1 Mb in an extended sample set of Finnish families 
with dyslexia and 1050 individuals (of which 251 affected) from the 
German population as a replication sample. Several haplotypes show 
significant association with dyslexia between rs2350780 and rs273933 
on chromosome 7q32-q34. This region harbours the CHRM2 , PTN 
and DGKI  genes. Several haplotypes overlapping in both populations 
were included in intron 1 of  DGKI  (diacylglycerol kinase, iota). All three 
genes in this region are expressed in brain. Pleiotrophin (PTN) has 
a neurite extension activity and PTN-knockout mice display lower 
threshold for long-term potentiation in hippocampus, thus suggest -
ing a role in learning and memory. We hereby confirm and refine a 
dyslexia susceptibility locus harbouring three functionally interesting 
candidate genes on chromosome 7q34 in two independent European 
populations.
P09.048  Screening for genes involved in dyslexia using MLPA 
technique in Brazilian individuals
E. L. Sartorato , M. C. C. M. Svidnicki, V. C. S. De Moraes, S. M. S. Costa, C. 
A. Salgado, S. M. Ciasca;  
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil.
Dyslexia is defined as a disorder or learning disorder in the area of 
reading, writing and spelling, not as a result of poor literacy, lack of 
attention, motivation, socio-economic status or low intelligence, but as 
a hereditary condition. Complex diseases such as dyslexia are usually 
caused by several susceptibility genes that lead to a similar pheno -
type. Currently, there are 4 prominent genes associated with dyslexia: 
DYX1C1, KIA00319, DCDC2 and ROBO1.The method MLPA (Multi -
plex Ligation-dependent probe amplification) was used in this study 
to evaluate deletions/duplications in genes associated with dyslexia. 
The P150 Dyslexia probe mix contains probes for most of the DCDC2 
exons. In addition, several probes for the KAAG1, KIAA0319 and 
NRSN1 (VMP) genes that are nearby DCDC2, as well as probes for 
the ROBO1 and ROBO2 genes on chromosome 3p12 are present. 
In this work 14 dyslexics of Brazilian origin, were analyzed by MLPA 
technique. The DNA fragments generated in reaction using the P150 
kit were separated by capillary electrophoresis in DNA sequencer ABI 
PRISM 310. Our results indicate that none of the patients showed 
changes in copy number of probes and therefore no duplication or de -
letion was observed so far in the regions detected by probes on the kit. 
Finding genes that contribute to the phenotype of complex diseases 
represents one of the biggest challenges. The identification of these 
genes, the elucidation of their functions, create windows before whom 
she can view the complex molecular mechanisms, allowing for real 
possibilities of new treatments.P09.049  Autosomal Dominant Dyslexia Pedigree maps to 7q21
D. K. Pal1, L. J. Strug2, W. Li2, L. Addis1, T. Chiang2;  
1King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
Reading disability (RDG) has been shown to be comorbid with Rolan -
dic Epilepsy (RE), with RE probands having a 6-fold increase in risk for 
RDG and their unaffected siblings a 3-4-fold increased risk. We there -
fore set out to map a locus for RDG in RE families, using multipoint 
linkage analysis on 25 2-3 generational pedigrees ascertained in the 
United States. The max HLOD obtained was 3.10 on 7q21 at D7S660, 
under a dominant mode of inheritance, 60% penetrance. Of these 25 
families, 16 provided positive LOD scores, with the majority of the link -
age evidence coming from 8 French-Canadian families. One particular 
French-Canadian pedigree with 20 individuals (14 genotyped), 11 of 
which are RDG affected, provided a multipoint LOD score of 2.10 at 
D7S660 under a dominant mode of inheritance with 99% penetrance, 
with D7S660 providing the maximum multipoint LOD score genome-
wide. This pedigree appears to be inheriting this trait in an autosomal 
dominant fashion. D7S660 sits in a gene-sparse region, however, there 
is one gene very close to this microsatellite. We are in the process of 
re-sequencing genes at this locus in the French-Canadian pedigree.
P09.050  A novel mutation in the Dj1 gene found in an early 
onset Parkinson’s disease patient
S. Hosseini1, F. Ghazavi2, N. Ghaemi1, E. Elahi2,1;  
1Department of Biotechnology, University College of Science, University of 
Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen -
erative disease. PD is considered as a complex disease, and both 
genetic and environmental factors contribute to its etiology. Although 
PD is generally a disease of the elderly, early onset cases constitute a 
small subgroup of the patients. Among the genes known to be associ -
ated with PD, PRKN , Dj1 and Pink1 are most relevant to early-onset 
Parkinson disease. PRKN  encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, Dj1 codes 
a protein that apparently plays a neuroprotective role and is involved 
in the cellular response to oxidative stress, and Pink1  codes a serine/
threonine protein kinase that localizes to mitochondria. In the study 
being reported, we screened Dj1 and Pink1 by direct sequencing in 10 
Iranian PD patients with age of onset of less than 30 years. Early onset 
patients were chosen in whom mutations in PRKN  had been ruled out 
by previous mutation screening of this gene. No mutation in the eight 
exons of Pink1 was found. One homozygous variation, c.G319C in 
exon 5 of Dj1was observed in one patient. This novel variation causes 
the substitution of alanine at position 107 by proline (A107P). This non-
conservative substitution occurs at a turn connecting β7 and α5 sec -
ondary structures in the protein. Further analysis is needed to confirm 
the pathogenic effect of this mutation.
P09.051  mutation screening of L tBP2 in Ectopia Lentis patients
R. Haji-Seyed-Javadi1, S. Jelodari-Mamaghani1, N. Nilforooshan2, S. Yazdani3, 
E. Elahi1;  
1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Ophthalmic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University MC, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Ectopia Lentis (EL) is a pathologic condition in which the lens in the 
eye becomes displaced from its normal position. EL sometimes mani -
fests as an isolated condition termed simple EL, but more frequently 
as one of the symptoms of a syndrome. Marfan syndrome (MFS) and 
Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) are diseases often associated 
with EL. To date, Fibrillin (FBN1) is the only gene linked to EL. The 
protein coded by FBN1 is a major microfibrillar component of the extra -
cellular matrix (ECM). Latent TGFβ Binding protein 2 (LTBP2) is also a 
microfibrillar component of the extracellular matrix with high structural 
similarity to Fibrillin, suggesting it too may be a causative gene for 
ocular disorders involving the ECM. Recently LTBP2 was identified as 
a Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG) causing gene. Several PCG 
patients harboring LTBP2 mutations were observed to be also affected 
with EL. The association of LTBP2 with Fibrillin in the extracellular ma -
trix, and the observation of EL in some PCG patients harboring LTBP2 Complex traits and polygenic disorders227
mutations prompted a further investigation of possible role of LTBP2 
in promoting EL. We therefore screened all 36 exons of LTBP2 in 7 
simple EL, 6 MFS, and 2 WMS patients, all of whom exhibited lens dis -
placement. In addition to several known polymorphisms, a truncating 
null mutation in exon 7 of the gene was observed in an MFS patient.
P09.052  two Novel mutations in scN1A gene in iranian Epileptic 
Patient 
A. -. Ebrahimi1, M. Houshmand1, S. Tonekaboni2, S. Zainali3, M. Fallah 
Mahboobpasand1, M. Moghadasi1, M. Mamarabadi1;  
1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshty Medical Science 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Psture Inestitute, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Epilepsy as a common chronic neurological disorder is characterized 
by recurrent unprovoked seizures. Febrile seizures are the most com -
mon type of epilepsy in infants and children. Our aim was the molecu -
lar analysis of SCN1A gene in affected Iranian patients with GEFS+ 
and Dravet syndrome diagnosed clinically to explain genotype-pheno -
type correlation and exact classification.  
Materials and Method: The 34 unrelated Iranian families with epilepsy 
were selected and screened for SCN1A mutations by MLPA, ARMS, 
and PCR-RFLP confirmed by direct Sequencing.
Results: MLPA analysis showed normal pattern, but the direct sequenc -
ing revealed that generally 20 of 34 (0.588) probands have a common 
reported SNPs (p.A1067G; rs2298771), with allelic frequency as 0.706 
/ 0.294 in patients and 0.515 /0.485 in control group respectively for 
A/G. No significant differences between two groups were observed. 
Moreover four novel allelic variants as missense substitutions included 
two new sequence variation (p.F412 I, p.Y1274N) and two previously 
reported mutations (p.R101G, p.S103G) which were detected in 4 of 
34 probands, but not in control groups and other healthy normal family 
members. 
Conclusions: It seems that the clinical diagnosis could nearly establish 
the classification, but mutation screening helps clinicians to confirm 
their data. We found mutation in four probands and confirmed the net 
diagnosis. Our data suggest that the clinical sign variations could be 
also explained considering the role of modifier genes such as mito -
chondrial mutations or other genes responsible for drug metabolism 
pathways including multiple drug resistance family genes (ABCB1) or 
MTHFR.
P09.053  distribution of the CyP1B1 and CYP2F1  gene variants 
in three  ethnic groups of Bashkortostan and case-control study 
with cOPD.
G. F. Korytina , L. Akhmadishina, T. Victorova;  
Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
The aim of this study was to appear interethnic variation interethnic 
variation in frequency distribution patterns of CYP1B1  and CYP2F1 
genes polymorphic markers and association analysis with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease The polymorphic markers Leu432Val  
(CYP1B1) and c.14_15insC ( CYP2F1)  were studied at chronic ob -
structive pulmonary disease patients (COPD) (N=306) and cases of 
healthy individuals (N=467) (Russian, Tatar and Bashkir), residents of 
Bashkortostan.
It was shown that the CYP2F1 gene genotype frequency distribu -
tion patterns differed between three ethnic groups (χ2=21.29, df=4, 
p=0.0001), because of high frequency of c.14_15insC / c.14_15insC 
genotype in Tatars, whereas in Bashkirs and Russians it was 1.28% 
and 0.53%, respectively. On the other hand, high frequency (39.74%) 
of wild type/ c.14_15insC genotype was appeared in Bashkirs and only 
29.95% in Russians and 20.21% in Tatars.
Association analysis of CYP2F1  gene insertion variant with COPD 
have shown high frequency of wild type (86.7%) allele in patients with 
very severe stage and manifestation of COPD after 55 years (χ2=4.584, 
df=1, P=0.032; OR=1.799 95%CI 1.048-3.099). It was shown that al -
lele and genotype frequency distribution of Leu432Val CYP1B1  gene 
not differed between Russians, Tatars and Bashkir ethnic groups 
(χ2=8.433, df=4, p=0.077 and χ2=3.474, df=2, p=0.176). We did not 
find any association of CYP1B1 gene with COPD.P09.054  silent c.3306c>t (p.L1102L) mutation in ABcB4 
gene causes exon skipping in patient with Primary sclerosing cholangitis
D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, L. Costantino1, M. Seia1, R. Iorio3, G. Ranucci3, L. 
Porcaro1, V. Paracchini1, M. Castagni1, G. Maggiore4, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico 
II, Naples, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina della Procreazione e dell’Età 
Evolutiva, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC) is an idiopathic chronic choles -
tatic disorder described as multifactorial disease in human. However, 
Abcb4 knockout mice (Abcb4 -/-) associated with absence of biliary 
phosphatidylcholine evolves in a progressive cholangiophaty leading 
to a severe form of PSC while in human the absence of the ortholo -
gous ABCB4 protein causes progressive familial intrahepatic cholesta -
sis type 3 frequently characterized by rapid evolution to end stage liver 
disease.
We investigated the ABCB4 gene by sequencing of the 27 coding ex -
ons and by qualitative cDNA analysis in two subjects with PSC dis -
ease.
Sequencing analysis identified in one 13 year old boy the silent nucleo -
tide change c.3306C>T (p.L1102L) in exon 26. Searches for putative 
Esonic and Intronic Splicing Enhancers (ESEs and ISEs, respectively) 
by ESE-Finder program has predicted that this silent mutation causes 
disruption of SRp40 motif identified in this locus. Qualitative mRNA 
analysis of ABCB4 gene has subsequently showed an heterozygous 
exon 26-skipping event that causes a deletion of 76 amino acid lo -
cated in the Nucleotide binding domain-COOH terminal, but retaining 
the correct open reading frame.
This study identifies the first ABCB4 silent mutation that causes the 
skipping of exon 26 producing a deleterious allele in a child with PSC 
disease. We conclude that also silent mutations in the ABCB4 gene 
need further characterization at mRNA level in order to exclude the po -
tential pathogenic role in subjects with suspected ABCB4 deficiency.
P09.055  Filaggrin mutations and their impact on stratum 
corneum lipid levels and other skin barrier parameters in 
patients with eczema
E. Rodríguez1, H. Scheer2, M. Mempel2, H. Baurecht2, L. Cifuentes2, J. Kaae 
Høgh3, L. I. Hellgren3, G. B. E. Jemec4, T. Agner5, S. Weidinger2, J. Mutanu 
Jungersted4;  
1Helmholtz Zentrum München and ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environment, 
Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 2Department of 
Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, 
Germany, 3Department of System Biology and Centre for Advanced 
Food Science, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
4Department of Dermatology, Roskilde Hospital, University of Copenhagen, 
Roskilde, Denmark, 5Department of Dermatology, Bispebjerg Hospital, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
The discovery of loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene as 
cause of the monogenic keratinisation disorder ichthyosis vulgaris and 
strong risk factors for eczema was a major breakthrough in complex 
disease genetics. Alterations in ceramide levels, changes in skin pH 
and increased trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL) are characteristic 
in eczema patients. However, until now no studies have evaluated a 
potential impact of FLG deficiency on stratum corneum lipid levels and 
other skin barrier parameters.
A cohort of 49 German individuals genotyped for the two common FLG 
mutations (R501X, 2282del4) had stratum corneum samples taken for 
lipid analysis by high performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC), 
and TEWL, erythema, skin hydration and pH were measured. In 27 in -
dividuals an additional 24-hour irritation patch test with sodium lauryl 
sulphate (SLS) was performed. For analysis, both the eczema group 
and the control group were stratified by FLG mutation status (FLGmut/
FLGwt).
Eczema patients with FLG mutations had significantly higher erythe -
ma compared to patients without FLG mutations. FLGmut individuals 
had significantly higher skin pH values than FLGwt individuals. In the 
FLGmut eczema group significantly lower levels of ceramide 4 and sig -
nificantly higher levels of ceramide 7 were observed compared to both 
healthy control groups. However, ceramide 7 levels also significantly Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
differed between FLGwt eczema and FLGwt controls, as did ceramide 
1 levels. No significant differences were observed for ceramide 2, 3, 
5 and 6.
Our results approved previous findings of altered ceramide levels in 
eczema, which however appear to show no clear relationship to FLG 
mutations.
P09.056  search for genetic variants associated with low folate 
status
J. Sokolová, B. Janošíková, L. Krupková, V. Kozich ;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Results of genome-wide association studies indicate that private muta -
tions may play an important role in the pathogenesis of complex dis -
eases. Since low folate status has been implicated in birth defects, 
cancer and cardiovascular disease we searched in candidate genes 
for allelic variants associated with low folate status. From a historical 
cohort of 591 controls and 296 patients with coronarographically con -
firmed coronary artery disease (Janošíková et al, Mol Genet Metab 79, 
2003:167-75) we have selected 22 controls and 12 patients with both 
plasma and erythrocyte folates below the 10th percentile of the distri -
bution. In these subjects we have resequenced the coding region of ex -
ons and the adjacent 50-300bp intronic regions in five genes involved 
in folate metabolism and transport. Sequence analysis of the FOLR1, 
FOLR2, FOLR3, MTHFR  and RFC genes in all subjects revealed 5, 1, 
2, 3, and 2 novel variants, respectively, that have not been previously 
deposited in the SNP database. Although some of these variants were 
synonymous mutations, in 15 of 34 subjects with low folate status we 
have identified either missense mutations or putative splicing/termina -
tion codon mutations. Functional testing of these candidate variants 
and their frequency analysis in the entire cohort are now being car -
ried out. This study indicates that private mutations in FOLR1, FOLR3, 
MTHFR and RFC genes may be associated with low folate status and 
may thus contribute to the susceptibility for several complex diseases.
This work has been supported by the grant No. NS10036-4/2008 from 
the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic.
P09.057  the obesity-associated sNPs in intron 1 of the FTO 
gene affect primary transcript levels.
B. Horsthemke , T. Berulava;  
Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany.
As shown by genome-wide association studies, single nucleotide poly -
morphisms (SNPs) in intron 1 of the FTO gene are associated with the 
body mass index and type 2 diabetes, although the functional signifi -
cance of these SNPs has remained unclear. Previous studies have not 
revealed any effect of the FTO genotype on total mRNA levels of the 
FTO gene or the neighbouring RPGRIP1L  gene. Such studies, how -
ever, are confounded by the fact that unrelated individuals unavoidably 
differ in genetic background, environmental exposure and life events 
so that subtle effects cannot be detected. This problem can be cir -
cumvented by determining the ratio of allelic transcript levels in het -
erozygous individuals, where each allele serves as an internal control 
for the other. To measure allelic transcript ratios, we developed highly 
quantitative fluorescence-tagged single nucleotide primer extension 
assays. For FTO, we used unspliced heterogeneous nuclear RNA 
and SNP rs9939609. Allelic expression ratios of the neighbouring RP-
GRIP1L  gene were investigated in individuals who were heterozygous 
for the RPGRIP1L  SNP rs4784319 and heterozygous or homozygous 
for the FTO SNP rs9939609. In each of five different blood samples 
tested, the FTO transcripts containing the A (risk) allele of rs9939609 
were more abundant than those with the T allele (mean 1.38; 95% 
confidence interval 1.31 to 1.44). Similar results were obtained in fi -
broblasts and adipocytes. We also observed skewed allelic expres -
sion of the RPGRIP1L  gene, but skewing was independent of the FTO 
genotype. Our data suggest that increased expression of FTO leads to 
increased body weight.P09.058  Gene-gene interaction of LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 pathway 
components exert an important influence on the occurrence of 
t2D in Japanese.
P. Keshavarz1, H. Inoue2;  
1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The 
Institute for Genome research, Tokushima, Japan.
The LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 signaling pathway controls glucose homeo -
stasis in the liver, and mediates therapeutic effects of insulin sensi -
tizing antidiabetic agents. Given the putative biological interactions 
among LKB1, AMPK a2-subnit and TORC2 proteins, to examine 
whether gene-gene interaction in the three genes (STK11, PRKAA2, 
CRTC2)encoding component of this signaling pathway increase 
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes ,we tested for statistical interactions 
among SNPs in the three genes with respect to T2D susceptibility. To 
limit multiple testing, we used ht-SNP data sets to represent each gene 
or locus, and the pairwise gene-gene (locus-locus) interactions were 
analyzed by GAIA (Genetic Association Interaction Analysis), a re -
cently developed statistical method for evaluating gene-gene interac -
tions. we observed significant and specific interactions between SNPs 
in STK11 and CRTC2 genes, while no interactions were found with 
either between the STK11 and CRTC2 SNPs, at least three pairs of 
SNPs showed a statistically significant interaction with respect to T2D 
risk (rs3829686-rs2072704, rs6510599-rs2072704 and rs741765-
rs2072704, with the most significant pair (rs6510599-rs2072704) 
reaching a p-value of 0.0010 (Permutation-p = 0.019, under an ‘‘ad -
ditive only’’ model). Interestingly, individual SNPs that were found to 
interact did not necessarily show significant single-locus associations 
in our previous study, except for rs741765. Our findings suggest that 
gene-gene (SNP-SNP) interaction studies between STK11 and CRTC2 
influencing susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in Japanese.
P09.059  An italian Network of isolated populations for genetic 
dissection of complex traits
P. d‘Adamo1, D. Toniolo2, M. Ciullo3, U. Hladnik4, P. Gasparini1,5;  
1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, 
Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 3Institute of Genetics 
and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati-Traverso”, Naples, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, 
M.Baschirotto Institute for Rare Diseases. B.I.R.D. Foundation, Costozza di 
Longare, Vicenza, Italy, 5University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
The use of isolated populations to reduce disease heterogeneity of 
complex disorders is a modern and valid instrument to study genetic 
basis of complex diseases. In order to better study multifactorial traits 
we have created a network (INGI) that join different isolated villages 
in Italy. We choose the populations in order to represent Italian vari -
ability and differences between nord and south. At this moment there 
are about 1700 people from Val Borbera (nord-west), 1400 from Friuli 
Venezia Giulia (nord east) and 700 from Carlantino (south).
In the isolates we have performed a fully clinical evaluation including 
anamnesis, anthropometrical measurements, three blood pressure es -
timates, a clinical chemistry, evaluation bone densitometry, ECG. We 
have also created a DNA and sera banks. Some specialistic exami -
nations were performed: cardiological (ECG, echocardiogram), odon -
toiatric (orthopantomography), neurological, psychiatrical examination and  bone densitometry and audiometry evaluations. We have also 
collected information on dietary habits.
Moreover we have collected genealogical data using curch and mu -
nicipality registers.
All samples were genotyped using ILLUMINA 370K SNPs-Array and 
inferred using HapMap 2M data. We are currently performing infer -
ences of all the populations using data derived from 1000 genomes 
consortium. Thanks to the high number of phenotypes collected we 
are involved in different consortia for the identification of genetic fac -
tors for common traits (heart traits like QT and PR intervals, hyper -
tension, white and red blood cells, platelets and menarche). We are 
currently performing association analysis for POF(premature ovarian 
failure), bone density, cardiac frequency, etc. but we are open to all 
possible collaborations.
P09.060  iRAK3 gene variants associate with atopic asthma: a replication study in the spanish population
M. Pino-Yanes1,2, A. Hernández3, J. Cumplido4, M. J. Torres-Galván5, I. 
Sánchez-Machín6, J. Figueroa7, R. González6, A. Corrales1,2, M. Casula1,8, 
T. E. Klassert9, O. Acosta Fernández10, I. García-Talavera10, T. Almeida9, M. Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
Hernández9, S. Basaldúa1,2, J. C. García-Robaina6, T. Carrillo4, A. Sánchez-
Palacios7, J. Villar1,8, C. Flores1,2;  
1CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, 
Spain, 2Research Unit, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, 
Spain, 3Instituto Nacional de Toxicologia y Ciencias Forenses, Delegación 
de Canarias, Tenerife, Spain, 4Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, 
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 5Research Unit, Hospital Universitario 
Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 6Allergy Unit, Hospital 
Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain, 7Allergy Unit, Hospital 
Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 
8Multidisciplinary Organ Dysfunction Evaluation Research Network (MODERN), 
Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 
Spain, 9Department of Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain, 
10Neumology Unit, Hospital Universitario NS de Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain.
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease that is affected by both 
genetic and environmental factors. IRAK3 has recently emerged as a 
new candidate gene for susceptibility as a result of positional cloning 
of early onset persistent asthma in Sardinian families, with two SNPs 
further replicated in a case-control sample of atopic persistent asthma 
from Italy. Here we aimed to replicate the association of IRAK3 com-
mon variants with susceptibility to asthma.
Using re-sequencing data of 23 kilobases of non-repetitive gene re -
gions from 32 unrelated healthy subjects, we selected a set of 15 
tagging SNPs (tagSNPs), forcing the inclusion of predicted functional 
variants and previously associated SNPs. Genotyping was conducted 
by means of SNaPshot® Multiplex System in 611 asthmatic cases and 
1407 population-based controls from the Genetics Of Asthma study 
(GOA) in the Spanish population.
Variants of IRAK3 showed no association with susceptibility to asthma, 
rhinitis, atopic dermatitis or total IgE. However, multiple SNPs distrib -
uted across the gene associated with early onset asthma (0.009≤p-
value≤0.043; q-value<0.10) and atopic asthma (0.016≤p-value≤0.050; 
q-value<0.05), replicating the two previously associated SNPs from 
the Italian study. Finally, a stratified analysis across Italian and Span -
ish samples further supported the strength of the associations (min p = 
1x10-5 in a joint analysis over >2500 individuals).
Taken together, our results confirm that variants of IRAK3  gene might 
play an important role in early onset and atopic asthma pathogenesis.
Supported by FUNCIS 23/07 and grants from the Spanish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation PI081383 and EMER07/001 to CF.
P09.061  Genome wide association study identifies three loci 
associated with psoriatic arthritis
U. D. Hüffmeier1, S. Uebe1, A. B. Ekici1, J. Bowes2, E. Giardina3, E. 
Korendowych4, K. Juneblad5, M. Apel1, R. McManus6, P. Ho2, I. N. Bruce2, F. 
Behrens7, B. Böhm7, H. Wichmann8,9, C. Herold10, M. Steffens10, L. Klareskog11, 
T. F. Wienker10, O. FitzGerald12, G. Alenius5, N. J. McHugh4,13, G. Novelli3, H. 
Burkhardt7, A. Barton2, A. Reis1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, 
Germany, 2ARC Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Department 
of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic risk Assessment in 
Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, University of Rome 
“Tor Vergata” and Fondazione PTV “Policlinico Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 
4Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Bath, United Kingdom, 
5Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/ Rheumatology, University 
Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 6Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 7Division of Rheumatology, 
Department of Internal Medicine II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, 
Frankfurt/ Main, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and 
Epidemiology, Chair of Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, 
Germany, 9Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 10Institute of Medical 
Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 
11Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 12Department of Rheumatology, St. 
Vincent’s University Hospital, UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science 
and Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University 
College, Dublin, Ireland, 13Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 
University Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory joint disease distinct from 
other chronic arthritides and frequently accompanied by psoriasis 
vulgaris and seronegativity for rheumatoid factor. In order to identify 
susceptibility genes, we performed a SNP array based genome wide 
association study in 609 German patients and 990 control individuals. Analysis of 1,585,307 confidently imputed SNPs revealed three loci 
achieving genome-wide significance (p<5x10-8) that were replicated 
in independent study groups of 1761 patients and 3727 control indi -
viduals of European origin. We confirmed HLA-C  (p=2.63x10-23) and 
IL12B  (p=5.60x10-13) as PsA susceptibility genes and observed sev -
eral independent signals within the HLA region. The most associated 
IL12B  variant, located 72kb upstream of the gene, was independent of 
previously reported psoriasis-associated IL12B -SNPs. Association to 
several intragenic variants of the TRAF3IP2  gene (p=5.48x10-9) includ -
ing the missense-variant R74W (rs13190932) was detected implicat -
ing this component of the IL-17 receptor signalling pathway 1 as a PsA 
susceptibility locus. Our study implicates new susceptibility variants 
at known susceptibility loci and in addition identifies a novel pathway 
for PsA.
P09.062  the role and frequency of glutathione s-transferase 
P1 polymorphism in Iranian patients affected with reflux 
esophagitis
N. Zendehdel1, N. Zendehdel2, H. Sarie3, M. Doughaiemoghaddam3, A. 
Pourshams4, A. A. Noormohammadi5, H. Gholami6, N. Zendehdel7, M. 
Dehghani8, S. Latifi-Navid1;  
1National Institue of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 3Fayazbakhsh Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Digestive 
Disease Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Iranian 
Oil Company Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Iranian Tissue 
Bank- Tehran university of medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
7Khalig Fars Hospita, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 8Special Medical Center, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Reflux esophagitis is a common complication of the gas -
troesophageal reflux disease. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) have 
important role in the protection of cells from the products of oxidative 
stress. GSTP1*B allele has a correlation with susceptibility to several 
diseases. In this case-control study, the role and frequency of GSTP1 
polymorphism was evaluated in Iranian patients with erosive reflux es -
ophagitis.
Methods: Seventy patients with reflux esophagitis and seventy-five 
normal individuals were enrolled in this study. The grade of esophagitis 
was determined via endoscopy. DNA was extracted from venous blood 
of each subject using the salting out method. GSTP1 genetic polymor -
phisms were detected using the PCR-RFLP method.
Results: There was a significant difference between the frequency of 
non-variant (*A/*A) and variant GSTP1 genotypes (*A/*B, *B/*B) in 
both patient and normal groups (P=0.006). Also in the patient group, 
the grade B of esophagitis was significantly associated with variant 
GSTP1 genotype (P=0.028). The rate of throat pain symptom was 
higher in the no-variant group (P<0.036).
Conclusion: The GSTP1*B allele frequency in Iranian patients with re -
flux esophagitis and normal control groups is similar to Orientals. In 
addition, GSTP1 polymorphism is correlated with a higher grade of 
esophagitis.
P09.063  the cA haplotype (-174c, -597A) of the iL-6 gene and 
systemic sclerosis susceptibility
R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, O. M. Popa1, C. Mihai1, R. Ionitescu1, I. Ancuta1, M. 
Bojinca1, C. Bara1, R. Ionescu1, M. Dutescu2, L. Popa3;  
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2C. T 
Nicolau National Institute of Hematology, Bucharest, Romania, 3Grigore Antipa 
National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania.
Systemic Sclerosis (SSc) is a complex multiorgan disease. The key 
steps in its pathogenesis include dysregulation of the immune system 
and early endothelial damage followed by the fibroblast activation. The 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene is implicated in all of these pathogenic path -
ways.
Objectives: to investigate the influence of the -174 G/C, -597 G/A SNP 
and their haplotypes on the susceptibility of SSc.
Materials and Methods: We assessed 118 European Caucasians 
subjects (67 SSc patients -86.5%F/13.5%M and 51 healthy controls 
-83%F/17%M) for -174G/C and -597 G/A SNP by PCR-RFLP method 
(Hsp 92II, Fok I as specific restriction enzymes). We used for all the 
statistical analyses the software package PLINK vl.07. The haplotype-
association tests were based on the expected number of haplotypes 
each individual has and was studied by the chi-squared test.Complex traits and polygenic disorders20
Results: The genotype frequencies (Wigginton test) respected Hardy 
-Weinberg equilibrium for the controls but not for the SSc group. The 
association analysis (Fischer test) showed no difference in the dis -
tribution of allele frequencies regarding both SNP positions between 
SSc patients and controls. Four common haplotypes were identified. 
Among them, the CA haplotype (-174C, -597A) was present in 13.7% 
SSc patients and 25.8%controls. We found a negative association 
(p=0.02) between the CA haplotype and SSc suggesting that this hap -
lotype exert a protective effect against disease susceptibility.
Conclusions: This study shows no association of the IL-6 -174 (G/C) 
and -597 (G/A) polymorphisms alone with SSc, but the CA haplotype 
(-174C, -597A) could confer a disease resistance in investigated popu -
lation.
P09.064  contribution of genetic factors to the variance in the 
frequency and severity of hereditary angioedema episodes
A. Szilagyi1, D. Csuka1, L. Varga1, A. Bors2, L. Kalmar2, A. Tordai2, G. Fust1, H. 
Farkas1;  
13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary, 2Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics, Hungarian National Blood 
Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary.
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare autosomal disorder caused by 
the deficiency of C1-inhibitor (C1INH) and characterized by recurrent 
episodes of angioedema. Frequency and localization of the edemic 
bouts are quite different sometimes even between members of the 
same family carrying identical C1INH  mutation. Beside various trig -
gering factors the different genetic background may contribute to the 
variation of symptoms. We aimed to evaluate the association of five 
polymorphisms of different genes related to the pathogenesis of the 
disease with the frequency and localization of edemic episodes. More -
over, correlation of C1INH concentrate usage with the occurrence of 
these polymorphisms was also analyzed.
One hundred and twenty-nine Caucasian HAE patients were enrolled 
in the study. The genotype of a 9 bp insertion/deletion polymorphism 
of the bradykinin B2 receptor gene, three single nucleotide polymor -
phisms of exon 1 (alleles A/B/C/D) within the gene of mannose-binding 
lectin and the copy numbers of complement component C4 genes were 
determined applying PCR based methods. The potential influence of 
different C1INH  mutations on disease severity was also evaluated.
We found that the analyzed polymorphisms are associated with the 
frequency and localization of attacks. Our data indicate that the stud -
ied variations are independent predictors of HAE attack frequency and 
C1INH concentrate usage irrespectively of the carried  C1INH  muta -
tion.
Characterization of genetic factors influencing severity of edemic at -
tacks may help in the near future to find the best therapeutic interven -
tion for hereditary angioedema patients with different symptoms.
P09.065  HHEX-IDE  genotype associated with birth weight in 
south Asians
L. K. Towns1, M. Attard2, A. J. Walley2, U. L. Fairbrother1;  
1London Metropolitan University, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
Within an obesogenic environment the South Asian population have 
a higher propensity to develop obesity and T2D. SA infants appear to 
have more central visceral adipose tissue at birth than white Cauca -
sians. Raised levels of adipose tissue increases the risk of T2D and 
cardiovascular disease in adulthood. Low birth weight followed by 
rapid catch up to normal weight in babies has been associated with 
insulin VNTR alleles and childhood obesity. HHEX - IDE  is a recently 
published candidate region for a role in obesity and T2D in Cauca -
sians. There is some evidence that  HHEX - IDE  influences fetal birth 
weight with a parent of origin effect. Since insulin is an important in -
trauterine growth factor, HHEX - IDE  is an interesting candidate in ei -
ther increasing or ameliorating childhood obesity. Our study was de -
signed to ascertain whether variants in the HHEX - IDE  locus of 663 
SA mothers influence fetal birth weight. Using the Sequenom iPLEX 
assay, 37 SNPs spanning the maternal HHEX - IDE  locus have been 
genotyped. ANCOVA analysis controlling for gestational age, maternal 
booking weight, fetal sex and parity revealed one SNP significantly 
associated with birth weight (rs12765131 p=0.002) and two trend as -
sociated. Three SNPs were also found to be associated with T2D in 
the mothers (rs4933236 p=0.011, rs2488073 p=0.020 and rs2497349 p=0.016) with a further two trend associated. This study provides pre -
liminary evidence that variants in the maternal HHEX - IDE  locus are 
associated with birth weight in SA subjects and also contributes to the 
development of T2D.
P09.066  serotonin receptor 1A -1019c/G polymorphism may 
influence treatment response to escitalopram in patients with 
melancholic depression
A. Tammiste1, K. Pettai1,2, T. Eller3, V. Vasar3, D. J. Nutt4, A. Metspalu2,5, E. 
Maron3,4;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, 
Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Neuropsychopharmacology 
and Molecular Imaging, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 
5Estonian Genome Project, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
In our previous study we demonstrated that melancholic subtype of de -
pression predicted poor treatment response to escitalopram; however 
this was not associated with the serotonin transporter promoter-linked 
polymorphic region polymorphisms. Recently, Baune et al reported that 
functional polymorphism -1019C/G in serotonin receptor 1A gene may 
have specific role in mediating antidepressant efficacy in depression 
with melancholic features. In current study we examined the possible 
impact of this polymorphism on the treatment response to escitalo -
pram in patients with major depression and particularly in depressive 
patients with melancholia. The 5-HT1A -1019C/G polymorphism was 
genotyped in 135 outpatients with major depressive disorder, MDD 
(mean age 31.1 ± 11.6 years, 68% females) treated with escitalopram 
10-20 mg/day for 12 weeks. Overall, there was no significant associa -
tion between  -1019C/G polymorphism and escitalopram efficacy in to -
tal sample of patients with MDD diagnosis. However, the melancholic 
patients carrying GG genotype showed significantly poorer treatment 
response at week 12 of escitalopram medication than melancholic pa -
tients with C alleles. The results of our study may give additional sup -
port to importance of 5-HT1A -1019C/G polymorphism in modulation of 
antidepressant treatment in the melancholic subtype of depression.
P09.067**  Genome-Wide Association study reveals new gene 
for hypospadias.
L. F. M. van der Zanden1, I. A. L. M. van Rooij1, J. Knight2, S. H. H. M. 
Vermeulen1, W. F. J. Feitz1, L. S. Baskin3, A. Nordenskjöld4, N. Roeleveld1, N. V. 
A. M. Knoers1, B. Franke1;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2King‘s 
College London, London, United Kingdom, 3University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, United States, 4Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male ex -
ternal genitalia with a multifactorial etiology. To identify genetic vari -
ants contributing to susceptibility for hypospadias, we performed the 
first Genome-wide Association Study (GWAS) for this malformation 
using DNA pooling. We included 436 Caucasian cases with isolated 
glanular or penile hypospadias from the AGORA project (Aetiologic re -
search into Genetic and Occupational/environmental Risk factors for 
Anomalies in children) and 494 unaffected Dutch males and allelo -
typed 906,600 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using Affyme -
trix 6.0 arrays. Allele frequencies were calculated using k-corrected 
signal intensities. The highest ranked SNPs that fulfilled quality-control 
criteria were selected for individual genotyping. Seven SNPs were lo -
cated in one X-chromosomal gene. As most SNPs in this gene are in 
strong linkage disequilibrium with each other, individual samples were 
genotyped for the (intronic) SNP that tagged most other SNPs and 
for a potentially regulatory SNP in the 5’ upstream region. Both SNPs 
showed highly statistically significant association results in individual 
genotyping (odds ratio (OR) = 2.45, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.88-
3.20, p=3.2E-11 and OR=2.25, 95% CI 1.71-2.94, p=3.5E-9, respec -
tively). These results were replicated in an additional Dutch sample of 
75 hypospadias cases and 102 controls (OR=2.18, 95% CI 1.17-4.05, 
p=0.014 and OR=1.89, 95% CI 1.01-3.53, p=0.045, respectively). 
Furthermore, nine SNPs in other genes were genotyped in the indi -
vidual samples, of which seven showed statistically significant results 
(p<0.05). Replication in 350 hypospadias cases and 350 controls from 
Sweden is ongoing as are experiments studying expression of the X-
chromosomal gene in relevant human tissue.Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
P09.068  Distribution of functional polymorphic variants of pro-
inflammatory related genes RANTES and CCR5 in long-lived 
individuals
M. Laplana, J. Fibla ;  
IRBLleida, University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.
The positive effect of the immune system protecting against pathogens 
and tumour-cells spread, can be turned out, later in life, as a detri -
mental chronic inflammation fading longevity. It has been considered 
that the persistent activation of inflammatory status is related to unsuc -
cessful aging meanwhile the prevention of inflammation contributes to 
healthy aging. Nevertheless, a pro-inflammatory status is the common 
phenotype in older people. In order to assess for a genetic component 
in the elderly pro-inflammatory status we have studied the distribution 
of functional polymorphic variants of two genes from the chemokine 
pro-inflammatory pathway, RANTES and CCR5, in long-lived indi -
viduals. A promoter polymorphism of the RANTES gene (rs2107538; 
-403G/A) and an insertion/deletion polymorphism of the CCR5 gene 
(rs333, delta32) were genotyped in a cohort of 214 subjects; 104 octo -
genarians (>85 years, 72 women and 32 men) and 110 sex-matched 
healthy young individuals (75 women and 35 men). Selected poly -
morphic variants have functional effects on the RANTES/CCR5 pro-
inflammatory mediated pathway. RANTES-403A rare allele increases 
the promoter transcriptional activity that results in high serum RANTES 
levels favouring a pro-inflammatory status. In contrast, delta32 CCR5 
deletion variant abrogates functional CCR5 receptor expressions that 
weaken the pro-inflammatory CCR5 mediated action. No differences 
were observed in global genotype and allele distribution between oc -
togenarians and controls. In contrast, male octogenarians shows and 
overrepresentation of RANTES-403A allele (OR=3.2 95%C.I.=1.2-8.5; 
p=0.012) and RANTES-403A carrier genotypes (OR=4.0 95%C.I.=1.3-
11.7; p=0.01). Our results suggest a male-specific pro-inflammatory 
genetic determinant that could contribute to the known gender differ -
ences in aging.
P09.069  Oxidative and carbonyl stress-induced DNA damage in 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease
D. Baláková1, M. Baldovič1,2, G. Minárik1, I. Čierna2, M. Bátovský3, T. Hlavatý3, 
L. Kádaši1,4, P. Celec1,5;  
1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 
2Children‘s Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty 
Hospital, Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute of Molecular Physiology 
and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute of 
Molecular Biomedicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are chronic relapsing 
inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. Oxidative stress, 
defined as an imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen 
species and antioxidative mechanisms, caused by the chronic inflam -
mation is one of the potential mechanisms leading to systemic com -
plications. Mitochondria are organelles with the highest production of 
free radicals and lowest antioxidant status, therefore, mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) is at high risk of oxidative damage. Increased oxidative 
stress in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) leads to lipoperoxidation 
and the production of carbonyl compounds. Carbonyl stress repre -
sents an important pathomechanism in several metabolic diseases, 
but its role in IBD has not been described yet.
We investigated 212 IBD patients and 47 control subjects. In our study 
we analyzed the fragmentation of mtDNA in association with polymor -
phisms in ATG16L1  and PTGER4  and carbonyl damage of DNA quan -
tified as AGE-specific fluorescence.
In our cohort of Slovak IBD patients we did not confirm the associa -
tion of rs3828309 in ATG16L1  and rs4613763 in PTGER4  with IBD 
decribed in several genome-wide association studies. We did not find 
any differences in AGE-specific fluorescence of DNA between IBD pa -
tients and controls. In contrast, fragmentation of mtDNA was found to 
be increased in CD patients compared to controls dependeding on the  
ATG16L1  genotype.
Our findings should be complemented by analyzing additional bio -
chemical markers of oxidative and carbonyl stress in further studies.P09.070  Detection, genetic impact and distribution of 
hypervariable region in human Na(+)-ca(2+) exchanger (NcX1) 
intronic region among European, Asian and African populations
K. Kepp1, E. Org1, S. Sõber1, P. Kelgo1, M. Viigimaa2, G. Veldre1,3, N. 
Tõnisson1, P. Juhanson1, M. Putku1, A. Kindmark4, V. Kozich5, M. Laan1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre of Cardiology, North Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, 
Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Cardiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia, Estonia, 4Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University 
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Charles 
University – First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, Tartu, Estonia.
Although short insertions and deletions (indels; <100bp) are abundant 
in the human genome, little attention is paid to their effect on gene 
regulation and disease susceptibility. We have targeted non-coding re -
gions of cardiovascular disease (CVD) candidate gene, Na(+)-Ca(2+) 
exchanger (NCX1) with polymorphism screening among CVD patients 
and identified a 14bp intronic indel (rs11274804). Genotyping among 
Eastern-Europeans (n=1792) revealed that the analyzed 348bp region 
was hypervariable, represented by seven different alleles. The align -
ments of human-chimpanzee-macaque sequences showed that the 
major human variant (allele frequency 90.45%) was actually a human-
specific deletion compared to other primates. In humans, this deletion 
was surrounded by other short (5-43bp) deletion variants and a dupli -
cation (40bp) polymorphism possessing overlapping breakpoints. The 
observed high variation reflects on a potential indel hotspot, which may 
have been triggered by the initial deletion in human lineage. Associa -
tion of NCX1 intronic 14bp indel (rs11274804) with CVD was studied in 
two Eastern-European sample sets: essential hypertension (HYPEST; 
n=1122; cases n=470/controls=652) and coronary artery disease, CAD 
(CADCZ; n=670; cases n=257/controls=413). An association was de -
tected between the carrier status of 14bp indel allele and the diagnosis 
of CAD (P=0.0016, OR=2.02; Bonferroni significance level α=0.0045), 
but not with hypertension. The risk for the CAD development was even 
higher among the patients additionally diagnosed with metabolic syn -
drome (P=0.0014, OR=2.34). Consistent with the effect on metabolic 
processes, the 14bp indel showed also suggestive evidence for the as -
sociation with heart rate, serum triglyceride and LDL levels (P=0.04).
P09.071  Association between genetic variation in the gene encoding coagulation factor Xi and ischemic stroke
E. Hanson1,2, T. Zagoras2, S. Nilsson3, C. Blomstrand1, K. Jood1, C. Jern1,2;  
1Institute of neuroscience and physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department 
of Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
Background: Coagulation factor XI (FXI) contributes to hemostasis by 
activating factor IX and by down-regulating fibrinolysis. Association 
between high levels of FXI and atherothrombotic disease including 
ischemic stroke (IS) has been reported in a few studies. The aim of 
the present study was to investigate whether there is an association 
between genetic variation in the gene encoding FXI ( F11) and IS.
Methods: The Sahlgrenska Academy Study on Ischemic Stroke 
(SAHLSIS) comprises 845 Caucasian patients with IS and 668 Cau -
casian population-based controls. Stroke subtype was defined using 
TOAST criteria. Seven tagSNPs in the F11 gene were selected from 
HapMap. Genotyping was performed with the Illumina GoldenGate as -
say. Haplotypes were inferred using the EM algorithm.
Results: Three SNPs (rs1593, rs3733440, and rs925451) in the F11 
gene showed significant associations with overall IS. All associations 
remained after adjustment for vascular risk factors with odds ratios 
(ORs) for the minor allele of 0.69 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.54-
0.88), 0.76 (95% CI 0.60-0.96) and 1.24 (95% CI 1.06-1.46), respec -
tively. Genetic variation in the F11 gene was also independently as -
sociated with the etiologic IS subtypes of small-vessel disease (SVD), 
cardioembolic (CE) stroke and cryptogenic stroke. Furthermore, hap -
lotype analysis revealed that two F11 haplotypes were significantly as -
sociated with overall IS.
Conclusions: In this study we found independent associations be -
tween F11 gene variation and overall IS as well as the IS subtypes 
of SVD, CE stroke, and cryptogenic stroke. These findings motivate 
further studies on the importance of FXI in IS.Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
P09.072  Genetic variation on chromosome 9p21 shows 
association with large-vessel disease in a swedish sample aged 
≤70 years
S. Olsson1,2, K. Jood1, C. Blomstrand§1, C. Jern1,2;  
1Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Clinical Neuroscience 
and Rehabilitation, the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
Background : Ischemic stroke (IS) is a complex disease in which en -
vironmental and genetic factors make about equal contribution to the 
etiology. The aim of this study was to independently validate a recent 
finding of an association between genetic variants on chromosome 
9p21 and the subtype large-vessel disease (LVD).
Methods:  The Sahlgrenska Academy Study on Ischemic Stroke 
(SAHLSIS) comprises 844 Caucasian patients, who suffered IS before 
reaching the age of 70 years, and 668 healthy Caucasian controls. IS 
subtype was defined according to the TOAST criteria, and 111 patients 
were categorized as LVD. Seven SNPs, rs10965227, rs1547705, 
rs1333040, rs7857345, rs1333045, rs10757278, and rs1537378 were 
analyzed.
Results: The mean age of controls and patients with IS (including LVD) 
was 56 years and the mean age of patients with LVD was 60 years. 
The uncommon (A) allele of SNP rs7857345 was associated with a 
decreased risk of LVD after adjustment for age and sex (OR 0.61, 95% 
CI 0.44-0.86, p=0.004). This association remained after adjustment 
also for vascular risk factors (OR 0.58, 95% CI 0.39-0.86, p=0.007), 
and in this analysis an association with LVD was also detected for 
rs10965227 (OR 1.57, 95% CI 1.06-2.34, p=0.02). In contrast, no 
significant associations were found for the other three IS subtypes or 
overall IS. In addition, an association between rs7857345 and func -
tional outcome two years after LVD was also observed.
Conclusion: In this relatively young Caucasian population of patients 
with IS, genetic variation on 9p21 is associated with the IS subtype 
LVD.
P09.073  Association between connective tissue disorders, bone 
mineral density and bone methabolism in juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis patients
M. V. Moskalenko1,2, M. M. Kostik3, G. S. Demin2, M. N. Ostroumova4, I. G. 
Makarova4, M. M. Mnuskina4, L. A. Scheplyagina5, V. I. Larionova3;  
1Institute of Hematology & Transfusiology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Gene Ltd, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg State 
Pediatric Medical Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4City’s 
Diagnostic Center for Adults N1, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Scientific 
and Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology & Immunology, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background and aims: Connective tissue disorders (CTD) are very 
common clinical syndrome among children with juvenile idiopathic ar -
thritis (JIA). The aim of our study was to investigate and compare data 
on bone densitometry, bone biochemistry and molecular assay in JIA 
patients depending on present of CTD.
Methods: 198 JIA children were included in our study. P. Beighton 
score was used for determinate joint hypermobility index. Bone min -
eralization was detected by dual-energy X-ray absorbtiometry of lum -
bar spine. Bone metabolic parameters such as osteocalcine, parathy -
roid hormone and C-terminal telopeptides, Ca and Ca2+, nonorganic 
phosphorus levels and total alkaline phosphatase (TAP) activity were 
determinated. Molecular testing of ApaI, Tag I, Bsm I VDR  gene poly -
morphisms, Sp1 Col1a1  gene polymorphism and HindIII BGLAP  gene 
polymorphism were provided by PCR-RFLP.
Results: We have revealed that CTD was more frequent among JIA 
patients (79.7%). Low bone mineral density (BMD) for chronological 
age was 3 times higher in CTD children with JIA, in boys also higher 
(26.7%) than in girls (20.0%). Significantly lower BMD (-0.19±1.05 SD 
and 0.5±0.92 SD, relatively, p=0.01) and higher TAP activity (354.6 
±117.2 U\l and 300.1±102.1 U\l, respectively, p=0.05) were detected in 
CTD children. There was no difference in genotype and allelic distribu -
tion of studied genes, impacted in bone metabolism and mineralization 
in JIA children, depending on presence of CTD.
Conclusion: We have revealed an association between CTD and low 
bone mineralization, high alkaline phosphatase activity and found no 
difference in frequencies of VDR  and Col1a1  genetic polymorphisms 
in children with JIA.P09.074  Low frequency variants affecting lipid levels in the 
Finnish population
K. Rehnstrom1,2, I. Surakka2, J. Kettunen2, S. Ripatti2, L. Peltonen1,2;  
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Institute for 
Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
The SNP genotyping platforms for genome-wide association studies 
(GWASs) contain mostly common SNPs, but it has become evident 
that common SNPs only explain a part of the heritability of complex 
disorders. A small number of low frequency SNPs (lfSNPs) are also 
present on these chips, but the statistical power to detect associa -
tion between a single low frequency variant and a phenotype is low. 
The presence or absence of lfSNPs within a predefined region can be 
used as a pseudomarker which provides increased statistical power to 
identify genes with multiple low frequency variants contributing to the 
phenotype. Although these rare variant collapsing methods are primar -
ily developed for resequencing data, here we have used available ge -
nome-wide SNP data to test for association of low frequency variants 
with lipid measures.
We used three Finnish datasets (n=8913) with measures of total cho -
lesterol, HDL, LDL and triglyceride levels. We used QuTie software, 
which pools low frequncy variants within genes and tests for differ -
ences in quantitative trait means in individuals with at least one lfSNP 
compared to individuals with none. Summary statistics per gene were 
combined across datasets using inverse variance meta-analysis.
In our preliminary analysis, we identified significant enrichment of lf -
SNPs in multiple regions, including 20q13.12 and 6p22.2. Next, the 
genotyping quality of the identified SNPs needs to be addressed. Our 
results suggest that low frequency variants, which are usually exclud -
ed from GWASs, should be included in analyses. Careful inspection 
of the clustering quality of identified SNPs is needed to exclude false 
positive signals.
P09.075  Patogenetics of the liver cirrhosis: Polymorphism of glutation s-transferase genes
I. A. Goncharova1, M. I. Rachkovskiy2, E. V. Beloborodova2, H. Gamal Abd 
El-Aziz Nasr2, V. P. Pyzirev1;  
1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 
2State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Deletion polymorphism in genes GSTT1 , GSTM1  and polymorphic 
variant in gene GSTP1 (A313G) were studied for their association with 
cirrhosis and probability of survival during four years from the moment 
of inclusion into study. Population of Tomsk region (West Siberia) was 
examined in the current study. We have shown that homozygous dele -
tion for  GSTM1 (null genotype) is protective factor against develop -
ment of alcoholic and mixed (HCV, HBV and alcohol) liver cirrhosis. 
The patients in general group and with alcoholic and mixed cirrhosis 
had lower frequency of null genotypes for GSTM1 then the control 
group (39.2%; 39%; 34.2%) (p=0.6x10-4; p=0.1x10-2; p=0.1x10-3). The 
null genotypes for GSTM1  and polymorphic variant in GSTP1 (A313G) 
were associated with four years patients survival. The survived patients 
had higher frequency of null genotypes for GSTM1  (46.6%; 30.2%) 
(p=0.03) and genotypes AA in GSTP1 (A313G) (63.1% and 40.5%) and 
lower frequency of genotypes AG in gene GSTP1 (A313G) (31.1% and 
51.2%)(p=0.8x10-2). Chance to survive was higher for patients with 
genotype AA in GSTP1 (A313G) (OR=2.52; 1.34<OR<4.75; p=0.3x10-
2) and null genotypes for GSTM1 (OR=2.01; 1.06<OR<3.85; p=0.032). 
The probability of a fatal outcome is higher for patients with genotype 
AA in GSTP1 (A313G) (OR=2.33; 1.23<OR<4.43; p=0.8x10-2).
P09.076  Resequencing candidate genes for major depressive 
disorder in a Dutch cohort
E. C. Verbeek1, M. R. Bevova1, Z. Bochdanovits1, P. Heutink1, W. J. G. 
Hoogendijk2;  
1VUMC, Dept. Medical Genomics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VUMC, Dept. 
Psychiatry, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common complex trait charac -
terized by prolonged dysphoria, changes in appetite and sleeping be -
haviour, feelings of worthlessness and additional cognitive symptoms. 
Besides being a burden for patients and their relatives, MDD is also 
one of the leading causes of disability in western civilization, with enor -
mous consequences for the economy and healthcare.
In a 2008 genome wide association study (GWAS) for MDD, Sullivan 
et al. found a significant single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
piccolo gene (pclo). Pclo codes for a protein that is localized in the 
presynaptic area.
We plan to resequence pclo in 50 control samples to look at all normal 
variants, find possible new risk factors for MDD, refine patterns of in -
heritance and to find further evidence that the SNP found by Sullivan 
et al. is truly the causal SNP. The variations that we want to find are 
SNPs, Copy Number Variations and Insertions/Deletions.
We hybridize genomic DNA to NimbleGen Sequence Capture arrays 
to capture the DNA of interest. Hybridized DNA is eluted using NaOH 
and then amplified with ligation mediated PCR. After amplification we 
compare the enrichment of our target DNA to genomic DNA for sev -
eral control loci. After having sufficient enrichment (>100x), indexes 
are ligated to the DNA for identification. Samples are then sequenced 
using an Illumina GAII-machine. Sequence data is then aligned back 
to the reference genome and variants are detected by CLC Genomics 
Workbench software.
P09.077  complex etiology of an apparently mendelian form of 
mental retardation
K. Gustavson ;  
Clinical Genetics, Rudbeck Laboratory,Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
The genetic causes for an apparently recessive form of non syndromic 
mental retardation, in a large nordern swedish pedigree from an inbred 
population, are investigated.
After extensive evaluation of the patients, which ruled out a recogniz -
able pattern of malformation and excluded the most common causes of 
MR, a comprehensive linkage-wide genome analysis, with 500 micro -
satellite markers, was performed in 24 members of this family,including 
9 mild mentally retarded individuals and 14 non affected individuals . No 
significant LOD score was found with either parametric and non para -
metric linkage analysis. The highest scores, both with MODSCORE 
and SimWalk parametric analysis are located at chromosomes 13, 15 
and 17. Additionally, a copy number analysis, using an affimetrix 250K 
SNP chip, was performed in this pedigree. No clear cause for the dis -
order was identified; but rather, several variants were present in the 
family members, irrespective of their affected status.
These results suggest that the mental retardation in this family, unlikely 
what we were expecting, has a heterogeneous etiology; and that there 
might be several lower effect genes variants
P09.078  Polymorphic genetic markers play role in developing of 
the metabolic syndrome abnormalities in men
A. N. Voytovich1, M. A. Bogdanova1, O. S. Romashkina1, B. I. Smirnov2, A. 
A. Bystrova3, T. D. Glebovskaja4, M. I. Badmaeva3, E. I. Krasilnikova3, O. A. 
Berkovich3, E. V. Shliakhto3, V. I. Larionova1;  
1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical University, St. Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, St. 
Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Federal heart, blood end endocrinology 
center n.a. V.A. Almazov, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
We investigated genotype distributions of several polymorphisms of 
genes APOA1 G-75A and C+83T, APOC3 Sst1, APOE, APOA5 T-
1131C and S19W, ADRB3 W64R, and ACE I/D to define predictive ge -
netic factors of metabolic and physiological abnormalities of the meta -
bolic syndrome (MS). Study population: 501 MS patients (176 males 
and 325 females, average age 61.7±1.0) and 199 controls (115 males 
of average age 40.0±0.5 and 84 females of average age 85.9±0.5). 
Almost all MS patients were moderately or severely obese, 382 pa -
tients had diabetes mellitus type II. Results. The male patients had 
a higher rate of APOA5 19W-allele carries compared to the controls 
(OR=4.77, 95% CI 1.40-16.24). The males with abdominal obesity had 
a higher rate of APOA1 -75A-allele (OR=2.01, 95% CI 1.12-3.61) car -
ries and the males without hypertension had a higher rate of APOE 
E2-allele carries (OR=3.16, 95% CI 1.36-7.35), compared to the con -
trols. Also, the rate of APOE E2-allele carries was higher among the 
patients with triglyceride levels above the 90th age and sex specific 
percentile (OR=2.22, 95% CI 1.10-4.48) and among the patients with 
total cholesterol levels below the 10th age and sex specific percentile 
(OR=2.47, 95% CI 1.04-5.85), compared to the controls. The only sig -
nificant difference in female groups was that the patients had a lower 
rate of ACE D-allele carries compared to the controls (OR=0.85, 95% 
CI 0.75-0.97). Females had not a significant difference in genotype distributions depended on the MS anomalies. Conclusion: Genetic 
polymorphisms can be associated with some abnormalities of MS in 
males.
P09.079  A genome-wide perspective of genetic variation in 
human metabolism
C. Gieger1, T. Illig1, G. Zhai2, W. Römisch-Margl3, R. Wang-Sattler1, C. Prehn4, 
E. Altmaier3,5, G. Kastenmüller3, B. S. Kato2, H. W. Mewes3,6, T. Meitinger7,8, M. 
Hrabé de Angelis4,9, F. Kronenberg10, N. Soranzo11,2, H. E. Wichmann1,12, T. D. 
Spector2, J. Adamski4,9, K. Suhre3,5;  
1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, 
Germany, 2Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King’s 
College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Bioinformatics 
and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, 
Germany, 4Institute of Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, 
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 5Faculty of 
Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany, 
6Department of Genome-oriented Bioinformatics, Life and Food Science Center 
Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, 
Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts 
der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 9Institute of 
Experimental Genetics, Life and Food Science Center Weihenstephan, 
Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany, 10Division 
of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and 
Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 11The 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom, 12Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität and Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany.
Serum metabolite concentrations provide a direct readout of biologi -
cal processes in the human body, and are associated with disorders 
such as cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. Here we present a 
genome-wide association study with 163 metabolic traits using 1,809 
participants from the KORA population, followed up in the TwinsUK 
cohort with 422 participants. In eight out of nine replicated loci (FADS1, 
ELOVL2, ACADS, ACADM, ACADL, SPTLC3, ETFDH, SLC16A9) the 
genetic variant is located in or near enzyme or solute carrier coding 
genes, where the associating metabolic traits match the proteins’ func -
tion. Many of these loci are located in rate limiting steps of important 
enzymatic reactions. Use of metabolite concentration ratios as proxies 
for enzymatic reaction rates reduces the variance and yields robust 
statistical associations with p-values between
3x10^-24 and 6.5x10^-179. These loci explained 5.6% to 36.3% of 
the observed variance. For three loci, an association with clinical end -
points has previously been reported (SLC22A4 with Crohn’s disease, 
FADS1 with hyperactivity and lipid levels, ACADS as susceptibility lo -
cus for ethylmalonic aciduria). For several others (ACADM, ACADL and 
ETFDH), loss of function of the corresponding gene leads to severe 
Mendelian disorders. As pointed out in a recent editorial, this shows 
the potential for discovering key steps in human metabolism, including 
common but minor inborn errors or minor variations of metabolism that 
are part of the disease process (Mootha, V.K. and Hirschhorn, J.N. 
Inborn variation in metabolism. in Nat Genet. 42 97-8 (2010)).
P09.080  Matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene polymorphisms and 
multiple sclerosis
A. La Russa1, V. De Marco1, V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, P. Valentino2, P. 
Spadafora1, E. Altomare1, I. Cirò Candiano1, R. Cittadella1;  
1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche C.N.R., Cosenza, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurologia 
Università “Magna Graecia” Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
To investigate the role of the matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene ( MMP-
9) in multiple sclerosis (MS), we analyzed the functional -1562C/T 
and -90 (CA)n repeat polymorphisms, located in the promoter region 
of this gene, in 243 Italian MS patients and 173 healthy controls. A 
markedly significant increase of the -1562T allele carriers in MS pa -
tients compared to controls was found ( P = 5.6 x 10-5, adjusted OR = 
2.57, 95% CI = 1.52- 4.36). Moreover, also carriers of higher than 20 
CA repeats were significantly more frequent among MS patients than 
among controls ( P = 0.011, adjusted OR = 1.53, 95% CI = 1.06-2.02). 
There were no differences in MS disability status, age at onset and 
disease duration among the genotypes. Haplotype analysis showed 
that the haplotype formed by the -1562T allele and the L allele (lower 
than 20 CA repeats) was over-represented in MS patients versus con -Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
trols, suggesting it could be a possible risk factor for the disease ( P = 
2.14·x10-5, OR=6.79, 95% CI=2.82-16.35). These results suggest that 
genetic polymorphisms of the MMP-9  promoter regions may influence 
the susceptibility to MS.
P09.081  Monoamine oxidase A and B genes ( MAOA  and MAOB ) 
and their influence on personality traits in healthy individuals
A. Khannanova1,2, A. Kazantseva1, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian 
Academy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical 
University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Complex phenotypes, such as personality traits, are presumably af -
fected by the interaction of multiple genes of small effect. Since psy -
chobiological model of personality was proposed by Cloninger, inter -
est of scientific groups has been focused on neurotransmitter system 
genes.
We aimed to define a single genotype effect of MAOA VNTR  and 
MAOB rs6651806  polymorphisms and to check possible interaction 
effect between them and personality traits (assessed with TCI-125 
questionnaire).
We recruited 652 healthy individuals (men-222, women-430) of Cau -
casian origin (Russians-233, Tatars-419) from Russia (mean age: 
19.53±2.24 years). The main and interaction effects of gene polymor -
phisms on personality traits were detected under ANOVA and MANO -
VA (SPSS 13.0).
Considering MAOA  and MAOB  genes location, we conducted analysis 
in each gender separately. Moreover, our preliminary study demon -
strated ethnic differences in personality that indicates the necessity 
of groups’ combination with respect to ethnicity. ANOVA performed in 
female Tatars group revealed an association between MAOA  4R-allele 
and higher Persistence (P=0.023). We observed significantly higher 
Reward Dependence (P=0.018) and lower Novelty Seeking (P=0.007) 
in Russian male and female carriers with MAOB  C-allele respectively. 
Subsequent MANOVA revealed the influence of MAOB*MAOA  interac -
tion on Persistence (P=0.021) and Cooperativeness (P=0.015) in Tatar 
females, and on Reward Dependence (P=0.004) and Cooperativeness 
(P=0.001) in Russian females.
Our findings point to the possible involvement of enzymes responsible 
for neurotransmitters degradation ( MAOB, MAOA ) in approach-related 
personality traits in healthy individuals.
P09.082  Association of a melatonin receptor 1B  (MTNR1B ) 
gene variant with fasting glucose and HOmA-B in children and 
adolescents of high Bmi-sDs groups
C. Holzapfel1,2, M. Siegrist3, M. Rank3, H. Langhof4, H. Grallert2,5, J. Baumert2, 
S. Wipfinger4, C. Irimie4, N. Klopp2, B. Wolfarth3, T. Illig2, H. Hauner1, M. Halle3;  
1Else Kröner-Fresenius-Centre for Nutritional Medicine, Munich, Germany, 
2Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, 
Germany, 3Preventive and Rehabilitative Sports Medicine, Munich, Germany, 
4Rehabilitation Hospital Schönsicht, Berchtesgaden, Germany, 5Ludwig-
Maximilians-University, Chair of Epidemiology, Munich, Germany.
Background: Genome-wide association studies have shown, that the 
polymorphism rs10830963 within the melatonin receptor 1B  (MTN -
R1B) gene is strongly associated with fasting glucose levels and the 
risk of type 2 diabetes. However, these data are limited to adults and 
little is known whether similar associations are prevalent in overweight 
and obese children and adolescents as well.
Objective: The aim of our study was to replicate the findings concerning 
fasting glucose in a sample of 472 overweight and obese children and 
adolescents (mean body mass index standard deviation score (BMI-
SDS): 2.77 (±0.55) / mean age: 14 (±2) years), who participated in a 
short-term weight loss program (energy reduction, increased physical 
activity, behaviour therapy). Furthermore, we investigated an associa -
tion between genotype and fasting insulin, homeostasis model assess -
ment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), beta-cell function (HOMA-B), 
and weight loss as well as changes of glucose during weight loss. 
Results: The minor G allele of polymorphism rs10830963 was associat -
ed with an increase of fasting glucose levels (0.132 mmol/l, p=6.37x10-
5) and decreased HOMA-B (-0.233, p=1.95x10-4). BMI-SDS adjustment 
did not change this association. Categorizing the sample into BMI-SDS 
groups, the significant association was abolished in children with BMI-
SDS <2.5. However, for more obese children (BMI-SDS: 2.5≤x<3) the 
beta estimate was much higher (0.212 mmol/l, p=1.26x10-5).Conclusion: This is the first study replicating the association between 
the MTNR1B  locus and diabetes-related traits in overweight and obese 
children and adolescents. The effect size in children is higher than in 
adults, whereas the effect size differs between BMI-SDS categories.
P09.083   
Role of mitochondria in multiple sclerosis
M. Houshmand1, H. H. Kumleh1, A. Azadi2;  
1National institute for Genetic Engineering &Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biology, Azerbaijan University of Tarbiat 
Moallem,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of the central ner -
vous system characterized by the morphological hallmarks of inflam -
mation, demyelination and axonal loss.
We have sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I in 54 MS patients and 100 con -
trol subjects. We have found that haplogroups A and K are significantly 
more abundant in MS patients. Thus, these two haplogroups might act 
synergistically to increase the penetrance of MS disease.
Kinetic analysis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I enzyme 
was performed on intact mitochondria isolated from fresh skeletal 
muscle in MS patients (n =10) and control subjects (n =11). Mitochon -
drial DNA common deletion and deletions were also tested in MS pa -
tients. Our findings showed that complex I activities were significantly 
reduced in patients compared with control. However, we could not find 
deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. This study suggested that a 
biochemical defect in complex I activity may be involved in pathogen -
esis of MS.
To evaluate the link between MS and LHON primary point mutations, 
we investigated 31 non-related Iranian clinically definite MS patients 
with optic nerve involvement, as well as 25 patients without involve -
ment of the optic nerve as controls. Our results suggest that there 
is no association between Iranian patients with MS and mtDNA point 
mutations at np 11,778, 3,460, and 14,484.
We sequenced mitochondrial complex I subunit in MS patient (ND1-
ND6). No pathogenic mutations were found in our patient’s. We con -
clude that it may mitochondrial nuclear subunit of complex I gene play 
roll in MS patient.
P09.084  CASP-9 exon 1 polymorphism in patients with Multiple sclerosis.
F. Trecroci1, R. Cittadella1, F. Condino1, P. Spadafora1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, G. 
Di Palma1, M. Caracciolo1, P. Valentino2, V. Andreoli1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, Pianolago 
di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
The pathogenesis of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is under strong genetic 
control involving several genes. Apoptosis signaling-related genes are 
strong candidate genes for involvement in MS, because apoptosis is a 
common regulatory mechanism for normal development and homeo -
stasis of the immune system, and the elimination of autoreactive T cells 
via apoptosis appears to be impaired in MS. Particularly, CASP-9 is an 
initiator CASP in the apoptosome-driven apoptosis pathway and plays 
an crucial role in the initiation phase of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. 
To explore the possibility that the genetic alterations of CASP-9 might 
be involved in the development of MS, we analyzed a SNP in a set of 
296 MS patients from Southern Italy and 255 healthy controls subjects 
from the same geographical area: a C to T polymorphism in the codin 
region of the gene at codon 93 (exon 1). Genomic DNA was isolated 
from blood and this polymorphism was determined by PCR-RFLP as -
say. Our results showed no significant differences in the allele and 
genotype distribution of the CASP-9 polymorphism between MS pa -
tients and controls. In addition, dividing patients according to disease 
type, EDSS, or age and gender did not yield significant differences for 
the examined polymorphism. The present findings from Italian popula -
tion suggest that there was no association between this polymorphism 
and susceptibility to MS. Therefore, in the absence of conclusive data, 
we cannot exclude the possibility that our results are only partially in -
dicative because the association between genetic polymorphisms and 
MS may also vary with ethnicity.Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
P09.085  complex I deficiency in MS caused by mitochondrial 
genes or nuclear one ?
A. Azadi1, M. Houshmand2;  
1Department of Biology, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem, Tabriz, Iran, 
Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease of central nervous system. 
Demyelination and devastation of axons occur in this disease. Genetic 
and environmental factors are important in the risk of developing the 
disease. Complex I that composed of at least 46 subunits contains 
seven subunits which are encoded by the mtDNA[subunit ND1-2-3-
4-4L-5 and 6] plus at least 39 nuclear-encoded subunits complex I. 
About MS,biochemical studies have established that catalytic activ -
ity of complex I has significantly decreased in MS patients compared 
with control subjects. To study relationship between MS patients and 
mtDNA-encoded complex I genes we sequenced from 15 representa -
tive Iranian MS patients and 10 control. Our results showed different 
mutations in ND2, ND3, ND4, ND5 and ND6 as following: One patient 
had a mutation in the ND2 gene at nt5153 A>G,two patients show a 
mutation in ND3 gene at nt10142 C>T. In ND4 one patient had a muta -
tion at nt11215 C>T,one patient had a change at nt11353 T>C,three 
patients had a mutation at nt11935 T>C. we found a new mutation in 
two patients at nt12062 C>T in ND4 gene. Eleven patients had a muta -
tion in ND5 gene at nt12662 A>G.ND6 had a mutation at nt14179 G>A 
in one patients and new mutation at nt14263 T>C in another patient. 
We couldn‘t find any mutation in ND1 and ND4L genes. Even some 
new mutations in mitochondrial DNA were found in this study we con -
clude that it may mitochondrial nuclear subunit I may roll in complex I 
deficiency in MS patients.
P09.086  Repulsive guidance molecule A ( RGMA ) and interleukin 
21 receptor ( IL21R ) show association with multiple sclerosis
I. Kockum1, R. Nohra1, A. D. Beyeen1, J. P. Guo2, M. Khademi1, E. Sundqvist1, 
M. T. Hedreul1, F. Sellebjerg3, C. Smestad4, A. B. Oturai3, H. F. Harbo5,6, E. 
Wallström1, J. Hillert7, L. Alfredsson8, M. Jagodic1, J. Lorentzen2, T. Olsson1;  
1Neuroimmunology Unit, Department och Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Medical Inflammation Research, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Danish 
Multiple Sclerosis Center Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 4Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, 
Norway, 54Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, 
Norway, 6Faculty Division Ullevål, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway, 7Division of Neurology, Department och Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Insitutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Institute of Environmental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex trait which is a chron -
ic inflammatory disease in which a dysregulated immune response di -
rected against myelin antigens causes demyelination and axonal injury 
the central nervous system. Rat chromosome one harbors overlapping 
quantitative trait loci (QTL) for cytokine production and experimental 
models of inflammatory diseases. Analysis in Advanced Intercross 
Lines of (MOG)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE) resolved the region in two narrow QTL, Eae30  and Eae31  in-
cluding the RGMA , IL21R  and IL4R genes.
Hypothesis: Are the same genes that have been implicated in EAE 
susceptibility on rat chromosome 1 also risk genes for MS?
Materials and Methods: RGMA , IL21R  and IL4R  were covered with 97 
tagSNPs which were genotyped in 1018 MS cases and 1215 controls 
from Sweden. Markers (n=17) in haplotypes that showed evidence of 
association were further tested in 2353 cases and 1770 controls from 
Scandinavia.
Results: In the combined patient material the rs34925346 SNP in 
RGMA  was associated with MS in males (OR=1.33, p<0.006). In 
IL21R , The rs8060368-rs2214537-rs961914-rs12934152 CGCT hap -
lotype was positively associated (OR 1.14, p<0.0009) with MS while 
the TCCC and TGCT haplotypes were negatively associated with MS 
(OR 0.87, p<0.004, and OR 0.68). One of the protective haplotypes  
correlated to lower IFN-γ expression in PBMCs of MS patients. We 
could not confirm previously reported associations between IL4R  and 
MS.
conclusion: We conclude that RGMA  and IL21R  and their pathways 
are crucial in MS pathogenesis and warrant further studies as potential 
biomarkers and therapeutic targets.P09.087  The double-faced association of the PRKCA  gene with 
multiple sclerosis
E. M. Paraboschi1, G. Soldà1, V. Rimoldi1, C. Dall’Osso1, G. M. Anelli1, D. 
Gemmati2, P. Zamboni3, A. Salviati4, M. Benedetti4, S. D’Alfonso5, S. Duga1, R. 
Asselta1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Center Hemostasis & Thrombosis, University 
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3Vascular Diseases Center, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e della Visione, Università 
di Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Department of Medical Sciences and IRCAD, Eastern 
Piedmont University, Novara, Italy.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease of the central 
nervous system characterized by chronic inflammation and progres -
sive neurological dysfunction. The Protein Kinase C Alpha ( PRKCA ) 
gene, spanning 508 kb on 17q24.2, was associated with MS in Finn -
ish, Canadian, and UK populations, in which specific risk haplotypes 
were identified.
In this study, we analyzed the role of PRKCA  in MS susceptibility in an 
Italian cohort of 358 cases and 662 controls. An association analysis 
was performed by genotyping 3 microsatellites and 20 single nucleo -
tide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering the whole gene.
Single-marker analysis demonstrated a nominal evidence of associa -
tion for one allele of the microsatellite mapping in the promoter re -
gion of the gene, showing a protective effect (P=0.033; OR=0.12, 95% 
CI=0.015-0.94). Moreover, a risk haplotype composed of 7 SNPs, 
spanning a 43-kb-long region of PRKCA , was found (P=0.00074; 
OR=1.57, 95% CI=1.24-1.99). Interestingly, this haplotype includes an 
exon characterizing an alternative PRKCA  transcript. The expression 
of both PRKCA  wild-type and of its alternative isoform was significantly 
down-regulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of MS patients 
compared to controls (P=0.00097 and P=0.044, respectively). How -
ever, stratification of expression data according to the presence/ab -
sence of the risk haplotype did not reveal any significant difference, 
suggesting that a fine mapping of the 43-kb region is needed to identify 
the actual risk variant.
In conclusion, the identification of both protective and risk alleles in 
different regions of PRKCA  suggests the existence of multiple mecha -
nisms linking genetic variations in this gene to the pathogenesis of 
MS.
P09.088  Replication study of Multiple sclerosis susceptibility 
alleles in Austrian patients
A. Zimprich1, S. Zehetmayer2, B. Bajer-Kornek1, C. Hotzy1, K. Zebenholzer1, F. 
Leutmezer1, P. Lichtner3, T. Meitinger4, E. H. Wichmann4, T. Illig5, C. Gieger5, W. 
Krisotoferitsch6, M. Reindl7, M. Khalil8, S. Fuchs8, H. Schmidt8, F. Fazekas8, T. 
Berger7, K. Vass1, M. Schmied1;  
1Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, 
2Zentrum für Med. Statistik, Informatik u. Intelligente Systeme, Medizinische 
Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institut 
für Humangenetik, München, München, Germany, 4. Helmholtz Zentrum 
München, Institut für Humangenetik, München, München, Germany, 5Helmholz 
Zentrum München Institut für Epidemiologie, München, München, Germany, 
6Neurologische Abteilung, Sozialmedizinisches Zentrum Ost-Donauspital, Wien, 
Vienna, Austria, 7Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria, 8Univ. Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität Graz, 
Graz, Austria.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of 
the central nervous system, thought to be mediated by an autoim -
mune process. The disease affects over 2 million individuals world 
wide. Population and family based studies have suggested that there 
is a strong genetic component. In recent genome-wide and candi -
date gene-association studies a number of putative MS susceptibil -
ity genes were identified. Here we performed a replication study in 
883 Austrian MS cases and 996 controls for 26 risk associated loci 
(39 SNPs). Eight non-human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci, were as -
sociated with disease susceptibility with nominal significant p-values < 
0.05: EVI5, RPL5/FAM69A, ASAP2, IL7R, ANKRD15, TBC1D2, IL2RA 
and CLEC16A. While some loci had been well established before the 
present study, others such as ASAP2 and TBC1D2 were replicated 
here for the first time. In an attempt to define a biological consequence 
of risk variants we mined associated SNPs from our study with data 
from a recently performed Expression Quantitative Trait loci eQTL 
study [Heinzen et al]. In this work, genome wide genotyping and ge -Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
nome wide expression profiling was performed in 93 human brain and 
80 blood samples. We revealed a strong association between the 
risk allele C of the RPL5 SNP rs6604026 and expression of the non 
coding small nucleolar gene SNORA66, located in intron 7 of RPL5 
(p<2.3x10-9). The discovery and validation of new genetic risk factors 
in independent populations may help toward the understanding of MS 
pathogenesis by providing valuable information on biological pathways 
to be investigated.
P09.089**  Searching for functional variants in STAT3-region in 
Finnish multiple sclerosis patients
V. Leppä1,2, A. Sulonen1,2, P. Ellonen1, H. Almusa1, E. Jakkula1,3, P. Tienari4, K. 
Koivisto5, I. Elovaara6, T. Pirttilä7, M. Reunanen8, A. Palotie1,9, L. Peltonen1,9, J. 
Saarela1,10;  
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute 
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, 
HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Neurology, Helsinki University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Central Hospital of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland, 
6Dept. of Neurology, Tampere University Central Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 
7Dept. of Neurology, Kuopio University Central Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 8Dept. 
of Neurology, Oulu University Central Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 9The Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 10Dept. of Gynecology 
and Pediatrics, Dept. of Child Psychiatry, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Helsinki, Finland.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered to be a complex autoimmune 
disease of the central nervous system. Prevalence of MS in the South -
ern Ostrobothnia (SO) region in Finland is 2-fold compared to other 
populations of Northern European descent. We conducted a GWAS in 
distantly related SO MS patients using genealogical information and 
identified variants in STAT3 to associate with MS. This association was 
replicated in a sample set of 4638 cases and 10279 controls from 7 
populations (rs744166 p 2.75 x 10E-10).
To refine our understanding of the association and to identify potential 
functional variants we targeted 111 kb of the STAT3-STAT5A region us -
ing SureSelect target enrichment method and Illumina GAII -sequenc -
ing. Ten MS samples were chosen based on the homozygous genotype 
for associated allele of rs744166 and pooled. In total 34 MS samples 
in four pools and 19 controls in 3 pools were sequenced. The median 
sequence coverage of 31 was obtained and the preliminary analysis 
identified 303 unreported variants in the case pool homozygous for the 
rs744166 risk allele. Twenty of them are missense or nonsense muta -
tions. None of the variants were found in all pooled MS cases homo -
zygous for rs744166, but 13 were specific to the MS pool. In addition 
to validating the mutations we are currently analyzing expression of 
STAT3 and near-by genes in PBMCs of 30 MS and 25 control samples 
to monitor if any of the genes are differentially expressed and if the 
expression correlates with the genotypes of the associated variants.
P09.090  Ile587Val Polymorphism of the eIF2B5 gene as 
susceptibility factor for multiple sclerosis
C. Ungaro1, F. L. Conforti1, M. Liguori1, M. Trojano2, F. Condino1, I. Manna1, 
V. Andreoli1, A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1, W. 
Sproviero1, M. Muglia1, A. Gambardella1,3, R. Mazzei1;  
1National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neurological 
and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Bari “Aldo Moro”, Bari, Italy, 3Institute of 
Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory chronic disease character -
ized by a demyelinating process, which is followed by neurodegen -
eration. Although the true etiology remains elusive, a lot of evidence 
have provided that genetic factors contribute to disease susceptibility. 
Mutations in the eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF2B) gene 
inherited as autosomal recessive trait cause the Vanishing White Mat -
ter disease (VWM). MRIs of patients with VWM show a diffuse leu -
koencephalopathy with evidence of progressive disappearance of the 
cerebral white matter. Genetic and biochemical data of MS patient and 
MRI data showing VWM images similar to MS lesions, encouraged the 
present study in which we analyzed the coding region of eIF2B5 gene 
to evaluate an overlapping between MS and VWM. We analyzed 225 
unrelated MS patients, all of them diagnosed as clinically established, 
definite MS, according to Poser criteria and derived from the Southern 
Italy too. More, 207 age- and sex-matched healthy subjects from the 
same geographic area were included. A common variation Ile587Val 
was found very frequent in the MS patients respect normal controls. A statistical analysis (χ2-test) suggests that polymorphism Ile587Val in 
exon 13 of the EIF2B5 gene should be considered as susceptibility fac -
tor in the development of MS (χ2=23.76; p<0.001). In conclusion, our 
data strongly suggest a possible involvement of the eIF2B5 in the de -
velopment of MS and that variations in the MS patient strongly depend 
on geographic and ethnic factors, thus suggesting the importance of 
knowledge the epigenetic contribution in the pathogenesis of MS.
P09.091  is there a common evolutionary background for music 
and language faculties? Analysis of dyslexia candidate genes in 
Finnish families tested for musical aptitude
P. Onkamo1, L. Ukkola-Vuoti2, K. Salo2, K. Karma3, P. Raijas3, I. Järvelä2;  
1Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of 
Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Sibelius Academy, 
Department of Music Education, Helsinki, Finland.
Musical aptitude is a cognitive function of the human brain. Common 
evolutionary background of music and language recognition has been 
long speculated, based on for example on partially overlapping brain 
regions in PET studies (Brown et al. 2006). Moreover, low rates in 
a test for musical aptitude, Karma Music test, have been shown to 
reliably predict dyslexia (Karma 2002). Here phonological awareness, 
a basic natural property not dependent on learning and defective in 
dyslexia could be understood as poor auditory structuring ability mea -
sured by KMT. Previously, we have carried out a genome-wide linkage 
analysis for musical aptitude in multigenerational families tested for 
musical aptitude using auditory structuring ability test (Karma Music 
test) and Carl Seashores test
for pitch (SP) and for time (ST). Evidence for linkage was obtained for 
several loci, including DYX6, a candidate locus for dyslexia (Fisher et 
al. 2002), on chr. 18q (Pulli et al 2008).
In order to understand the neurobiological basis of music in human 
evolution and communication we analyzed previously reported risk 
alleles of a set of dyslexia susceptibility genes: KIAA0319, DCDC2, 
DYX1C1, and C2ORF3. Several SNPs were chosen in these loci and 
genotyped in multigenerational families (N=395). Family-based asso -
ciation analyses (FBAT and QTDT) were used for analyzing the data. 
Preliminary results
point to SNPs in KIAA0319 and DCDC2, which are located next to 
each other on chr. 6 with the Seashore Pitch test, with p-value 0.02. 
Currently, more families are being genotyped, thus, refined results will 
be presented in the meeting.
P09.092  the role of neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 3 
gene ( NTRK ) in personality traits variation: focus on the main, 
haplotypic and GxE effect
A. Kazantseva1, T. Traks2, S. Koks2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian 
Academy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Centre of Translational 
Medicine, Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Personality traits are affected by GxE. NTRK3 , a key gene in neuro -
trophin signaling, is located within the region 15q25.3-q26.2 previously 
demonstrated linkage with anxiety-related disorders that points to its 
possible role in personality traits.
We aimed to examine the main and haplotypic effect of NTRK3  gene 
polymorphisms and to observe GxE interaction contributing into per -
sonality traits variation in healthy individuals.
Study sample consisted of 652 healthy individuals (men-222, wom -
en-430) of Caucasian origin (Russians-233, Tatars-419) from Russia 
(mean age:19.53±2.24 years) without any history of psychopatholo -
gies that filled in TCI-125 (Cloninger et al., 1993). Genotyping of 34 
SNPs in NTRK3  gene and genotypes assignment was performed with 
SNPlexTM platform and GeneMapper 4.0 (Applied Biosystems) corre -
spondingly. A measure of linkage disequilibrium between markers was 
obtained under Haploview 4.1. Statistical analysis was conducted with 
PLINK v.1.07 with P-value less than 0.0125 considered statistically 
significant.
We revealed an association of rs744994 T/T-genotype (P=0.004) and 
higher Novelty Seeking (NS). Haplotype analysis performed in four 
haplotype blocks (D’>0.7) separately demonstrated lower NS in T*C-
haplotype carriers (rs7176520, rs744994) (P=0.007) and higher Per -
sistence in those bearing A*T*C*G*C*T*T*T  haplotype (rs3825885, 
rs3825884, rs4887205, rs9806762, rs7180942, rs1110306, 
rs11073767) (P<0.001). GxE analysis demonstrated stronger associa -Complex traits and polygenic disorders27
tion between NTRK3 and NS or Persistence in the case of interaction 
with birth.
The region in NTRK3  gene located between rs7176520 and rs744994 
(24 kb within 5’-UTR and intron 2) is involved in NS variation, while the 
region between rs3825885 and rs11073767 (134 kb within introns 4 
and 12) is associated with Persistence.
P09.093  The influence of R229Q polymorphism of the NPHS2 
gene on the progression of chronic glomerulonephritis
J. Reiterová1, H. Šafránková1, J. Štekrová2, M. Merta1, V. Tesař1;  
1Nephrology Dept. 1st Fac.of Medicine and General Teaching Hosp., Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Medical 
Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis FSGS) is a common cause of ne -
phrotic syndrome (NS). IgA nephropathy (IGAN) is the most common 
nephropathy in the world. R229Q polymorphism may increase suscep -
tilibility to NS in association with second NPHS2 mutation. We have 
investigated the influence of R229Q polymorphism in NPHS2 gene on 
progression of FSGS and IGAN.
A total number of 268 Czech patients with FSGS and IGAN (174 males, 
94 females) were studied. The diagnosis of FSGS (98 pts) and IGAN 
(170 pts) was established from renal biopsy. Patients were divided 
into two groups: 1. 108 pts (71 males, 37 females, mean age 45.4± 
10.7 years) with end stage renal disease during 5 years since renal 
biopsy(rapid progressors), 2. 160 pts (103 males, 57 females, mean 
age 46.5±12.1 years) who had stable clearance of creatinine during 5 
years. As a control group, 100 unrelated healthy subjects (50 males, 
50 females, mean age 52.4±9.2 years)were used. Genomic DNA was 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction. Chi-square test was used to 
compare the distribution of genotypes. Proteinuria was compared by 
ANOVA test.
The distribution of R229Q polymorphism in FSGS pts was: in rapid 
progressors 9.1%, in slow progressors 11.1% of heterozygotes. The 
distribution in IGAN pts was: in rapid progressors 14%, in slow pro -
gressors 10.4% of heterozygotes. Proteinuria was not significantly dif -
ferent in R229Q heterozygotes.
To conclude, we excluded significant influence of R229Q polymor -
phism in the podocin on progression of FSGS and IGAN.Supported by 
grant project IGA MZ CR NS 9779-4 and VZ 0021620806
P09.094  Association of Genetic Variants in the Apelin Gene to 
Obesity in French caucasians
S. J. Clark1, D. Meyre2, L. Towns3, U. Fairbrother3, B. Balkau4, M. Marre5, J. 
Tichet6, P. Froguel1,2, A. J. Walley1;  
1Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090, Institute of Biology, 
Pasteur Institute, Lille, France, 3School of Human Sciences, Faculty of Life 
Science, London Metropolitan University, London, United Kingdom, 4INSERM 
U780-IFR69, 94807 Villejuif, Paris, France, 5INSERM U695, Université Paris 7, 
Paris, France, 6Institut Interrégional pour la Santé, La Riche, France.
Apelin is expressed in adipocytes and upregulated in obese mice. Its 
peptides are secreted by adipocytes in tissue culture and have been 
detected in the plasma of both mice and humans suggesting a pos -
sible role as a hormone involved in the regulation of feeding. As such 
Apelin is a plausible candidate gene for human polygenic obesity and 
this study was designed to investigate an association between varia -
tion in the Apelin gene and severe obesity.
Sequenom iPlex assays were designed to genotype thirteen SNPs 
within the Apelin gene. Subjects were 1533 obese (896 adults with 
BMI over 40kg/m2 and 637 children with a BMI>97th percentile for age 
and sex) and 1237 non-obese controls, all French Caucasians.
Two SNPs, rs2235307 and rs2281068 were found to be associated 
with severe obesity (p = 0.007 and 0.003) in female children when ana -
lysing genotypes. Male and female genotypes were analysed sepa -
rately as APLN  is located on the X chromosome. When allele frequen -
cies were analysed in both sexes, one SNP, rs2281068 was found to 
be associated in children (p=0.003). P-values remain significant after 
taking into account effects of multiple testing using the method of Ny -
holt (p<0.017).
In conclusion we report a novel association of the Apelin gene to obe -
sity. Re-sequencing of the gene and its promoter region is ongoing to 
locate the causative variant.P09.095  cORRELA tiON OF GENOtYPE AND OBEsE 
PHENOtYPE OF FRAGiLE X sYNDROmE
R. Rodríguez-López , J. Sáenz, M. González-Carpio, P. Méndez, M. García de 
Cáceres, T. Herrera, P. Sánchez-Giralt, M. Rubio, L. M. Luengo, M. Núñez, J. 
M. Carbonell.;  
Extremeño Health System, Badajoz, Spain.
The obese phenotype of fragile X syndrome (FXS) is associated with 
hyperphagia similar to Prader-Willi. Common variants in the fat mass 
and obesity associated gene (FTO) show evidence for anxiety and 
increased appetite. We investigated the association of the haplotype 
block structure of FTO gene with morbid obesity and with endopheno -
types in carriers of FMR1 deletereous alleles.
We selected the SNP with the strongest evidence for association in 
previous studies rs9939609 and rs1477199, rs1861868, rs1477196 
located within same and contiguous haplotype blocks. We genotyped 
194 patients with severe obesity appeared < 14 years, 19 cases of FXS, 
11 premutation carriers and 289 healthy control individuals. TaqMan® 
Assays were used and the CGG repeat lengths were determined in the 
ABI 3130 sequencer using GeneMapper software. SNP frequencies 
and estimated four-SNP haplotype frequency were compared among 
groups. Genotype-Phenotype correlations was established.
The two haplotypes rs1477199A/rs1861868A/rs1477196G/rs9939609A 
and AGGA in the FTO gene raised obesity risk with an odds ratio of 
1.31 and 3.35 respectively (p<0.05) in Spanish population. 9 FMR1-re -
lated individuals carried the AAGA combination in heterozygosity and 
3 individuals were homozygous. Positive associations with BMI were 
detected among them and female sex, ↑ age and longer CGG size also 
predisposed to pathology.
Obesity and anxiety are associated in some FXS patients. The as -
sociation between genetic variation in the FTO genotype and obesity 
could increase even more the propensity to overweight in this specific 
cognitive deficit. Human syndromes as FXS provide novel insights into 
processes of the hypothalamic satiety centers and obesogenic path -
ways.
P09.096  A common haplotype in the NAPEPLD  gene involved 
in endocannabinoid synthesis and obesity in a Norwegian population based cohort (the HUNt study).
T. Wangensteen1, H. Akselsen1, J. Holmen2, D. Undlien1, L. Retterstøl1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, OSLO, Norway, 
2HUNT Research Centre, Department of Public Health and General Practice, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Levanger, Norway.
Background: Obesity has a strong genetic component which is still 
largely unknown.
Material and Method: We investigated the association between se -
vere obesity and genetic variation in six selected candidate genes, 
including three drug related genes; gastric lipase  (LIPF) , cannabinoid 
receptor 1  (CNR1)  and N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholi -
pase D (NAPEPLD) , and three genes related to inflammation; inter -
leukin 18  (IL18) , six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate 
4 (STEAP4)  and nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase  (NAMPT) . 
Tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the coding region 
of these genes were analyzed in 1632 cases (BMI≥35 kg/m²) and 3379 
controls (BMI 20-24.9 kg/m²) from a Norwegian population based co -
hort, the HUNT study.
Results: Single SNPs rs17605251 in NAPEPLD and rs7913071 in LIPF  
were associated with obesity at a nominal significance level (p<0.05). 
Haplotype analysis revealed a common haplotype in the NAPEPLD 
that was associated with obesity, even after correction for multiple test -
ing. The allele frequency was 56.8 % in cases and 60.3 % in controls, 
giving an odds ratio (OR) of 0.87, p=0.0016. Being homozygous for 
this haplotype gives an OR of 0.79, p=0.00059.
Conclusion: We identified a common haplotype in NAPEPLD , a rate 
limiting enzyme of the endocannabinoid synthesis. Individuals who are 
homozygous for this haplotype have an OR of 0.79 for severe obesity, 
corresponding to a 20% risk reduction. LIPF was associated with obe -
sity at a nominal level but did not remain significant after correction for 
multiple testing. For the remaining genes; CNR1, IL18, STEAP4 and 
NAMPT  we found no association to obesity.Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
P09.097**  cryptic chromosomal abnormalities are a common 
cause of syndromic obesity: Array cGH study and review
R. Hastings1, J. P. Hamilton-Shield2, J. A. Crolla3, R. Newbury-Ecob1;  
1Clinical Genetics Department, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation 
Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Department of Child Health, University 
Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Wessex 
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom.
Chromosomal imbalance causing obesity has previously been recog -
nised in both recurrent ‘syndromes’ and unique deletions and/or du -
plications in individual patients. Many of the chromosomal regions 
identified in this manner have identified ‘obesogenic’ genes or are 
loci which have also been highlighted by genome-wide association 
studies in non-syndromic obesity. We have previously identified chro -
mosomal deletions causing syndromic obesity, including a case sug -
gesting prohormone convertase-2 as a novel cause of obesity. We 
therefore studied 21 patients with severe childhood-onset obesity, with 
or without other features, using array comparative genomic hybridiza -
tion (array CGH) to look for chromosomal imbalance. From this co -
hort we identified 6 patients with copy number variation, in at least 4 
of whom this is likely to represent a significant factor in causing their 
obesity (deletions at 16p11.2, 15q11.2, and 1q21.1, and a duplication 
of 22q11.2). 16p11.2 microdeletion has recently been highlighted in a 
large series of childhood obesity as a recurrent finding, although the 
causative gene suggested from this (SH2B1) is not deleted in our and 
other cases of 16p11.2 microdeletion with obesity suggesting further 
obesogenic gene(s) at this locus. All four loci are associated with a 
neurobehavioural phenotype and it is likely effects are predominantly 
through appetite and satiety regulation, a common finding to the major -
ity of single-gene causes of obesity, although alteration of metabolism 
is possible. This indicates that as a group chromosomal imbalance is 
a common cause of childhood obesity, being more common than a 
recognised single gene cause.
P09.098  Association study on HAPLN1 and MMP genes and 
osteoarthritis
A. Näkki1,2, A. Harilainen3, K. Tallroth3, P. Leino-Arjas4, M. Heliövaara2, J. 
Kaprio1,5, L. Peltonen1, J. Saarela1, U. M. Kujala6;  
1Institute of Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3ORTON 
Orthopedic Hospital, Invalid Foundation, Helsinki, Finland, 4Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland, 5University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 
6University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Background. Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease com -
mon in the elderly and the heritability ranges between 40-60 %. The 
disease progresses by the breakage of the extracellular matrix of the 
cartilage formed by collagens, aggregans and hyaluronic acid. Matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP) are a group of enzymes breaking down the 
collagen network and aggrecans. Our aim was to study the putative 
role of four MMP genes and hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 
1 gene (HAPLN1) in OA, all potentially playing a role in the stability of 
the cartilage.
Methods. We genotyped a total of 37 tagging SNPs covering the 
MMP3, MMP8, MMP9, MMP13 and HAPLN1 genes in 134 severe fa -
milial hand OA cases, 113 unrelated bilateral primary knee OA cases 
and 2436 population based control samples. The Pseudomarker pro -
gram was used to monitor for association with individual SNPs and 
SNP haplotypes.
Results. Eight variants in MMP8, MMP9 and HAPLN1 provided nomi -
nal evidence for association with OA (p<0.05). The strongest associa -
tion signals were observed for rs1940475 in MMP8 in combined OA 
(p=0.008) and for rs17577 in MMP9 in hand OA (p=0.004).
Discussion. Initial evidence for association was observed between se -
vere OA and the MMP8, MMP9 and HAPLN1 genes. We are in a pro -
cess of validating the two most significant associations in a population 
based Finnish Health2000 cohort of 6000 samples.
P09.099  Influence of glutathione-S-reductase gene 
polymorphisms on bone mineral density and biochemical bone 
turnover markers
S. Jurković Mlakar1, J. Osredkar1, J. Preželj2, J. Marc3;  
1University Medical centre Ljubljana, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical 
Biochemistry, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Glutathione-S-reductase (GSR) regenerates the oxidized form of glu -
tathione that protects human body from negative effects of reactive 
oxygen species in state of oxidative stress. Recent data suggest that 
oxidative stress may influence the development of osteoporosis. An 
aim of our work was to associate two GSR gene tag polymorphisms, 
located in introns 3 and 10 (A19278G and A45359T), with bone mass 
density (BMD) and biochemical bone turnover markers on samples of 
721 volunteers.
The results showed a statistical significant association between 
A45359T polymorphism and the age of menopause (p = 0,038) in the 
subgroup of women, BMD of total hip (p = 0,043) and lumbar spine (p 
= 0,041) in the subgroup of premenopausal women. A presence of T 
allele in the genotype has probably a protective impact on BMD. The 
polymorphism A19278G is statistically significant with lower BMD of 
neck (p=0,034) and total hip (p=0,019) of women in the range of 60 to 
70 years old. In addition, by using a dominant model we have found 
out that a presence of at least one allele in conjunction with polymor -
phism is statistically significant with BMD of femoral neck (p=0,0017), 
total hip (p=0,019) and lumbar spine (p=0,010).
We conclude that there is a need to find out the mechanism, by which 
these polymorphisms affect age of menopause, bone mineral density 
and bone turnover markers. However, it is the first time where the as -
sociation of the polymorphisms in GSR gene with BMD occur.
P09.100  Loci on 1p13, 10p13 and 18q21 are associated with 
susceptibility to Paget’s disease of bone.
O. M. E. Albagha1, M. Visconti1, N. Alonso1, A. Langston1, T. Cundy2, R. 
Dargie3, M. Dunlop4, W. D. Fraser5, M. J. Hooper6, G. Isaia7, G. Nicholson8, J. 
del Pino9, R. Gonzalez-Sarmiento9, M. di Stefano7, A. Tenesa4, J. P. Walsh10, S. 
H. Ralston1;  
1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of Auckland, 
Australia, 3Glasgow Royal Infirmary, United Kingdom, 4MRC Human Genetics 
Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5Royal Liverpool University Hospital, United 
Kingdom, 6University of Sydney, Australia, 7University of Torino, Italy, 8University 
of Melbourne, Australia, 9University of Salamanca, Italy, 10Sir Charles Gairdner 
Hospital, Australia.
Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a common disease with a strong 
genetic component characterised by focal abnormalities of bone turn -
over in which mutations of SQSTM1  gene are responsible for ~10% 
of sporadic and ~40% of familial PDB cases. In this study we sought 
to identify novel genetic variants that predispose to PDB by genome 
wide association study. In the discovery stage, we genotyped 750 
patients without SQSTM1  mutations and 1002 controls for 318,237 
SNPs using the Illumina platform. Quality control procedures were per -
formed on the data to exclude SNPs and samples with low call rate, 
low genotype quality score, and non-Caucasian ancestry. Analysis 
was performed using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test adjusting for 
population structure. Three loci on 1p13, 10p13, and 18q21 showed 
genome wide significant association with PDB with (P<1.0x10-8). In the 
replication stage we genotyped the most significant SNPs (P<1x10-6) 
from the discovery stage in an independent set of 500 PDB cases and 
535 controls using Sequenom iPLEX platform. The combined dataset 
confirmed the association of variants on 1p13 (P=5.4x10-24; OR=0.55), 
10p13 (P=6.1x10-13; OR=0.65), and 18q21 (P=5.3x10-13; OR=1.52) 
and showed evidence for suggestive association with variants located 
on 3p24, 8q22, 10q24, and 14q32 (P<1x10-5). As well as advance our 
understanding of the pathogenesis of PDB, the genetic variants we 
have identified may have value as diagnostic markers for disease sus -
ceptibility and severity. The causal genes and their associated signal -
ling pathways may also represent new targets for the design of new 
drugs to treat PDB.
P09.101  t au and alpha-synuclein and genetic susceptibility to 
Parkinson Disease in the italian population
I. Guella1, L. Trotta2, R. Asselta1, G. Soldà1, M. Zini2, A. Zecchinelli2, G. 
Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2, S. Duga1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di 
Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy.
Several loci for familial Parkinson disease (PD) have been described, 
and over the last years significant efforts have been focused on in -Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
vestigating the contribution of common variants to PD risk. Recently, 
3 independent GWAS have shown a genome-wide significant asso -
ciation of SNPs in the SNCA (alpha-synuclein) and MAPT (Tau) re -
gions. In this frame, we genotyped a large Italian population of 920 
PD patients (306 familial, 614 sporadic) and 920 controls for 13 
markers located across the SNCA gene, and for 2 SNPs that define 
the MAPT H1 clade (previously associated with an increased risk of 
PD). Single-marker analysis demonstrated nominal evidence of as -
sociation for: i) 5 SNPs in SNCA: 2 SNPs (rs356219, rs356220) in 
the 3’ region associated with increased risk of PD (P=0.05, OR[95% 
CI]=1.15[0.99-1.33], and P=0.05, OR[95% CI]=1.15[1.00-1.33]) and 
3 SNPs (rs356186, rs2737029, and rs2197120) located in the intron 
4 of the gene, associated with a reduced/increased risk of the dis -
ease (P=4.46E-04, OR[95% CI]=0.74[0.62-0.87]; P=0.03, OR[95% 
CI]=1.16[1.02-1.33]; and P=1.05E-03, OR[95% CI]=0.76[0.64-0.89]); 
ii) both SNPs (rs1800547, rs9468) identifying the MAPT H1 haplotype 
(P=8.13E-04, OR[95% CI]=0.75[0.63-0.89]; and P=8.36E-05, OR[95% 
CI]=0.72[0.61-0.85]). Moreover, we found a highly significant associa -
tion between PD and a protective haplotype (P=7.53E-06; 14.1% in 
cases vs 19.9% in controls), spanning 83kb from intron 4 to the 3’ end 
of SNCA. Our findings provide additional evidence of SNCA and MAPT 
as major PD genes, and underline the concept that, at least in the Ital -
ian population, different allelic variants of SNCA (either protective or 
predisposing) can contribute to PD susceptibility.
P09.102  increased level of FAs mRNA gene in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s 
disease
T. Usenko1, A. Taraskina1, A. Emelyanov1, A. Yakimovsky2, S. Pchelina1,2;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Mutations in the Leucine-Reach Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are 
the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson’s disease (PD) known 
today. Although the precise physiological and pathological role of 
LRRK2 is unclear, direct link between mutant LRRK2 and activation 
of the extrinsic cell death pathway through FAS receptor has been 
suggested. The aim of our work was to estimate level of FAS mRNA 
in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of patients with LRRK2-associ -
ated. The levels of FAS mRNA were estimated in PBL of six patients 
with LRRK2-linked PD (5 patients with G2019S mutation; 1- V1613A, 
mean age 65±10), fourteen sporadic PD patients (sPD) without muta -
tions in LRRK2 (mean age 65±8) and nine persons without neurologi -
cal disorders (controls) (mean age 76±10) using quantitative real-time 
PCR with TagMan probes. The level of G protein (GNB2L1) mRNA 
was used as internal control. The level of FAS mRNA was higher in 
patients with mutations in the LRRK2 gene (4.0±1.0) compared to sPD 
(0.7±0.4) (p<0.0001) and controls (1.1±0.2) (p<0.01). mRNA FAS level 
did not differ between sPD and controls (0.7 vs 1.1, p=0.26).
Our results suggest that LRRK2 mutations may lead to the activation 
of the extrinsic program cell death signaling pathway by means of in -
duction of FAS expression in patients with LRRK2-associated PD.
P09.103  Alpha-synuclein (sNcA) and mRNA sNcA levels 
in peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2-
associated Parkinson’s disease
A. K. Emelyanov1, A. F. Yakimovsky2, A. S. Drozdova1, T. S. Usenko1, S. N. 
Pchelina1,2;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Pavlov’s State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Mutations in the LRRK2 gene, encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 
2 (LRRK2), is the most frequent cause of familial PD known today. 
LRRK2-associated PD cases represent classical PD pathology char -
acterized by Lewy bodies, protein deposits found in the neurons. It has 
been shown that dardarin is co-localized with alpha-synuclein (SNCA), 
a major component of Lewy bodies. Alpha-synuclein aggregation is 
implicated in PD pathogenesis. However, the influence of dardarin on 
alpha-synuclein metabolism and neurodegeneration remains unclear. 
The aim of the present study was to access alpha-synuclein and SNCA 
mRNA levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of PD patients with 
LRRK2 mutations. mRNA SNCA and alpha-synuclein levels were es -
timated by means of quantitative real-time PCR and western blotting, correspondently. Patients with LRRK2 mutations (mutations G2019S 
(n=6); V1613A, (n=2)), patients with sporadic PD (sPD) (n=33) and 
persons without neurological disorders (controls) (n=18) were taken 
into analyses. PBL alpha-synuclein levels correlated with mRNA SNCA 
level (in sPD and controls, p<0.05). mRNA SNCA level did not dif -
fer between groups while PBL alpha-synuclein was decreased in PD 
patients with LRRK2 mutations compared with sPD patients without 
LRRK2 mutations (p<0.02) and controls (p<0.05).
Thus we received the first data about PBL alpha-synuclein in patients 
with LRRK2 mutations and demonstrated the decreased level of PBL 
alpha-synuclein in this group along with unchanged level of SNCA 
gene expression. These results allow us to suggest the influence of 
abnormal LRRK2 functions, caused by LRRK2 mutations, to unmodi -
fied monomeric PBL alpha-synuclein level.
P09.104  Genetic background of primary ciliary dyskinesia in 
Polish patients
M. Witt1,2, E. Ziętkiewicz1, B. Nitka1, E. Rutkiewicz1, U. Skrzypczak1, K. Voelkel1;  
1Inst of human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2International Inst Molec Cell Biology, 
Warsaw, Poland.
Five genes known to be involved in PCD pathogenesis were searched 
for mutations in patients from over 150 Polish families with Kartagener 
syndrome (KS) and with CDO (ciliary dysfunction only). DNAH5 . In 
total, 109 PCD families were screened for the presence of mutations 
in DNAH5  exons using SSCP/heteroduplex method. Of the 22 muta -
tions, 3 STOPs, in exons 63, 49 and 34, and one missense in exon 
32 (not reported before) were found in more than one family; haplo -
type background analysis indicated common origin for each of these 
repetitive mutations. DNAI1.  The search for mutations in DNAI1 was 
conducted in 113 families. The most frequent ones were insertion in 
intron 1 and missense in exon 17, confirming their previously reported 
prevalence among European patients. Our study indicates that muta -
tions in DNAH5  and DNAI1  are responsible for PCD/KS in at least 
15% and 8% families, respectively. RSPH4A.  A preliminary search for 
mutations in two of six RSPH4A exons revealed the presence of two 
stop mutations - in exon 1 (1 family) and in exon 3 (in 2 families), a 
missense mutation (in 1 family) and 4-nt deletion starting at +2 position 
of intron 3. RSPH9.  A preliminary search for mutations in three exons 
revealed a substitution in the 3’UTR (in 1 family). XL-RPGR.  In one 
family, a mutation in exon 2 was shown to cause aberrant RNA splic -
ing. In another family, a mutation at 5th position of intron 2 was found 
to cosegregate with the disease.
Support: HEALTH-PROT, GA No 229676.
P09.105  A genetic variant of tFAP2B is associated with 
anthropometric and adiposity related parameters in women with 
PcOs
N. Schweighofer , E. Wehr, U. Lam, O. Trummer, T. R. Pieber, B. Obermayer-
Pietsch;  
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University, Graz, Austria.
Background: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects about 6 -15 
% of all women and is therefore the most common hormonal disorder 
among women of reproductive age. PCOS is associated with a vari -
ety of clinical problems like infertility, obesity and insulin resistance. 
TFAP2B (Transcriptional factor-activating enhancer-binding protein-2 
beta) is an adipocyte expressed transcription factor involved in the 
regulation of adiponectin expression and the development of insulin 
resistance. This study aimed to evaluate allelic TFAP2B variants for 
obesity and weight associated parameters in PCOS patients.
Methods: We investigated the effect of an A/G SNP in TFAP2B on 
hormonal, anthropometric and metabolic parameters in 371 PCOS pa -
tients and 133 non PCOS controls.
Results: Genotype frequencies of the TFAP2B SNP did not deviate 
from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and were equivalent in PCOS and 
non PCOS controls. In all PCOS patients and especially in overweight/
obese PCOS patients (BMI ≥ 25), the G allele of TFAP2B was associ -
ated with a significantly higher BMI and changes in body fat composi -
tion (lean mass, visceral adipose tissue mass). The G allele addition -
ally influenced weight associated parameters and showed significantly 
higher systolic blood pressure as well as a trend for increased CRP 
levels.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that variants in the TFAP2B gene influ -Complex traits and polygenic disorders20
ence anthropometric as well as obesity related parameters in women 
with PCOS, especially with increased BMI. This might be of high impor -
tance for diagnostic and therapeutic aspects in this frequent disease.
P09.106  An erroneous agenda for personalized medicine.
F. Clerget-Darpoux1, R. Elston2;  
1INSERM, Paris-Sud university, Villejuif, France, 2Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, United States.
Ng et al (Nature, 2009) proposed an agenda for predicting multifacto -
rial diseases using the information on DNA associated variants. We 
argue here that, under the cloak of comparing the performance of two 
companies, 23andme and Navigenics, Ng et al give credence to their 
approach with erroneous recommendations.
At the outset, they confound relative risk (RR) and predictive risk. The 
term “relative risk” has no meaning unless the baseline risk relative to 
which the risks refer is specified. In many parts of the paper, the term 
RR refers to the ratio of risk among those who have the allele to that 
among those who do not. They advise focusing on markers with high 
RR and consider them as having high-risk prediction. They seem to 
ignore that large allelic RR can result in a very low predictive value.
Furthermore, there is no sense to the recommendation that, when a 
test is marketed, the consumer should be informed of the proportion of 
the disease heritability it explains. The heritability of a disease is usual -
ly computed as the heritability of a conceptual “liability” that has a com -
pletely different distribution under different models. For multifactorial 
diseases the underlying model is unknown and likely very complex.
The computation of a predictive risk (and its confidence interval) 
should be specific to sub-groups that we cannot define so long as the 
environmental factors involved are partly or totally unknown.
P Ng, S Murray, S Levy and J Craig Venter: Nature, vol 461/issue no 
7265, 8 October 2009
P09.107  the role of sex determination genes in Polycystic 
Ovary syndrome
O. Trummer , N. Schweighofer, U. Lam, E. Wehr, T. Pieber, B. Obermayer-
Pietsch;  
Division of Endocrinology and Nuclear Medicine, Department of internal 
Medicine, Medical University, A-8036 Graz, Austria.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common complex genetic 
disorder. Its inherited basis was established by studies demonstrating 
its increased prevalence including hyperandrogenemia, insulin resis -
tance, and disorders of insulin secretion in relatives of woman with 
PCOS. Human homologs of sex determination genes in the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans (FEM1A, FEM1B) were proposed as candi -
date genes for PCOS [Goodarzi et al., 2008, Hum. Reprod.], but this 
finding has not been replicated.
Methods: We investigated the potential role of FEM1A and FEM1B 
single nucleotide polymorphisms in PCOS in a case control study (370 
affected women with PCOS and 134 healthy controls). Hormonal, met -
abolic and anthropometric phenotypes have been collected. Genotype 
frequencies did not deviate from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and were 
not different between PCOS and control women.
Results: FEM1B variants were significantly associated with higher 
CRP levels, even within the normal range. There was a trend in al -
lele-dependent body fat distribution in FEM1A and a significant as -
sociation with acanthosis nigricans in FEM1B gene variants. Metabolic 
parameters were not found to be significantly associated with these 
FEM polymorphisms. To confirm these findings, further investigations 
will be performed.
Conclusion: PCOS women with certain FEM1B alleles might be pre -
disposed for higher CRP levels and therefore be at higher risk for car -
diovascular events than PCOS women without these alleles.
P09.108  Association of SNPs and haplotypes at MTHFR gene 
with coronary atherosclerosis
E. Trifonova , V. Stepanov;  
Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a key enzyme of 
folate cycle, which catalyzes for the conversion of 5,10-methylene -
tetrahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate. The reducted activity of 
this enzyme, often conditioned by the presence of certain MTHFR  
alleles, leads to increasing homocystein concentrations in blood. We focused on 12 SNPs spanning the MTHFR-coding region: rs3753588, 
rs2066470, rs17037397, rs7533315, rs4846052, rs1801133 (C677T), 
rs6541003, rs2066462, rs1801131 (A1298C), rs17375901, rs2274976 
(G1793A) and rs1537516. The prevalence of the C677T and A1298C 
genotypes did not differ significantly between 141 individuals with doc -
umented coronary artery disease (CAD) and 126 individuals without 
vascular disease from a Russian population. We detected significant 
associations for CAD with rs7533315 (OR=1,60; 95% Cl: 1,08-2,36), 
rs2066462 (OR=2,71; 95% Cl: 1,13-6,72) and with GCCTTCGCACGC 
haplotype (OR 2,98, 95% CI 1,53-5,88). Moreover we found one pro -
tective haplotype GCCCTCGCCCGC (OR 0,18, 95% CI 0,04-0,69). In 
the total sample 40 out of 4096 possible haplotypes were found. The 
majority of genetic diversity is comprised by 4 common haplotypes, 
which accounted for 71% of all chromosomes. This study suggests 
that two polymorphisms (rs7533315 and rs2066462) in MTHFR gene 
should be assessed as new genetic risk factors for CAD.
P09.109  Significant association of LPP and REL genes in Potential cD patients
V. Izzo , F. Tucci, M. Morelli, S. Storchi, A. Del Mastro, L. Timpone, F. Paparo, 
L. Greco;  
Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
A contribution in the pathway of gluten-induced immunoresponse in 
Celiac Disease (CD) was gained by candidate genes discovered in 
GWAS. These new understanding could help to elucidate the mecha -
nism through which CD manifests in so many different ways: Potential 
celiac cases are patients who produce anti-trasglutaminase antibod -
ies, but haven’t small intestinal mucosa damage.
643 CD cases, 105 potential CD patients and 711 controls were geno -
typed for eight of CD-associated SNPs by Taqman technology. Expres -
sion studies of LPP and REL genes were studied by Real-Time PCR 
using intestinal biopsy samples of 10 CD patients, 10 potential CD and 
10 healthy controls.
Candidate Gene SNPs typing shows that the genotype of REL gene 
SNP (rs842647) can differentiate Potential cases from Controls and 
Celiac patients, and LPP gene SNP (rs1464510) only from controls. 
Expression studies show that REL gene only was over-expressed in 
potential patients when compared to controls and CD.
Potential celiac cases are a living model of gradual expression of the 
phenotype of CD. The different expression of the REL gene, found in 
potential cases, suggests a probable role in the pathogenic mecha -
nism of the CD.
P09.110  the combined impact of metabolic gene 
polymorphisms on elite power athlete status
I. I. Ahmetov , A. M. Hakimullina, I. A. Mozhayskaya;  
St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Power performance is a complex phenotype, subject to the influence 
of both environmental and genetic factors. Whilst the last decade has 
seen a variety of specific genetic factors proposed, each is likely to 
make a limited contribution to an ‘elite’ phenotype: it seems more likely 
that such status depends upon the simultaneous presence of multiple 
such variants. The aim of the present study was to investigate the as -
sociations of multiple common metabolic gene (involved in ATP, glu -
cose, insulin and lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis, thermo -
genesis, regulation of muscle fiber type composition and angiogenesis) 
polymorphisms with power athlete status. The study involved 416 Rus -
sian power athletes and 696 controls. ACE, AMPD1, HIF1A, NFATC4, 
PPARA, PPARD, PPARG, PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, PPP3R1, TFAM, 
UCP2, UCP3, VEGFA gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-
RLFP. Four ‘power alleles’ were first identified showing discrete asso -
ciations with elite power athlete status (HIF1A 582Ser: 15.8% vs 7.8%, 
P = 0.0054; PPARA rs4253778 C: 19.3% vs 16.4%, P = 0.048; PPARG 
12Ala: 19.9% vs 15.3%, P = 0.0017; PPARGC1B 203Pro: 7.4% vs 
4.9%, P = 0.017). Next, to assess the combined impact of all 4 gene 
polymorphisms, all athletes were classified according to the number of 
‘power’ alleles they possessed. The proportion of subjects with a high 
(2-5) number of ‘power’ alleles was greater in the best power athletes 
compared to controls (41.3% vs 25.0%, P = 0.0036). These data sug -
gest that the likelihood of becoming an elite power athlete depends on 
the carriage of a high number of power-related alleles.Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
P09.111  inherited thrombophilia as a risk factor for pre-
eclampsia
E. S. Vashukova1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, D. R. Bicmullina2, M. S. Zainulina2, V. S. 
Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
The role of inherited thrombophilia in onset and progression of sever 
complication of pregnancy such as pre-eclampsia still remains obscure. 
The major goal of the present study was to determine the relationship 
between inherited thrombophilia and the risk of pre-eclampsia for preg -
nant women in Russia. The study was carried out in 77 patients with 
pre-eclampsia and 100 pregnant women as a control. Pattern of tested 
genes included: factor V Leiden ( F5 1691G>A), prothrombin gene ( F2 
20210G>A), polymorphisms of factor 7 ( F7 10976G>A), fibrinogene 
(FGB -455G>A), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 ( PAI1 -675 5G/4G), 
glycoprotein IIIa ( ITGB3 1565T>C),  glycoprotein Ia ( ITGA2  807C>T) 
and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( MTHFR  677C>T) genes us -
ing biochip technology. The distribution of genotypes frequencies for 
F5, F2 , F7, FGB and ITGB3 genes  was not statistically significant in 
group of pre-eclamptic patients compared to these ones in the controls. 
But distribution of genotypes frequencies of PAI1 (χ2=7.365, p=0.025), 
ITGA2 (χ2=6.003, p=0.049) and of MTHFR (χ2=6.198, p=0.045) genes 
were different in these groups. Thus inherited thrombophilia might be 
considered as a risk factor for pre-eclampsia. Pregnant women should 
be tested for inherited thrombophilia.
The work was partly supported by grant of President of Russian Foun -
dation 2008 (MK-2961.2008.7), grant of Russian Foundation for Basic 
Research (N 09-04-13847-ofi-c), and grants of Russian Ministry of Sci -
ence and Education (N 02.512.11.2275 and N P2387)
P09.112  A search for the most reliable biochemical, hormonal, 
and genetic markers for hypertension in saudi patients
A. S. Warsy1, M. A. F. El-Hazmi2, J. S. Al Wakeel3;  
1Center for Science and Medical Studies for Girls, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia, 3Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
This study was conducted to identify presymptomatic markers of hy -
pertension in Saudi. The study included 153 hypertensive patients and 
(males: 67; females:90) and 369 controls (males:162; females:207). 
Blood samples, collected from fasting individuals, were analysed for 
biochemical, immunological and hormonal parameters [renal, bone, 
liver function tests, electrolytes, lipids and lipoproteins, apolipopro -
teins, immunoglobulins and complement levels, insulin, C-peptide, co -
agulation parameters, leptin and Lp(a)]. The DNA was extracted and 
used for the analysis of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene, 
SA gene, glycogen synthetase gene, glucokinase gene, and paraoxi -
nase (PON) gene polymorphisms. The results showed that the fre -
quency of ACE genotype DD was lower (52.17 % vs 56.03%), while 
that of ID (43.48% vs 41.84%) and II (4.34% vs 2.13%) were slightly 
higher in the hypertensive patients compared to the control group but 
the differences were not statistically significant. In addition, D and I 
allele frequency did not show any significant difference. When the dif -
ferent biochemical, haematological, immunological parameters were 
compared, diastolic bp was the highest in the II genotype followed by 
the ID genotype. In addition, HDL levels were lowest in the II genotype 
while creatinine levels were highest in the DD genotype. For the SA 
gene, the genotype A1A1 and A2A2 occurred at a higher frequency, 
while A1A2 occurred at a lower frequency compared to the controls 
and the difference was statistically significant. The results showed 
a significant elevation in Lp(a) in the genotype A1A2. The paper will 
present these results in Saudi hypertensive patients to identify the 
most reliable markers.
P09.113  Polymorphisms in the FAM167A(C8ORF13)-BLK locus 
and TNFSF4 (Ox40L) gene are associated with primary Sjögren’s 
syndrome
G. Kristjansdottir1, G. Nordmark1, S. Appel2, L. Vasaitis1, M. Kvarnström3, P. 
Eriksson4, E. Theander5, P. Lundmark1, C. Sjöwall4, J. Brun2, M. Jonsson2, P. 
Söderkvist4, E. Harboe6, L. Gøransson6, L. Padyukov1, M. L. Eloranta1, G. Alm1, 
E. Baecklund1, M. Wahren-Herlenius3, R. Omdal6, L. Rönnblom1, R. Jonsson2, 
A. C. Syvänen1;  1Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Sweden, 2Institute of 
Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Rheumatology, University 
Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, 5Rheumatology clinic, University Hospital, Malmö, 
Sweden, 6Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
The purpose of this candidate gene study was to identify SNPs in 
genes with a putative role in the pathogenesis of primary Sjögren’s 
syndrome (pSS). Genes from the type I IFN system, genes involved in 
inflammatory processes and lymphoma development and genes previ -
ously shown to be associated with SLE in GWAS were included.
The genetic variations of the selected genes were covered with Tag -
SNPs and genotyped in two case/control cohorts from Sweden and 
Norway, using Illumina GoldenGate assay. After quality filtering, 1121 
SNPs in 82 genes and 540 patients and 532 controls remained for 
the association analysis. Allele counts and genotype frequencies 
were compared between patients and controls by Fisher’s exact test. 
Combined p-values and OR of the two cohorts were calculated with 
Cochran-Mantel-Haenzel test. Clinical data was extracted from the 
patient files.
We found high signal for association between pSS and several SNPs 
in the FAM167A-BLK region (p=4.7x10-4, OR=1.37) and the TNFSF4 
gene (p=7.4x10-4, OR=1.34), which have not previously been asso -
ciated with pSS. In addition we found an expected association with 
the IRF5/TNPO3 locus (p=5.5x10-6, OR=1.70) and the STAT4 gene 
(p=7.0x10-4, OR=1.40). We investigated the correlation between 
the best SNPs in FAM167A-BLK and TNFSF4 and the presence of 
Raynaud´s phenomenon, arthritis, dermal vasculitis, major salivary 
gland swelling, lymphadenopathy, lymphoma, leucopenia, hypergam -
maglobulinemia and anti-SSA/SSB antibodies in the patients. No con -
vincing correlation was detected between the SNPs and the pheno -
types.
We conclude that genes involved in B cell activation are important in 
the pathogenesis of pSS.
P09.114  Absence of mutation in the PRNP  gene and 
heterozygosity at codon 129 in probands of an iranian family 
with two cDJ affected members
S. Jelodari-Mamaghani1, F. Sina2, E. Elahi1;  
1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Prion diseases are a group of rare fatal neurodegenerative disorders 
characterized by accumulation of a host encoded membrane protein 
and exemplified by Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). The causative 
protein is the prion protein (PrP) entirely encoded within the second 
exon of the PRNP  gene. Up to 15% prion disease cases appear to 
be familial and inheritance is considered autosomal dominant. Varia -
tions in the gene sequence resulting in altered amino acids promote 
the aggregation process and ultimately disease status. More than 60 
different pathogenic mutations in PRNP  have been identified, and the 
most common cause amino acid changes at positions 102, 178, and 
200. Additionally, the variation resulting in methionine/valine polymor -
phism at position 129 is considered a genetic susceptibility factor for 
prion diseases. Here, we report the identification of an Iranian family 
consisting of two CDJ affected siblings both of whom first manifested 
symptoms in the second decade of their lives. Both exons of PRNP  
were screened for mutations by direct sequencing and a mutation was 
not observed. Their genotypes predicted heterozygosity (Met/Val) at 
position 129. This genotype is not expected to promote disease status. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of familial incidence 
of a prion disease without mutation in the PRNP  gene.
P09.115  ZNF750 is a nuclear protein whose promoter & 5‘ UtR 
variants are found in psoriasis patients
I. Cohen1, R. Y. Birnbaum1, A. M. Bowcock2, S. Sivan1, O. S. Birk1,3;  
1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for 
Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, Beer-
Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Genetics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 3Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical 
Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
We previously showed that a dominant mutation in the novel zinc fin -
ger protein, ZNF750, that is located within PSORS2 locus, causes 
seborrhea-like dermatosis with psoriasiform elements. Furthermore, 
ZNF750 c.-625A>C promoter variant has been linked with familial pso -Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
riasis in Chinese patients. We now sequenced DNA samples of 250 
bone-fide psoriasis patients. No mutations were found in the ZNF750 
coding sequence. However, sequence variants in the ZNF750 5‘-UTR 
were found in 3 of 250 unrelated psoriasis patients and not in 300 con -
trols. It is yet unclear how this variation affects ZNF750 expression.
To begin to understand ZNF750 function, we determined ZNF750 
sub-cellular localization: HEK293 and HaCaT cells were transiently 
transfected with EGFP-ZNF750 constructs of full-length or of partially 
truncated protein, abrogating the ZNF750 NLS. Both confocal fluores -
cence microscopy and cellular fractionation followed by western blot 
analysis demonstrated that ZNF750 is expressed in the cell nucleus 
both in HEK293 and HaCaT cells. Removal of the nuclear localization 
signal of ZNF750 abrogated its nuclear localization.
Our data suggest that ZNF750 5‘-UTR variants might be associated 
with bone fide psoriasis. Although ZNF750 has a single zinc finger 
C2H2-like motif, its nuclear localization suggests that it might act as 
a transcription factor.
P09.116  Variants in LD with the LcE gene cluster deletion are 
associated with susceptibility to psoriatic arthritis
J. D. Bowes1, E. Flynn1, P. Ho1,2, B. Aly1, A. W. Morgan3, H. Marzo3, L. Coates3, 
E. Korendowych4, N. McHugh4, O. FitzGerald5, J. Packham6, I. N. Bruce1,2, A. 
Barton1,2;  
1Arthritis Research Campaign Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The Kellgren Centre for Rheumatology, Central 
Manchester Foundation Trust, NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 3NIHR-Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical 
Research Unit, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases and 
Dept Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, 
5Department of Rheumatology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, UCD School 
of Medicine and Medical Sciences and Conway Institute of Biomolecular and 
Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 6Arthritis 
Research Campaign National Primary Care Centre, Keele University, Keele, 
United Kingdom.
Objective:  A common deletion mapping to the PSORS4 locus on chro -
mosome 1q21 and encompassing two genes of the late cornified en -
velope (LCE) gene cluster has been associated with increased risk of 
psoriasis vulgaris (PsV). One previous report found no association of 
the deletion with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) suggesting it may be a spe -
cific risk factor for PsV. Given the genetic overlap between PsA and 
PsV we have investigated whether SNPs mapping to this locus, and 
which are in linkage disequilibrium with the deletion, are risk factors for 
PsA in a UK and Irish population.
Methods:  Three SNPs mapping to 1q21 with prior evidence for asso -
ciation with susceptibility to PsV were genotyped in 1057 PsA patients 
using Sequenom iPlex chemistry and genotype frequencies com -
pared with data available for 5575 healthy controls. Two of the SNPs, 
rs4112788 and rs4085613, were reported to be highly correlated with 
the LCE deletion. The third SNP, rs6701216, was previously reported 
to be associated with PsV in a US population.
Results: The alleles tagging the deletion for both rs4112788 and 
rs4085613 were significantly associated with increased susceptibility 
to PsA (ptrend = 0.001, OR = 1.19 and ptrend = 0.001, OR = 1.18 respec -
tively). No association was observed to rs6701216.
Conclusions:  The evidence presented here supports the LCE deletion 
as a risk factor for PsA in a UK and Irish population. It suggests that 
this locus is a risk factor within a shared etiological pathway that con -
tributes to psoriatic skin disease in both PsV and PsA.
P09.117  Dissecting the mHc locus in psoriatic arthritis
S. Uebe1, U. Hüffmeier1, H. Burkhardt2, M. Apel1, A. Ekici1, H. Wichmann3, C. 
Gieger3, T. Becker4, M. Steffens4, C. Herold4, T. Wienker4, A. Reis1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Division of Rheumatology, 
Department of Internal Medicine II, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Helmholtz 
Center, Munich, Germany, 4Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and 
Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany.
Both psoriasis vulgaris and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) show strong as -
sociation with SNPs in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
region on chromosome 6q. It has, however, proven difficult to interpret 
these data because of complex LD at this region. In a GWAS using 
572 German PsA patients and 888 population based controls (KORA), 
association to this locus was confirmed. To clarify whether the associa -tion is due to one or several loci within the same region, we performed 
a stepwise logistic regression analysis using rs13191343 (our most 
significantly associated SNP) as covariate in the first step, and the 
most strongly associated SNP from this as an additional covariate in 
the next one, until logistic p-values for all SNPs on chromosome 6q 
were above 5.0E-6. We were able to identify 5 distinct SNPs which 
account for most of the observed association. Of these, 4 were rep -
licated in independent study groups of 1,761 European PsA patients 
and 3,727 control individuals. They are in no or negligible LD with each 
other, so we conclude that at least four different loci are responsible for 
the strong association signals for PsA within the MHC region. Addition -
ally, there was no evidence for log-linear interaction between these 4 
loci among each other and with TNF, coding for a psoriasis drug target 
within MHC. Furthermore, only one locus overlaps one of 3 recently 
identified loci for psoriasis vulgaris, suggesting that the remainder are 
specific to PsA and that both shared and distinct genetic factors pre -
dispose for psoriasis and PsA.
P09.118**  A CNV in the Epidermal Differentiation Complex, 
affecting the LcE3c and LcE3B genes , is a susceptibility factor 
for psoriatic arthritis in spanish and italian populations.
E. Docampo1,2, E. Giardina3, E. Riveira-Muñoz1,2, R. Rabionet1,2, J. Martin4, J. 
Maymó5, J. Fernández-Sueiro6, M. González-Gay7, F. Blanco6, Á. Carracedo8, 
G. Novelli3, X. Estivill1,2,9;  
1Genes and Disease, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF), Barcelona, 
Spain, 2CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Biopathology, Tor 
Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 4Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 
López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain, 5Rheumatology Unit, Hospital del Mar 
y la Esperanza IMAS-IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 6Rheumatology Unit,Complejo 
Hospitalario Universitario de La Coruña, La Coruña, Spain, 7Rheumatology 
Unit,Hospital Xeral-Calde, Lugo, Spain, 8Fundación Gallega de Medicina 
Genómica y CIBERER - Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain, 9Department of Experimental and Life Sciences of the 
Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
Objective: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a complex disorder in which envi -
ronmental and genetic factors are involved. Recently LCE3C_LCE3B_
del has been defined as a susceptibility factor for psoriasis and rheu -
matoid arthritis, making it a good candidate for PsA. Nonetheless, a 
study performed on German PsA patients did not find association. The 
aim of this study was to elucidate whether LCE3C_LCE3B_del is as -
sociated with PsA in the Spanish and Italian populations.
Methods: We tested for the association between LCE3C_LCE3B_del 
and a linked (r2=0.928, D’=0.98) SNP (rs4112788) with PsA in three in -
dependents case-control datasets (Barcelona: 50 cases and 411 con -
trols, Galicia: 178 and 124, and Roma: 424 and 450). The Barcelona 
and Roma samples were typed for the presence of the LCE3C_LCE3B 
deletion by direct PCR and for the SNP with a Taqman assay, and the 
Galician dataset was only tested for the SNP. Association analysis was 
performed by R SNPassoc package.
Results: Analysis of the Barcelona dataset showed significant asso -
ciation of the LCE3C-LCE3B_del and rs4112788 with PsA (p=0.0075; 
OR=2.27(1.25-4)) and (p=0.03; OR 1.92(1.06-3.44), respectively). The 
rs4112788 association was confirmed in the Galician dataset (p=0.004; 
OR 2.22 (1.26-3.84)). A large Italian cohort confirmed both associa -
tions (LCE3C-LCE3B_del p=0.006; OR 1.63(1.15-2.38); rs4112788 
p=0.008; OR 1.61(1.44-2.32)). Joint analysis for the SNP showed an 
overall p-value of p=0.00019; OR 1.35(1.19-1.59)). Subphenotype 
analysis showed a stronger association for the oligoarticular versus 
poliarticular disease (interaction p-value=0.03).
Conclusions: The LCE3C-LCE3B deletion shows association with PsA 
in the Spanish and Italian populations analyzed, presenting a stronger 
effect in the oligoarticular cases.
P09.119  Variants in polyunsaturated fatty acids metabolizing 
enzymes are associated with neurodevelopment in iNmA birth 
cohort
M. Bustamante1,2, E. Morales1,3, J. Gonzalez1,3, M. Guxens1,3, X. Estivill2,4, J. 
Sunyer1,3, M. Torrent5;  
1Centre for Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genes and 
Disease Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 
3Municipal Institute of Medical Research, Barcelona, Spain, 4Public Health and 
Epidemiology Network Biomedical Research Center, Barcelona, Spain, 5Area Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
de Salut de Menorca (ib-salut) and Fundació Caubet-CIMERA, Balears, Spain.
Long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) are essential for 
cognitive development, mainly during first months of life. Although for -
mula milks have been started to be supplemented with PUFAs, some 
essential PUFAs are uniquely available in human milk. In the present 
study we have tested direct and indirect effects of genetic variants in 
FADS  and ELOVL  genes on neurodevelopment. Thirty-six tag SNPs 
were genotyped with the SNPlex technology in 340 Caucasian chil -
dren from the Menorca INMA (Infancia y Medio Ambiente) birth cohort. 
After excluding variants with low genotyping quality or deviation from 
HWE, twenty seven SNPs were analyzed in relation to neurodevelop -
ment measured at age 4 years with McCarthy Scales of Children’s 
Abilities test consisting in 6 subscales. The statistical analysis was 
performed using a likelihood ratio test from a linear model adjusting for 
main confounders. We also tested interactions between genetic vari -
ants and breastfeeding (83% breastfeeding, 17% formula milk). After 
Bonferroni correction, a SNP in the FADS  cluster was associated with 
the general cognitive and quantitative scales. Two SNPs in ELOVL  
genes were associated with the perceptual-performance ( ELOVL2 ) 
and motor ( ELOVL5 ) scales. Nominally associations were also found 
for SNPs in these genes and the six McCarthy scales. Finally, an in -
teraction between breastfeeding and a SNP in ELOVL5  was found for 
general cognition, verbal, quantitative and motor skills. In summary, 
genetic variants in PUFA enzymes, directly or through an interaction 
with breastfeeding, seem to have an effect on neurodevelopment. Due 
to the limited number of individuals analyzed, results should be repli -
cated.
P09.120  Evaluating the influence of multiple genetic 
polymorphisms on genitourinary and gastrointestinal acute 
morbidity to radiotherapy
L. Fachal1, P. Peleteiro2, A. Carballo2, M. Santamariña1, A. Blanco1, Á. 
Carracedo1, A. Gómez2, A. Vega1;  
1Fundación Pública Galega Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina 
Xenómica-USC, CIBER-ER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Radiation 
Oncology Department, Clinical University Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
Genetic predictive markers of radiation morbidity are being sought for 
stratifying radiotherapy for patients and risk assessment of radiation 
exposure. To evaluate the association of genetic variants with radio -
therapy-induced acute normal tissue toxicity we enrolled 472 unselect -
ed prostate cancer patients, treated at the Radiation Oncology Depart -
ment (Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela) from 
2006-2009, into a prospective epidemiological study.
Adverse effects (AE) were documented for 8 weeks using the common 
toxicity criteria (CTCv3.0). Patients showing CTC grade ≥1 for genito -
urinary (GU) or gastrointestinal (GI) disorders were comprised in the 
“case” group. The “control” group consisted of patients without acute 
clinical sensitivity.
After a systematic review, we selected previously associated SNPs as 
so as validated non-synonymous SNPs in the same genes. Altogether, 
17 SNPs in 6 candidate genes were genotyped. The power to detect 
odds ratios as low as 1.4 for selected SNPs considering an average 
population minimum allele frequency (MAF) of 12% was 88% for an 
allelic test. All SNPs were found in HWE in controls.
The TGFB1 rs1800472 allele T was significantly associated with both 
the risk of developing GU (OR=1.81; CI95%=1.02-3.22; p=0.04) and 
GI AE (OR=2.08; CI95%=1.05-4.13; p=0.03), although this association 
did not reach the nominal significance level after Bonferroni correc -
tion.
Due to the present study is the first to investigate the role of rs1800472 
in the acute adverse normal tissue reactions to radiation, we under -
stand the need of replicating our results in a greater sample in order to 
convincingly distinguish the proposed effect.
P09.121  New loci associated with blood cell and iron traits in 
the isolated population of Val Borbera
G. Pistis1, T. Corre1, M. Traglia1, C. Masciullo1, C. Sala1, I. Buetti1, E. Petretto2,3, 
C. Camaschella1, D. Toniolo1;  
1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Research Council 
Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, United Kingdom, 
3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, United Kingdom.
Blood cells participate in vital physiological processes as oxygen trans -
port, defense against infections and vessel wall integrity. Their numbers 
and characteristics are in part determined by genetic mechanisms (An -
drews NC, Nat Genet 2009). We used the Val Borbera isolated popu -
lation in the Appenine region of Northern Italy (Traglia et al, Plos One 
2009) to define genetic variants associated with blood cell traits and 
iron parameters. Using 370K Illumina array we conducted genome-
wide association studies for 15 hematological and 4 iron traits mea -
sured in the peripheral blood of 1664 individuals. These traits include 
hemoglobin, red cell counts and erythrocyte indices, white cell number 
and types, platelet and iron parameters. Our analyses replicate 23 loci 
that recent studies have found associated to blood cells (Soranzo et 
al Nat Genet 2009, Ganesh et al Nat Genet 2009, Gudbjartsoon et al 
Nat Genet 2009, Chambers et al Nat Genet 2009) and iron (Benjamin 
et al Nat Genet 2009) traits. Moreover we found 3 new loci that reach 
the genome-wide significance associated to mean corpuscular hemo -
globin concentration (MCHC), neutrophils count and platelet distribu -
tion width (PDW). These preliminary results require replication in other 
populations, sequencing analyses and functional follow-up to prove 
their true involvement in quantitative traits variation.
P09.122  the REt51/FKBP52 complex and its involvement in 
Early Onset- Parkinson disease
D. Fusco1, M. Vargiolu1, M. Vidone1, L. Pennisi1, E. Bonora1, E. Mariani1, S. 
Capellari2, P. Martinelli2, G. Romeo1;  
1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, 
Bologna, Italy.
RET51 is a tyrosine kinase receptor expressed in distinct families of 
neurons where it promotes different functions. FKBP52 is an immu -
nophilin with neuroprotective effects on different kind of neurons. We 
have demonstrated that RET51 activation by both GDNF and NGF 
triggers the formation of RET51/FKBP52 complex. The substitution 
of the tyrosine 905 of RET51, a key residue phosphorylated by both 
GDNF and NGF, disrupts the RET51/FKBP52 complex. NGF and 
GDNF have a functional role in dopaminergic (DA) neurons where 
RET51 and FKBP52 are expressed with a yet undefined function. The 
degeneration of DA neurons is the main feature of Parkinson Disease 
(PD), which is associated to a complex multifactorial aetiology combin -
ing environmental, age-related and genetic factors. To clarify if RET51/
FKBP52 complex should exert its function in DA neurons we used an 
indirect approach by screening the genes encoding for RET51 and 
FKBP52 in a group of 30 Early Onset (EO)- PD patients. We found a 
compound heterozygous carrying two mutations in RET and FKBP52 
genes. Functional analysis performed in the human cell line HEK293 
have shown that the two mutations expressed simultaneously are suf -
ficient to disrupt the RET51/FKBP52 complex, indicating its potential 
role in EO- PD.
P09.123  Association study of CARD8 c. 30T_A (p.C10X) variant 
with Rheumatoid Arthritis in t unisian patients
M. Ben Hamad1, F. Cornelis2, S. Marzouk3, G. Chabchoub1, Z. Bahloul3, F. 
Fakhfakh1, H. Ayadi1, E. Petit-Teixeira2, A. Maalej1;  
1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, sfax, Tunisia, 2GenHotel-EA3886, 
Evry-Paris VII Universities, AP-HP and CHSF Hospitals, Evry-Genopole, 
France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Hedi Chaker, 
sfax, Tunisia.
Caspase activating and recruitment domain 8 (CARD8) may be a 
negative regulator of NF-κB, which plays a key role in inflammation, 
and also has a regulatory effect on apoptosis. The common variant 
rs2043211 (c.30T>A) introduces a stop codon (Cys10Ter) at position 
10 of the amino acid sequence (p.C10X). CARD8 full-length (CARD8-
L) was recently found to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The aim of this study was to analyze the frequency of p.C10X in 141 
Tunisian patients affected with RA and 191 healthy unrelated controls. 
DNAs genotyping was carried out with a TaqMan 5‘ allelic discrimi -
nation assay on an ABI 7500 real time PCR machine (assay: C__
11708080_1_) and data were analyzed by chi-squared test, Genotype 
relative risk and Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI).
Our results showed neither allelic nor genotypic significant associa -
tion of the CARD8 gene polymorphism with RA (p=0.42; p=0.115, re -
spectively); [OR (95% CI) = 1.14 (0.83-1.58)]. The stratification of RA 
patients subgroups according to clinical and immunological data re -Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
vealed significant associations of T/T genotype in HLA-DRB1*10 posi -
tive subgroup (n=20) (p=0.009). However, no significant differences 
of rs2043211 polymorphism was found according to the presence of 
nodules, another autoimmune disease, erosion, anti-cyclic peptides 
antibodies (ACPA) and rheumatoid factor antibody (RF) (p>0.05).
Our results suggest that the CARD8 rs2043211 polymorphism was 
significantly associated with RA susceptibility in patients carrying at 
least one allele HLA-DRB1*10. Further replication studies with a larger 
sample size as well as on different populations are needed to confirm 
this finding.
P09.124  Functional sNPs in CD2  gene associated with 
rheumatoid arthritis in a Japanese population
A. Suzuki1, R. Yamada2,1, Y. Kochi1, Y. Okada1, K. Matsuda3, K. Shimane1,3, A. 
Takahashi1, M. Kubo1, Y. Nakamura3,1, K. Yamamoto3,1;  
1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 3The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well-known as an autoimmune disease 
and is a chronic inflammatory disorder. Many genome wide association 
studies were performed and multiple RA-susceptibility loci and autoim -
mune-susceptibility loci have been identified. These studies suggested 
that multiple genes and its functions were related with disease caus -
ing and development. These studies also indicated an important factor 
regarding genetic factors of RA and autoimmune diseases; some of 
the RA-susceptible polymorphisms also increase the risks of other au -
toimmune diseases as reported. One of the mechanisms of the inflam -
mation in autoimmune diseases associated with signal transduction 
via signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM). It was reported 
that SLAM family gene, e.g., Ly108 is also associated with systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). We studied whether variants of the SLAM 
family gene are associated with susceptibility to RA. The association 
peak in the block was observed at two functional SNPs (rs3766379 
and rs6682654) in CD244  in two independent RA cohorts from Japan 
(P= 3.23 x 10-8 and P=7.45 x 10-8). We found a Japanese cohort of SLE 
that had the similar genotype distribution with RA cohorts. These dis -
ease-associated SNPs have been shown to increase their expression 
using luciferase assays. Furthermore, we indicated that rs6682654 
locates on the binding site of USF-1 in CD244 gene and affect on 
the regulation of CD244 expression via USF-1. We supposed that up-
regulation of CD244 by transcription factors including USF-1 affect on 
RA. Thus, CD244 is a novel genetic risk factor for RA and may have a 
role for autoimmunity in RA.
P09.125  Identification of two susceptibility variants for 
schizophrenia in Bulgarian sample by case-control association 
study approaches
E. T. Betcheva1, A. G. Yosifova1, T. Mushiroda2, M. Kubo3, A. Takahashi4, S. 
Karachanak1, I. Zaharieva1, R. Vazharova1, S. Hadjidekova1, I. Dimova1, D. 
Stoyanov5, V. Milanova6, T. Tolev7, G. Kirov8, N. Kamatani4, D. Toncheva1, Y. 
Nakamura9;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory for Pharmacogenetics, RIKEN Center for Genomic 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Genotyping Development, 
RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 4Laboratory of 
Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 
5State Psychiatric Hospital St. Ivan Rilski - Ministry of Health of Republic of 
Bulgaria, Novi Iskar, Bulgaria, 6Department of Psychiatry, Aleksandrovska 
Hospital, Medical University, 1431 Sofia, St. G. Sofiiski 1 str., Sofia, Bulgaria, 
7Department of Psychiatry, Dr. Georgi Kisiov Hospital, 6260 Radnevo, Magda 
Petkanova 1 str., Radnevo, Bulgaria, 8Department of Psychological Medicine, 
Cardiff University, School of Medicine, Henry Wellcome Building, Heath Park, 
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 9Laboratory of Molecular 
Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 108-8639, Tokyo, Japan.
Recent development of molecular psychiatry identified a number of 
candidate genes possibly associated with schizophrenia. However, 
the studies often result with controversial and non-conclusive outputs. 
Replication studies might help to unravel this problem. The candidate 
gene approach requires selection of a small number of candidate mark -
ers out of a limited number of loci suggested by preliminary studies. 
In contrast genome-wide association studies enable high-throughput 
screening without previous knowledge of disease etiology or patho -
genesis.We employed a two-step case-control association design in order to 
reveal schizophrenia susceptibility genes in a Bulgarian sample. Ini -
tially we performed a candidate gene replication study of 180 SNPs in 
59 candidate genes, using 255 Bulgarian patients with schizophrenia 
and schizoaffective disorder, and 556 Bulgarian healthy controls (by 
TaqMan® or Invader assay®). In stage two, a genome-wide association 
study (Illumina Bead Array (550K)) was performed across 188 affected 
and 376 healthy Bulgarian subjects. Hundred markers with lowest p-
values were validated and then followed up in additional set of 99 case 
and 328 control samples by Invader assay®.
The candidate gene replication study revealed rs6277 ( DRD2 ) (P = 
0.0010, OR = 1.76) as a susceptibility factor for schizophrenia in our 
sample. The GWAS identified strongest association with an intronic 
SNP of an involved in the pathway of coordination between the tissue 
size and shape and the cell-type identity in brain development.
Our findings support two of the most widely considered hypotheses for 
schizophrenia’s etiology: the dopaminergic hypothesis and the malde -
velopment of the nervous system hypothesis.
P09.126  severe schizophrenia in males is associated with the 
presence of mtHFR 677t allele.
M. G. Siniauskaya1, I. M. Halayenka1, V. G. Objedkov2, B. I. Navrotsky3, N. G. 
Danilenko1;  
1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical State 
University, Minsk, Belarus, 3Belarusian Republic Center “Mental Health”, Minsk, 
Belarus.
Objective: MTHFR gene codes the methylenetetrahydrofolate reduc -
tase, one of the important enzyme of folate metabolism, also playing 
role in DNA methylation - thus influencing important cellular pathways. 
The MTHFR C677T mutation has been associated with elevated homo -
cysteine levels, that can cause different abnormalities of fetal develop -
ment: neural tube defects, cardiac dysfunctions and others. Some data 
points the role of this gene mutation in schizophrenia development.
We studied functional MTHFR C677T alleles variation within schizo -
phrenic patients families and in control group in order to check if any 
association exists between carriers of 677T allele and disease.
Method: 116 schizophrenic patients as well as their mothers and 57 
healthy control families were included in research. The patients were 
differentiated into 2 disease severity groups according clinical data. 
Allelic frequencies for the C677T polymorphism were estimated for all 
studied persons.
Results: Strong 677C/T allele ratio frequencies shift was revealed in 
the group of male patients with mild defect (85/15) as compared to se -
vere defect group (66/33) and controls (68/31). We didn’t observe any 
shift in 677C/T frequencies for female patients. Significant differences 
(P=0,001) were discovered between groups of male and female pa -
tients, subdivided by the severity of disease (mild and severe defect), 
in ratio of individuals bearing 677T allele. Male patients with 677T al -
lele more often suffer from severe schizophrenia.
Conclusions: To our mind, obtained data reflect the different way of 
schizophrenia development in male and female patients with mild and 
severe schizophrenia.
P09.127  meta-analysis of 4 European genome wide association 
scans identifies 3 new QTLs influencing serum amyloid A 
concentrations
C. Marzi1, E. Albrecht1, P. Hysi2, I. Prokopenko3,4, N. Soranzo5, A. Tönjes6,7, W. 
Koenig8, W. März9,10, M. Stumvoll6, T. Spector2, T. Illig1, C. Gieger1;  
1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Twin Research and 
Genetic Epidemiology Department, King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, 
3Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger 
Institute Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medicine, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 7Coordination Centre for Clinical Trials, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 8Department of Internal Medicine 
II – Cardiology, University of Ulm Medical Center, Ulm, Germany, 9synlab 
Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum Heidelberg, Eppelheim, Germany, 10Institut 
für Public Health, Sozialmedizin und Epidemiologie, Medizinische Fakultät 
Mannheim der Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
Serum amyloid A (SAA), a sensitive marker of an acute inflammatory 
state, is associated with several severe chronic diseases, such as Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
amyloidosis, Alzheimer’s disease, tumor genesis and rheumatic arthri -
tis. Furthermore, SAA concentrations have been reported to be linked 
to obesity, atherosclerosis, and diabetes, three of the risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease. We conducted a meta-analysis of 4 genome-
wide association scans on baseline SAA concentrations totalling 4,264 
participants of European descent (KORA S4, LURIC, Sorbs, TwinsUK) 
and identified 3 independent signals which are distributed across two 
regions. One region is located on chromosome 11 and displays two 
independent loci, one of which harbouring SAA1 and SAA2 and the 
other the neighbouring GTF2H1 and HPS5. The other region includes 
the LEPR gene region on chromosome 1. Taken together, the present 
meta-analysis was the first genome wide association analysis on SAA 
concentrations and detected gene regions, which highlight immune 
response pathways involved in the regulation of chronic inflammation 
and implicated diseases and underline a close interplay between SAA 
and other inflammatory proteins.
P09.128  Synaptic exocytosis and migraine: association study of 
the sNARE complex and related genes in a spanish population
R. Corominas1,2, O. Carreño1,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2, M. Camiña3, M. Vila-Pueyo4, B. 
Narberhaus5, P. Pozo-Rosich6, A. Macaya7, B. Cormand1,2;  
1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain, 2CIBER Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, 
3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, 
Galicia, Spain, 4Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari 
Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 5Neurology Service, Hospital Sant 
Joan de Déu (Fundació Althaia), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 6Headache 
Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain, 7Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari 
Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
Migraine is a complex multifactorial neurological disorder. It has been 
suggested that disturbances of ions and/or neurotransmitter levels in 
the synaptic cleft may be involved in the pathophysiology of migraine 
by influencing neuronal excitability. The Soluble N-ethylmaleimide 
sensitive factor Attachment protein REceptor (SNARE) complex 
plays a key role in the fusion of vesicles loaded with neurotransmitter 
with the presynaptic membrane. The aim of the present study is to 
investigate the involvement of 15 genes ( STX1A, SNAP25, VAMP1, 
VAMP2, SYT1, SYT2, CPLX1, CPLX2, CPLX3, CPLX4, STXBP1, 
SYP, SNPH, NSF, NAPA ) encoding proteins that belong to or interact 
with the SNARE complex through a case-control association study of 
538 migraine patients, 312 without aura (MO) and 226 with aura (MA), 
and 538 sex-matched controls from Spain. The analysis of 144 SNPs 
displayed several nominal associations in different clinical groups, but 
only two SNPs in CPLX2 ( complexin 2) for MO and one SNP in NSF 
(N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor) for MA remained significant after 
15% FDR correction for multiple testing. A replication study with 480 
cases and 480 controls from Spain is currently underway.
P09.129  Replication of the celiac Disease GWAs results in spanish population
L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, G. 
Gutierrez1, J. R. Bilbao1,2, C. E. G. E. C3;  
1Immunogenetics Lab, Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain, 
2Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, 
University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Spanish Celiac Disease 
Genetics Consortium, Spain.
BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic, immune-mediated 
disorder of the gut caused by intolerance to ingested gluten that de -
velops in genetically susceptible individuals, affecting approximately 
1% of Caucasians. The major genetic risk factors for CD are HLA-
DQ2/DQ8 molecules. Nevertheless, these variants are also frequent 
in the general population, so HLA is necessary but not sufficient to ex -
plain all genetic susceptibility to CD. Genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS) have been performed in CD and eigth new loci that contribute 
to genetic risk have been identified and replicated in different popula -
tions.
AIM: Our aim was to replicate the association of the eigth risk loci in 
the Spanish population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 500 CD patients and 470 
healthy controls from the Spanish Celiac Disease Genetics Consor -
tium collaborative study for GWAs associated single nucleotide poly -
morphisms (SNPs) tagging the eight risk loci. SNPs were genotyped using TaqMan probes and primers on an ABI Prism 7900HT instru -
ment. SDS v2.3 software was used for genotype calling. Association 
analyses were performed using 2x2 contingency tables.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Significant association was ob -
served in five regions (Table 1), confirming the implication of several 
those genomic regions in CD susceptibility in a southern European 
population.
LOCUS SNP Minor allele MAF cases/controlsp 
Value
RGS1 rs2816316 C 0.145/0.199 0.0002
IL12A/SCHIP1 rs17810546 G 0.132/0.100 0.0286
IL12A rs9811792 C 0.514/0.439 0.0003
SH2B3 rs3184504 T 0.510/0.438 0.0004
KIAA1109 rs13119723 G 0.178/0.229 0.0024
The majority of GWAs identified loci are replicated accross popula -
tions, although allele frequencies may vary. Failure to replicate may be 
in part due to differences in genetic bakground.
P09.130  the i/D polymorphism of the AcE1 is not a risk factor 
but is a prognostic marker for ischemic stroke
S. Domingues-Montanari , I. Fernández-Cadenas, A. del Rio-Espinola, M. 
Mendioroz, J. Fernández-Morales, P. Delgado, A. Penalba, P. Chacón, D. Salat, 
M. Ribó, A. Rosell, J. Álvarez-Sabín, J. Montaner;  
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain.
Background: Studies on the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE1) 
gene in ischemic stroke (IS) have generated conflicting results. The 
goal of our study was to clarify the influence of the ACE1 as a risk fac -
tor and prognosis marker for IS.
Methods: We genotyped the rs4341 polymorphism, in linkage disequi -
librium with the rs1799752 (ID polymorphism) in 531 IS cases and 549 
healthy controls. We then tested if the rs4341 could influence thrombo -
lytic efficacy (measured as frequency of revascularization) and safety 
(measured as cerebral hemorrhagic complications) in IS patients who 
received t-PA <3h after symptoms onset. We measured serum ACE 
levels in 130 samples: 27 controls, 68 IS at baseline and 35 IS 24h 
after stroke.
Results: There was no association of the ACE1 variant with IS 
(p=0.776), although it affected ACE protein levels (DD=153.5±54.9, 
ID=120.4±39.8, II=107.0±45.8 ng/mL, p<0.001). IS cases showed 
lower ACE levels than controls in the acute phase (p<0.001), but not 
at 24h (p=0.673). On another hand, the D allele was associated with 
higher revascularization rates in tPA-treated patients (p=0.037 at 1h), 
without increasing the odds of hemorrhagic complications (p=0.244). 
Protein levels at 24h were also higher in IS patients who revascular -
ized at 24h (174.6±47.9 vs. 116.0±28.1, p=0.028).
Conclusion: The D allele of the ACE1 I/D and ACE protein levels were 
not associated with a higher risk of IS in Spanish individuals. However, 
the ACE1 could be a good pharmacogenetic marker, since it is associ -
ated with higher revascularization rates following t-PA treatment.
P09.131  correlation between different clinical manifestations 
and subphenotype stratification of genetic association in systemic Lupus Erythematosus
P. H. Li , P. P. W. Lee, Y. Lau;  
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex genetic disease with 
heterogeneous clinical manifestations. An individual can be classified 
as having SLE when 4 or more of the 11 criteria set by the American 
College of Rheumatology (ACR) have been met. Disease manifesta -
tions are therefore varied and diverse, where two SLE patients may 
have non-overlapping subphenotypes. It is known that multiple genes 
are involved in SLE. The phenotypic heterogeneity could be a result 
of an underlying genetic heterogeneity, with different subsets of sus -
ceptibility genes contributing to different phenotypic manifestations. In 
this study, we analysed the clinical data from 1211 SLE patients col -
lected in Hong Kong, including the 11 criteria from the ACR classifica -
tion criteria and autoantibody production. We also correlated this with 
the genotype data for 612 of these patients genotyped by the Illumina 
610-Quad Beadchip in a recent genome-wide association study and 
the genotype data of several well-established SLE susceptibility genes 
for the remaining patients by the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX Gold 
system. Correlation analysis between disease manifestations revealed Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
that several subphenotypes (clinical manifestations and autoantibody 
production) tended to cluster together, indicating overlapping of the 
underlying mechanisms for these manifestations. Furthermore, pa -
tient-only analysis (e.g. patients with arthritis versus patients without) 
showed that many well-established susceptibility genes may be partic -
ularly associated with specific disease subphenotypes. Our study may 
help dissect the intrinsic correlation between different subphenotypes 
and the correlation between genetic makeup and clinical manifesta -
tions.
P09.132  Dissection of genes in the type i interferon pathway 
reveals two novel risk genes for sLE
J. K. Sandling1, S. Garnier1, S. Sigurdsson1, C. Wang1, G. Nordmark2, I. 
Gunnarsson3, E. Svenungsson3, L. Padyukov3, G. Sturfelt4, A. Jönsen4, A. A. 
Bengtsson4, L. Truedsson5, C. Eriksson6, S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist7, A. Mälarstig8, 
R. J. Strawbridge8, A. Hamsten8, L. A. Criswell9, R. R. Graham10, T. W. 
Behrens10, M. L. Eloranta2, G. Alm11, L. Rönnblom2, A. C. Syvänen1;  
1Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden, 2Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Rheumatology Unit, Department of 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 4Section of Rheumatology, Department Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine, section of 
M.I.G., Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 6Department of Clinical Immunology, 
Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 7Department of Rheumatology, 
Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 8Atherosclerosis Research Unit, 
Department of Medicine, Solna Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 
9Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 
10Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States, 11Department of 
Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune 
disease in which the type I interferon (IFN) pathway plays a crucial 
role. We have previously shown that five genes in this pathway, IRF5,  
TYK2 , STAT4, IFIH1  and IRF8 are associated with risk for SLE, as 
well as successfully replicated the previous reports on association for 
IRAK1, TNFAIP3, TNFSF4  and the IRF7  region (KIAA1542). Here we 
investigate 78 genes involved in the type I IFN pathway to identify 
additional SLE susceptibility loci. First, we genotyped SNPs in these 
78 genes and 14 other candidate genes in Swedish SLE patients and 
controls. Genes with P < 0.01 in the initial screen were then followed 
up in an additional Swedish cohort. SNPs in five genes were nominally 
associated with SLE in this extended cohort. To replicate these find -
ings we extracted data from a genome-wide association study on SLE 
performed in a US cohort. Combined analysis of the Swedish and US 
data confirmed two of these  genes as SLE susceptibility loci. Our study 
highlights additional genes from the type I IFN system for further func -
tional analysis, and more specifically points to the importance of genes 
in the IFIH1/DDX58 pathway which is activated in cells other than the 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, for example monocyte derived dendritic 
cells, in response to viral infections.
P09.133  BK channel β4 subunit gene (KCNMB4) and Temporal 
Lobe Epilepsy
I. Manna1, A. Labate2, U. Aguglia3, L. Mumoli2, G. Palamara2, A. Fratto2,1, P. 
Spadafora1, G. Di Palma1, A. Quattrone2,1, A. Gambardella2,1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, 
2Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional 
Epilepsy Centre, Hospital of Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
Epilepsy is one of the major neurological disorders characterized by 
spontaneous and recurrent seizures. Traditionally Temporal Lobe 
Epilepsy (TLE) was considered as a multifactorial syndrome due to 
environmental factors. Advances in molecular biology have facilitated 
the detection of many genetic alterations that may have a pathogenic 
effect in TLE. Large conductance calcium-activated potassium chan -
nels (BK) have recently been implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic 
epilepsy.
The objective of this study is to replicate previously published results 
regarding the involvement of KCNMB4 gene in TLE. We used a case-
control approach comparing a tag single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) located 3’ of this candidate gene between unrelated TLE pa -
tients and matched controls. A total of 359 patients and 319 age- and sex-matched healthy controls were genotyped for a single biallelic 
(G/T) nucleotide polymorphism (rs398702) in the 3’ region of the KC -
NMB4 gene using a TaqMan 5’ allele discrimination assay. Analysis of 
genotype or allelic frequencies between patients and controls showed 
no statistically significant difference (p>0.05). Our data suggest that 
KCNMB4 gene polymorphism does not act as a susceptibility factor 
for TLE. Although these findings do not replicate the earlier findings 
at the SNP level, we believe that many SNPs contribute to disease 
predisposition in an population-specific manner. Despite our negative 
results, the candidate gene selection strategy could be quite useful in 
the future determination of variants predisposing to disease.
P09.134  Genotyping of the tPmt gene using pyrosequencing in 
Polish population
M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, K. Milanowska1, L. Jakubowska-Burek2, M. 
Kaczmarek-Rys1, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja2, A. Plawski1, R. Slomski1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
2Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, 
University School of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) metabolizes thiopurine drugs 
which are used in the treatment of several disorders such as inflam -
matory bowel disease (IBD). The therapeutic function of tiopurine 
drugs is considerably dependent on the genetic polymorphisms of 
TPMT gene. The three main TPMT alleles, TPMT *2 (p.Ala80Pro), *3A 
(p.Ala154Thr, p.Tyr240Cys) and *3C (p.Tyr240Cys), determine 80 - 
95% of the intermediate and low enzyme activity, and increase the risk 
for thiopurine-induced toxicity. The aim of our study was to optimize a 
simple genotyping method to identify main TPMT alleles and to deter -
mine the frequency of these changes in the Polish population. We test -
ed 37 of IBD patients treated with thiopurine drugs and 100 controls. 
Following a PCR protocol, fragments of exon 4, 6 and 9 of TPMT gene 
enclosing codon 80, 154 and 240, respectively, were analyzed using 
pyrosequencing. The results were compared with those obtained by 
standard sequencing. Identification of these sequence variants using 
pyrosequencing is highly sensitive and less time consuming compared 
to standard sequencing or restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP). It can be easily integrated in diagnostic testing. Moreover, we 
found a TPMT*3A allele frequency of 8,1 % in IBD patients compared 
to 3,0 % among general Polish population. The frequency of TPMT*3C 
allele in heterozygote is of 2,7% in IBD patients and 0,0% in controls. 
TPMT*2 allele was not identified either in patients or the Polish control 
group.
P09.135  Quality control for large-scale high throughput 
mRNA isolation and transcriptome analyses of subjects of the Rotterdam study
M. J. Peters , M. P. Jhamai, F. Rivadeneira, J. B. J. van Meurs, A. G. 
Uitterlinden;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Within the Rotterdam Study (RS), Genome-Wide Asso -
ciation Studies have successfully identified genomic regions associ -
ated with several diseases and traits. To identify the genes involved 
we will study genotype-dependent expression profiles of blood mRNA 
in 2,000 subjects, but first evaluated quality of transcriptomes of 96 
RS participants.
Materials & Methods: Whole blood cells have been collected for 
~2,000 RS subjects. RNAs were isolated (Qiagen PAXgene-tubes), 
amplified and labelled (Ambion Illumina TotalPrep), and hybridized to 
the Illumina Whole-Genome Expression Beadchips (HT-12). For nor -
malization and analysis, the lumi package of Bioconductor was used 
(Du et al.,2007).
Results: For the pilot of 96 RS subjects 90.6% had sufficient quality 
(RIN > 7.0) and RNA yield (>1.0ug). After amplification, 98.9% had a 
cRNA yield > 5.0ug. A total of 70 samples were hybridized to 6 Illumina 
WG Expression Beadchips, containing 48,775 probes. After variance-
stabilizing transformation and quantile-normalization, 3 samples (low 
intensities) and 25,386 unexpressed probes (p < 0.01) were excluded. 
The remaining 67 samples did not cluster by beadchip, date of blood 
collection, the person who collected the blood, nor the person who 
isolated the RNAs. Age and gender were not found to influence the 
expression profiles.
Discussion: In this pilot set-up we detected no biases in transcriptomes 
during sample collection, preparation or hybridization, consequently Complex traits and polygenic disorders27
transcriptome analyses of further samples is warranted. On the long 
run, we will try to replicate earlier reported expression quantitive trait 
loci (eQTLs) from lymphocytes, while for 4 RNAs microarray-data will 
be compared to RNA-seq transcriptome-data (generated with Illumina-
GAII). 
P09.136  tRP channels: a case-control association study with 
migraine
O. Carreño1,2, R. Corominas1,2, M. J. Sobrido3,2, J. Pardo4, J. Fernández-
Morales5, J. M. Fernández-Fernández6, P. Pozo-Rosich5, B. Cormand1,2, A. 
Macaya7;  
1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain, 2CIBER Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, 
3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Comostela, 
Galicia, Spain, 4Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago 
de Compostela, Galicia, Spain, 5Headache Unit, Neurology Department, 
Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 6Laboratory 
of Molecular Physiology and Channelopathies, Department of Experimental 
and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 
7Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Migraine is a common episodic, chronic and disabling cephalea with 
a complex inheritance that is caused by the interaction among mul -
tiple genes and environmental factors. The fact that rare monogenic 
forms of the disorder are caused by mutations in genes involved in ion 
transport point at these genes as potential candidates to underlie also 
the common forms of migraine. Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) 
channels constitute a heterogeneous family of cationic non-selective 
channels that work as cellular sensors, playing critical roles in a num -
ber of physiological processes such as touch, vision, olfaction or ther -
mo- and osmosensation. TRP channels have been involved in several 
neurological disorders including Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2C, Gua -
manian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and mucolipidosis type IV. We 
have studied the possible contribution of 14 genes of the TRP super-
family ( TRPA1, TRPC1, TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC5, TRPC7, TRPM4, 
TRPM6, TRPM7, TRPM8, TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPV3, TRPV4 ) to mi -
graine through a case-control association study with 192 single nu -
cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We genotyped 555 migraine patients 
(124 males and 431 females, 323 migraine with aura -MA- and 232 
migraine without aura -MO-) and 555 controls. Nominal associations 
were identified with 11 of these genes, but none of them overcame 
multiple testing corrections. However, we identified a risk haplotype for 
migraine in the TRPC4 gene, while TRPC1, TRPM6  and TRPM8  con-
tained susceptibility haplotypes to MO and TRPM4, TRPV4, TRPV3 
and TRPV1  to MA. These results await replication in a second Spanish 
case-control sample, currently underway.
P09.137  the study of association between polymorphism of 
genes responsible for th1/th2-polarization and tuberculosis in Russian population of siberia
A. Rudko1, A. An2, E. Bragina1, I. Saltikova2, V. Puzyrev1, M. Freidin1;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian 
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
The analysis of inherited basis of predisposition to tuberculosis (TB) is 
one of the most perspective and actively-developing field of genetics 
of infectious disease in humans. More than twenty candidate genes 
underlying the predisposition to TB were discovered; however, the ef -
fects of these genes vary in different populations. The aim of this study 
was to search for an association of SNP markers of genes respon -
sible for Th1/Th2-polarization with TB. The study was performed in 
a group of 304 Russians from Siberia (Tomsk Region, Russia) with 
TB and 160 healthy controls. We investigated genes encoding for cy -
tokine ligands and receptors (IL12B, IL12RB1, IFNG, IFNGR2, IL4, 
IL4RA, IL1B, IL1RN) and genes involved in intracellular transduction 
of immune signals (STAT-, SOCS-, PIAS-family genes). The following 
associations between polymorphic markers and TB were observed: 
IL12B  (rs3212227; p=0.044), PIASY  (rs760903; p=0.019), PIAS3 
(rs12756687; p=0.019). The SNPs in IL12B  and PIASY  were mainly 
associated with secondary TB (p=0.041 and p=0.027, respectively), 
whereas the polymorphism of PIAS3 was associated with primary TB 
(p=0.001). So, the genes of PIAS-family are new candidate genes 
of predisposition to TB. This observation can reflect the fact that the 
genes studied influence a balance between Th1/Th2-polarizating sig -nals and, therefore, determine predisposition to different clinical forms 
of TB. This hypothesis requires further confirmation.
P09.138  Validation of a novel chromosome 10p CNV associated with t ype 2 diabetes
J. L. Buxton1, R. G. Walters1, J. S. El-Sayed Moustafa1, L. J. M. Coin1, A. J. de 
Smith1, A. I. F. Blakemore1, P. Froguel1,2;  
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS 8090-Institute of 
Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.
The use of SNP genotyping data to identify copy number variants 
(CNVs) is potentially a highly effective approach for the detection of 
novel common and rare genetic variants associated with disease. 
In order to identify common CNVs associated with Type 2 diabetes 
(T2D), we applied our novel algorithm cnvHap to Illumina genotyping 
data from stage 1 of a GWAS in a French cohort, for approximately 
300,000 SNPs from 694 cases and 669 normoglycaemic controls. 
We have characterised in detail a duplication located on chromosome 
10p, encompassing a SNP for which increased copy number is as -
sociated with an increased risk of T2D (p value <10-10). The variation 
in copy number observed at this locus is caused by a combination of 
a small, 70bp duplication and a larger duplication involving all or part 
of a 20.8kb repeat block. Genotyping of the 70bp duplication reveals 
that, by itself, this variant does not explain the CN association of this 
SNP with T2D: the allele frequencies are 0.076 in normoglycaemic 
controls (n=909) and 0.074 in cases (n=890). Thus, it appears that 
the large duplication is responsible for the observed CN association 
at this locus, either solely or in combination with the 70bp duplication. 
Ongoing qPCR measurements to genotype the large duplication will 
enable confirmation of its association with T2D and interrogation of 
any possible interactions between the copy number state of the two 
duplications at this locus.
P09.139  Hsp70 genes polymorphisms: lack of association with Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Romania
O. Popa1, M. Dutescu2, M. Bojinca1, V. Bojinca1, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, F. 
Raicu1, C. Bara1, L. Popa3;  
1University „Carol Davila“, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Hematology Institute 
Prof. Dr. C.T. Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania, 3Grigore Antipa National Museum 
of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania.
Background: Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis (USpA) belongs to the 
group of spondyloarthritides, rheumatic inflammatory diseases caused 
by genetic, environmental and immunologic factors.
Heat shock proteins (hsp) genes polymorphisms have been investigat -
ed in different conditions with an immune component, including spon -
dyloarthritides. The +1267A/G polymorphism in hsp70-2 gene showed 
a significant association with USpA in Mexican Mestizo patients.
Objectives. The aim of this study was to investigate the association of 
two known polymorphisms (+190G/C and +1267A/G of the hsp70-1 
and hsp70-2 genes) with undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Roma -
nia.
Methods. 75 unrelated Romanian patients with USpA (diagnosed ac -
cording to the European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group criteria) 
and 100 healthy unrelated ethnically matched controls were involved 
in this study. Patients did not meet criteria for any of the well defined 
spondyloarthritides.
All subjects were genotyped for hsp70-1 +190 G/C (rs1043618) by 
TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay C_11917510_10 (Applied Biosys -
tems, USA) and for hsp70-2 +1267A/G (rs1061581) by PCR-RFLP 
with PstI restriction enzyme. Association tests for each polymorphism 
and haplotype frequency estimations were performed with software 
package PLINK v 1.07.
Results. Patients and controls groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equi -
librium for both polymorphisms. No association was found between 
any of the investigated polymorphisms and USpA. Three main haplo -
types were constructed, the most commune being 190G/1267A (65% 
in patients and 62% in controls). There was no association of these 
haplotypes with the disease.
Conclusion. The present study shows no association of hsp70-1 
+190G/C and hsp70-2 +1267A/G polymorphisms and derived haplo -
types with susceptibility to undifferentiated spondyloarthritis in Roma -
nian patients.Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
P09.140  mthfr gene polymorphism c677t associated with urinary 
tract anomalies in girls
J. Behunova1, L. Klimcakova2, L. Podracka1;  
1I. Department of Pediatrics, PJ Safarik University Children Hospital, Kosice, 
Slovakia, 2Department of Medical Biology, PJ Safarik University, Kosice, 
Slovakia.
Background: Folate deficiency could play a role not only in neural tube 
defects (NTD), but also in urinary tract anomalies (UTA) formation,. 
We evaluated the frequency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
(MTHFR) gene polymorphisms C677T and A1298C in patients with 
UTA and NTD, comparing them to healthy Slovak children.
Methods: The cohort comprised 515 children: 225 patients (132 UTA 
/85 boys/; 93 NTD /39 boys/ and 290 healthy newborns (147 boys). 
The patients´ DNA was analysed by PCR followed by enzyme restric -
tion. The newborns´ DNA isolated from dry blood spot was analysed 
by RT PCR. Genotype frequencies were compared with Pearson χ2or 
Fisher tests. Odds ratio was rated by Garts method, statistic signifi -
cance level was determined as ≤0,05.
Results: The Slovak population frequencies of T allele and TT geno -
type of C677T polymorphism were 25,17% and 6,90%; C allele and CC 
genotype of A1298C: 34,66% and 13,79%; no differences between the 
sexes. NTD patients: no association with MTHFR polymorphisms, no 
sex differences. Surprisingly, UTA patients showed significantly higher 
incidence of C677T polymorphism compared to the controls (T allele 
resp.TT genotype: 32,95%, p=0,019 (OR=1,9957; 95%CI[1,0086-
3,9486]) resp.12,88% p=0,044 (OR=1,4611 95%CI[1,0633-2,0078]). 
This finding was even more significant in girls with UTA: T allele resp.
TT genotype frequencies 42,55%, p<0,0001 (OR 95%CI 2,676 [1,629-
4,396]) resp. 19,20% p=0,008 (OR; 95%CI 3,9967;[1,2615-12,6931]) 
compared to the healthy girls. On the other hand, T allele in UTA boys 
represented 27,6%, compared to 42,6% in girls, p=0,0136. A1298C 
polymorphism in UTA group did not differ from the controls.Conclu -
sions: Despite no association of MTHFR gene polymorphisms with 
NTD in our patients, MTHFR gene polymorphism C677T was strongly 
associated with UT anomalies in girls. This might point to UT devel -
opmental sex-differences related to sex-specific processes of meth -
ylation, which might be limited due to reduced MTHFR activity. This 
hypothesis should be further tested on larger groups of patients.
P09.141  the pattern of genetic inheritance of voice registers
A. L. S. Figueiredo1, E. R. Paradela1, L. A. Agostinho1, C. Rocha1, G. L. 
Hadju2, S. R. Middleton1, C. L. A. Paiva1;  
1Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, 2Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ), Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
Little is known about the genetics of voice. Vocal registers arise from 
several anatomical configurations which lead to different vibratory pat -
terns produced by the vocal cords. The purpose of this retrospective 
study was to analyze the different vocal registers in 55 men (tenor, 
baritone and bass) and 45 women (soprano, mezzo-soprano and 
contralto), their descendants and ascending relatives, and to suggest 
a pattern of inheritance for vocal registers. These people were lyric 
singers of Teatro Municipal, and of two Schools of Music in Rio de Ja -
neiro (UFRJ and UNIRIO). The voice registers, when unknown, were 
determined by the lyric singer Maria Bezzi. In this work we observed 
the limited variability of the vocal registers and timbres within families, 
and found a high frequency of tenors (30%) and sopranos (28%) in 
the sample. We also found mezzo-sopranos (14%), baritones (11%), 
contraltos (3%), and basses (14%). Forty-five men out of 55 and 41 
women out of 45 knew their parents´ voice registers. Pedigree analysis 
showed a high similarity of timbres among men and women within the 
same family. We suggest a non-mendelian, poligenic and multifactorial 
inheritance. Each register and timbre has a wide “norm of reaction”. 
Therefore, an enormous complexity can exist in the interrelationships 
between genetic and environmental factors in determining traits such 
as voice registers and timbres. Additional genetic research is needed 
to further elucidate the relationship between vocal tract structure and 
function, mechanisms of voice and transmission of voice characteris -
tics, and this work is one relevant initial step.P09.142  Polymorphisms in WNt family genes are associated 
with nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate
I. Prane1,2, L. Piekuse1, I. Akota3, B. Barkane3, A. Krumina1, B. Lace2;  
1Department of Biology and microbiology, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical 
Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia, 3RSU Institute of Stomatology, Riga, 
Latvia.
Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP) is a common 
birth defect with a prevalence of 1/700 live birth worldwide. NSCLP is 
a complex trait most probably caused by multiple genetic loci interact -
ing with environmental factors and other genes. Genetic variations in 
several genes have been identified as contributing to NSCLP up to 
12-25%. Vast mayority of the genetic susceptibility loci have not been 
defined and study results are conflicting.
The WNT  (wingless-type MMTV integration site family) 
(MIM:165330/602864) family genes are involved in regulation of mid-
face development and upper lip fusion; therefore they are strong can -
didates for an etiological role in NSCLP.
The aim of the study was to confirm WNT3 and WNT9B  genes etiologi -
cal role in the development of NSCLP.
Materials and methods: 108 nonsyndromic cleft lip (CL) and cleft lip 
with cleft palate (CLP) cases and 182 healthy, unrelated and randomly 
selected individuals as controls from Latvia were genotyped for 29 
SNPs by APEX technology, developed by Tartu University, Estonia (A. 
Metspalu).
Association analyses of case-controls were applied by PLINK soft -
ware, after data genetic cleaning.
Results  All SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Three SNPs 
out of 29 (rs11655598, p<0.001; rs11653738, p=0.001; rs4968282, 
p=0.021) showed a significant association with nosyndromic CLP.
Conclusion: Our data confirms WNT  family genes role in the develop -
ment of nonsyndromic CLP. It was considered WNTs  interacts with 
FGFs  and BMPs  during embryonic development and failure in this 
pathway leads to formation of NSCLP.
J09.01  Association between the Polymorphism of SORL1  and 
Alzheimer ’s disease
J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1,2, M. Rezazadeh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2These authors contributed 
equally to this work, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The genetic epidemiology of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) 
remains a very active area of research, making it one of the most 
prolifically published areas in medicine and biology. Numerous puta -
tive candidate genes have been proposed. A recent study reported 
significant association of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) with 
multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes in 
SORL1 , a neuronal sortilin-related receptor protein, known to be in -
volved in the trafficking and processing of amyloid precursor protein. 
We examined the co-segregation of six statistically significant single-
nucleotide polymorphisms with the SORL1  gene, in a total of 150 pa -
tient samples, and 150 healthy controls from west northern Iran (East -
ern Azerbaijan). The samples were genotyped for the polymorphisms 
and the genotype frequencies were statistically analyzed. One of the 
SNPs was diagnosed to be individually linked to the gene of study, 
while the others were linked as haplotypes.
J09.02  No major genes in autoimmune thyroid diseases: 
complex segregation and epidemiological studies in a large pedigree from south of t unisia
N. Bougacha1, S. Ben Arab2, A. Rebai1, M. Mnif3, A. Maalej4, N. Charfi3, J. 
Jouida5, M. Abid3, H. Ayadi1;  
1Center of Biotechnology of sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, 
Tunisia, 3CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, 
Tunisia, 5Dispensaire Bir Hfay Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia.
Objective: The objective of this study is to determine epidemiological 
parameters and transmission mode of autoimmune thyroid diseases 
(AITDs) in a Tunisian district which harbour a unique multigenerational 
family with high prevalence of AITDs (Akr). STUDY DESIGN AND Set -
ting: 113 AITDs patients have been subjected to a regular clinical fol -
low-up for over 8 years (1992-2000).The coefficient of consanguinity, 
incidence and prevalence were determined. On the other hand, a com -
plex segregation analysis was performed in order to determine AITDs 
mode of inheritance. Results: We have assessed prevalence (43.6‰) Complex traits and polygenic disorders2
and incidence (7.2 per 1000 inhabitants) of AITDs in this district. The 
mean of consanguinity was estimated at 3% in Akr family and 2.1% in 
control group. Complex segregation analysis gave evidence for a poly -
genic character of theses diseases when compared to the full model 
(Chi2 (ddf=6)= 68.31; p<10-12). The plausible hypothesis of transmis -
sion was the co dominant Mendelian inheritance (Chi2 (ddf=3)=60.89; 
p<10-12).CONCLUSION: Such sample was of a particular utility to 
foresee transmission mode of AITDs genetic component. The high 
incidence of AITDs in such a district could be explained by the high 
rate of endogamy and consanguinity. A larger scale study should be 
performed in order to establish epidemiological parameters of AITDs 
in Tunisia.
J09.03  ADRB2 and GNB3 gene polymorphisms at children with 
bronchial asthma.
E. A. Isupova , M. A. Vinogradova, M. V. Zdanova, A. N. Lubashova, O. A. 
Konanova, A. N. Voitovich, P. B. Glazkov, G. A. Novik, V. I. Larionova;  
Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Background: β2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) connected with Gi-pro -
tein may contribute the development of allergic diseases and play role 
in bronchial asthma (BA) treatment influencing the response on β2-
agonists.
Aim: To study combination of polymorphisms Arg16Gly (R>G), Gln -
27Glu (Q>E) of ADRB2 gene and C825T polymorphism  in the gene 
encoding the G protein β3-subunit (GNB3) in boys and girls with BA 
and healthy children.
Methods: We included 273 Caucasian children; aged of 4-17 years; 
227 boys (82,6%) and 46 girls (17,4%) affected by BA. Control group 
included 148 healthy children; 77 boys (52,1%) and 71 girls (47,9%) 
aged of 4-17 years. The genetic polymorphism of ADRB2 and GNB3 
genes was performed by PCR-RFLP standard method.
Results: In group of children with BÀ the combination of genotypes 
RR/QQ/CT prevails comparing to healthy children (7,7% and 1,4%; 
ð=0,006; OR=5,36; 95%CI 1,28-22,55). The combination of genotypes 
GG/QE/CT was rarely in children with BÀ comparing to healthy chil -
dren (5,5% and 14,0% accordingly, ð=0,006; OR=2,61; 95%CI 1,37-
4,94).
Conclusions: Our results show that combination of genotypes and al -
leles ADRB2 and GNB3 are different in children with BÀ and healthy 
children.
Identification of genetic combination of “candidate” genes for BA may 
be useful for prediction of disease and patient’s response to treatment.
J09.04  Association of the CYP2J2*G0T  promoter 
polymorphism with skin allergy in females
L. I. Selezneva , G. F. Mukhammadieva, A. U. Shagalina, A. B. Bakirov;  
Ufa Research Institute of Occupational Health and Human Ecology, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
Cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP2J2 , metabolizes arachidonic acid 
to epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). These eicosanoids exert anti-in -
flammatory, vasodilator, anti-thrombotic and antioxidant affects. The 
G50T  promoter polymorphism in the CYP2J2  gene was found to be 
associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease (Spiecker, 
2004; Borgel, 2008) and bronchial asthma (Polonikov, 2007). In the 
present study we investigated the association of the CYP2J2*G50T  
polymorphism with the risk of allergic disorders in patients from Re -
public Bashkortostan (Russia). A total of 468 subjects were recruited 
into this study, including 116 patients with allergic asthma, 58 with non -
allergic asthma, 70 patients with allergic rhinitis, 64 with allergic skin 
disorders (contact dermatitis, hives, eczema) and 160 controls. The 
frequencies of the CYP2J2*C50T  genotypes did not differ significantly 
between patients with allergic, nonallergic asthma, allergic rhinitis and 
controls. The frequencies of the CYP2J2*G*T  genotypes were 6,9% 
in patients with allergic asthma, 5,2%- nonallergic asthma, 7,6% - al -
lergic rhinitis and 9,5% in controls. The frequencies of the CYP2J2*T*T  
genotypes were 0,9%, 0%, 1,5% and 0,9%, respectively. Women 
with skin allergy had a higher prevalence of the CYP2J2*G*T  geno -
type (17,6%) than the gender-matched control group (6,3%, χ2=4,92; 
p=0,027; OR=1,32). No association was observed for skin allergy 
in males. Thus, CYP2J2*G50T  polymorphism may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of skin allergy in females. Further research is needed to 
obtain more comprehensive results.J09.05  contribution of the mHc class iii region to the 
predisposing role of mHc class ii haplotypes in type 1 diabetes
Z. Banlaki1, N. Hosszufalusi1, P. Panczel1, E. Pozsonyi2, A. Hosso2, K. Rajczy2, 
G. Fust1, A. Szilagyi1;  
13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary, 2National Blood Transfusion Service, Department of Immunogenetics, 
Budapest, Hungary.
Relationship between the human MHC region and type 1 diabetes 
(T1D) has been widely investigated and susceptibility to the disease 
has been linked to class II alleles. Recent data indicate that other 
genes located beyond the class II region may have modifying effect 
on genetic predisposition to T1D, however, the high frequency of the 
extended ancestral haplotypes in this region hinders the precise lo -
calization of the gene variants which are responsible for the observed 
increased risk.
In order to evaluate the role of genes in class III and class I regions, 
we collected 42 Hungarian families with at least one affected offspring. 
Beside HLA-typing, genotype of five polymorphisms and copy number 
of C4 genes located in the MHC III region was determined. Statisti -
cal analysis was performed applying transmission disequilibrium test 
and chi-square test in a case-control design. As control, 48 Hungarian 
families with no T1D child were used.
Our data clearly established the previously known class II risk haplo -
types, and furthermore we found that the odds ratio of the class II risk 
alleles, e.g. DQ8-DR4 differed according to the linked MHC III haplo -
types. Our results did not show any influence of the different alleles 
located at the MHC I region.
In conclusion alleles in the MHC class III region may have modify -
ing role on the major susceptibility determinants of T1D located in the 
class II region. These results may contribute to a more precise deter -
mination of individual risk to T1D and may allow the identification of the 
responsible gene variants.
J09.06  Association of eNOs rs2070744 polymorphism with diabetic nephropathy in diabetes type ii patients. 
M. Koptides ;  
University of Nicosia, Dept of Life and Health Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Diabetic Nephropathy (DN) due to type II diabetes is the leading cause 
of End Stage Renal Failure. Epidemiological data suggest that there 
is heterogeneity among type II diabetes patients in different popula -
tions, which may be partly explained by genetic predisposition to the 
development of renal and cardiovascular complications of diabetes. 
However, the molecular mechanisms have yet to be elucidated. Poten -
tial candidate genes include the RAAS, and the endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) genes. The eNOS is involved in several processes 
and its dysfunction may lead to diabetes complications, including DN.
We assessed the association of eNOS polymorphisms T-786C, Glu -
298Asp and 4a/b with type II DN patients. Study subjects comprise of 
40 normoalbuminuric diabetes type II (T2DM) patients with duration 
over 5 years and without antihypertensive treatment and 30 T2DM pa -
tients with DN. Genotyping was performed by Real Time PCR melting 
curve analysis and/or PCR-RFLP.
The frequencies of the eNOS genotypes CC, TC and TT were 0.2, 
0.3 and 0.5 respectively, in the control group and 0.17, 0.6 and 0.23 
respectively in the case group. Our data showed that the combined fre -
quencies of the eNOS TC and CC genotypes were significantly higher 
in T2DM patients with DN (0.77) compared to T2DM patients without 
DN (0.5) ( P = 0.0362 using Fisher’s Exact Test, 95%CI = 1.037-2.163). 
No statistically significant differences were observed for Glu298Asp 
and 4a/b polymorphisms or the mutant haplotype -786C/298Asp be -
tween the two groups.
Our results suggest a potential association between the mutant -786C 
allele and DN among T2DM patients.
J09.07  Risk genotypes in scN5A and ANK2 genes for 
hypertrophy in patients with severe arrhythmias
A. Vasku1, M. Raudenska1, D. Honsova1, T. Novotny2, J. Bienertova-Vasku1, M. 
Kozak2, P. Kala2, J. Spinar2;  
1Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine,Department of Pathophysiology, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Internal Cardiology Medicine, Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, Complex traits and polygenic disorders20
Czech Republic.
Purpose: The aim of the study was to evaluate possible association 
of two polymorphisms in long QT genes (C5457T in SCN5A gene and 
T3579C in ANK2 gene) with hypertrophy in patients with implantable 
cardiovertor defibrillator after severe arrythmia episodes.
Methods: Genotypes of the polymorphisms were determined in a sam -
ple of 33 Czech patients, aged 62 ± 8 years with implantable cardio -
vertor defibrillator for severe arrhythmias (85% patients with ventricle 
fibrillation, 15% with ventricle flutter, EF= 35±12 %, with hypertrophy 
confirmed in 48 % of patients).
Results: We observed a significantly lower occurrence of hypertrophy 
in patients with CT genotype of T3579C polymorphism in ANK2 gene 
compared to CC+TT genotypes of the polymorphism (odds ratio=0.56, 
P=0.02, with sensitivity of 30%, specifity of 60%). The CT genotype 
of C5457T polymorphism in SCN5A was associated with higher risk 
of hypertrophy in comparison with CC genotype (odds ratio = 4.25, 
P=0.04; sensitivity=33%, specifity 100%). A significant difference in 
interventricular septum diameter between these two genotypes in 
SCN5A gene was proved (P=0.005). When both polymorphisms were 
tested simultaneously, a significant risk for all other associated geno -
type combinations compared to CT(SCN5A)CT+CC(ANK2) genotypes 
was found (OR=6.19, P=0.02,sensitivity =65%, specifity = 77%).
Conclusions: In patients with severe arrhythmias with necessity of im -
plantable cardiovertor defibrillator, interactions of long QT genes vari -
ability can be expected. Some combinations of these genotypes can 
be related to hypertrophy in these patients.
J09.08  MTHFR, F2 and F5 genotyping in hemodialysis patients 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina
N. Lojo - Kadric , L. Kapur, J. Ramic, K. Bajrovic;  
Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
MTHFR (methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase) thermolabile polymor -
phism (677C-T mutation) is associated with several diseases such as 
homocysteinuria, thrombosis, and, among others, renal function. F2 
(coagulation factor II, prothrombin) 20210G-A gene mutation is associ -
ated with an increased risk of venous thrombosis, as well as F5 (co -
agulation factor V Leiden) 1691G-A gene mutation.
In this study, we genotyped 40 patients with total renal failure which 
currently undergo hemodialysis. For materials we used 6 ml of whole 
blood for DNA isolation. Samples were genotyped for MTHFR 667C-T, 
F2 20210G-A and F5 1691G-A mutation by RFLP method with HindIII 
and HinfI enzyme, respectively.
Regarding MTHFR genotypes in our sample we found 45% of CC - wild -
type genotype, 37.5% of CT genotype and 17.5% of TT genotype. Al -
lele frequencies for C and T allele are 0.6375 and 0.3625, respectively. 
In our sample we found only one heterozygote (GA) for F2 20210G-A 
and F5 1691G-A mutation. No mutant homozygote (AA) was found. Al -
lele frequency for G allele in both F2 and F5 gene was 0.9875 and for 
A allele was only 0.0125. After genotyping, we performed chi-square 
test on our frequencies compared to NCBI SNP database, and found 
no statistical significance between our population and world population 
in allele frequencies (MTHFR - p=0.105; F2 - p=0.886; F5 - p=0,841). 
The most common haplotype (MTHFR, F2, F5) for these three genes 
in our sample was wildtype haplotype - CCGGGG (45%), followed with 
CTGGGG (32.5%) and TTGGGG (17.5%). Rare haplotypes in our 
sample were CTGGGA (0.25%) and CTGAGG (0.25%).
J09.09  Angiotensin-converting enzyme activity and 
polymorphism A1166c of the angiotensin ii type 1 receptor at 
hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
I. R. Minniakhmetov1, A. Baygildina2, D. Islamgulov1, F. Kamilov2, T. 
Khabelova2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) is a group of clini -
cally similar diseases that occur throughout Eurasia. HFRS includes 
diseases such as Korean hemorrhagic fever, epidemic hemorrhagic 
fever and nephropathia epidemica. HFRS begins as a flu-like illness 
and may progress to shock, bleeding, and renal failure. Mortality is 6 
to 15%.
The research aimed to explore the changes of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) blood activity and polymorphism A1166C (rs5186) of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor as disease predictor at hemorrhagic 
fever with renal syndrome.
The studied groups included 409 patients with HFRS and 52 healthy 
controls. ACE blood activity was determined by Bühlmann ACE kinetic 
test. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes 
by standard phenol-chloroform method. Genotyping was performed by 
the PCR-RFLP technique.
It was demonstrated that the ACE blood activity increased at HFRS 
and these changes were more significant at more severe form of 
disease. ACE blood activity depends on the form, and the period of 
HFRS: nonsignificant decrease is observed only in the feverish period 
of mild or severe form without complications. In severe form signifi -
cant changes of ACE activity were observed, in complicated form - 
stable high activity during all disease. Analysis of angiotensin II type 
1 receptor polymorphism A1166C demonstrated that neither *A1166 
and *C1166 alleles nor *A1166/*A1166 and *C1166/*C1166 genotypes 
were associated with HFRS severity.
High ACE activity is not adaptive reaction due to defect in angiotensin 
II binding and it is an adequate metabolic response of an organism to 
endotheliotropic virus action.
J09.10  Genetic markers of predisposition to development of the 
metabolic syndrome in children with obesity.
P. Sinitsyn1, A. Khmyrova2, A. Voytovich2, E. Petriaykina3, T. Razorenova4, M. 
Shcherbakova1, V. Larionova2;  
1The Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The 
St-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 3The Morozov children‘s city clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 4The Museum of Military Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Increasing evidence suggests that there is genetic basis for the meta -
bolic syndrome.
Objective: To study a contribution of candidate genetic markers in de -
velopment of major metabolic syndrome components in children with 
obesity.
Study groups: 83 children aged 7-18 years old (13,3±0.2 yr) with vary -
ing degree (I-IV) of obesity. Methods: Body mass index, waist circum -
ference, blood pressure, and level of triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, 
and glucose, were measured. ACE I/D, APOA1 G-75A, APOA5 S19W, 
APOC3 Sst1, APO E  and W64R ADRB3 genetic polymorphism were 
identified using PCR-RFLP method.
Results: The genotype analysis showed that 33 out of 58 (57.0%) 
mono- and heterozygous carriers of D allele of ACE gene had a high 
blood pressure. More than half of heterozygous carriers of either al -
leles - 19W ApoA5 (11 children - 69.0%), -75A ApoA1 (15/56.0%), 
S2 ApoC3 (9/53.0%) and ε4 ApoE (20/83.3%) - presented with lipid 
disorders typical to metabolic syndrome (hypertriglyceridemia and/or 
hypoalphacholesterolemia). In 4 out of 10 (40.0%) children with RW 
genotype of ADRB3 gene presented with hyperglycemia and/or hy -
pertriglyceridemia. It was found that the alleles accumulation (D ACE, 
19W ApoA5,-75A ApoA1, S2 Apo C3 and ε4 ApoE) correlated with an 
increase in number of clinical criteria of metabolic syndrome (r > 0.8, 
p<0.01).
Conclusion: Accumulation of rare alleles of genes determining lipid 
metabolism, level of blood pressure, and body mass index may be 
considered as molecular basis of genetic predisposition to extreme 
manifestation of metabolic syndrome.
J09.11  A New Research on Genetic Predisposition of microtia: Endothelial Nitricoxide synthase (NOs3) and myeloperoxidase (mPO) might be responsible of the ethiology of microtia
B. Buyukgural1, T. Sever2, M. Bekerecioglu1, S. Pehlivan2;  
1Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgery, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University Faculty of 
Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey.
Objective.  The aim of this study was to investigate the links between 
Endothelial nitricoxide (NOS3) synthase, Myeloperoxidase (MPO) 
variants and microtia.
Methods. Nineteen microtia patients and 40 healthy controls were 
included in the study. We studied the polymorphisms of MPO (-463) 
and NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and VNTR in intron4) genes using the 
PCR and/or PCR-RFLP method.
Results.  Significant differences were not determined for MPO (-463) Complex traits and polygenic disorders21
polymorphism from the genotype distribution and allele frequency 
between microtia and healthy control groups. In contrast, significant 
differences were determined in the NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and 
VNTR in intron 4) polymorphisms between microtia and healthy control 
groups ( P < 0.05).
Conclusion. According to our literature searches our study is the first 
analyze of the polymorphisms of NOS3 (+894 polymorphism and 
VNTR in intron 4) on microtia patients. Our data suggest that NOS3 
gene polymorphisms might play important role on the etiyopathogen -
esis of Microtia in Turkish patients. The findings of the current study 
highlight the necessity for prospective longitudinal studies in elucidat -
ing the relative contributions of various factors in diseases with a mul -
tifactorial etiology where there is interplay among genetic susceptibility 
and exogeneus factors. 
J09.12  the polimorphism of cytokine genes in patients with 
multiple sclerosis
A. Khusainova1, T. Nasibullin1, I. Tuktarova1, O. Zaplakhova2, R. Magjanov2, K. 
Bakhtiyarova2, O. Mustafina1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical 
University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
The multiple sclerosis (MS) - the heaviest of known central nervous 
system diseases- is one of the most topical questions nowadays The 
etiology of MS is complex, with strong evidence implicating both en -
vironmental and genetic causes. Many researchers admits that the 
leading importance in development of immunopatological process at 
MS is an infringement of balance proinflammatory (IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, 
IL-12, TNFa) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4, IL-10, TNFb) cytokines. In 
this study we analyzed the associations of MS with polymorphisms 
of IL6 (-572G>C), IL10 (- 627C>A) and IL12p40  (1159A>C) gene in 
Russian of Bashkortostan. DNA of 133 MS patients and 239 controls 
were analyzed by
polymerase chain reaction. It was revealed, that in MS patients the 
IL6(-572)*G/*G genotype frequency was higher than in controls 
(89.47% vs. 71.13%, p<0.001, OR=3.45). Concerning polymorphism 
- 627C>A of IL10 gene we couldn’t find differences of the genotype 
and allele frequencies between MS patients and controls The associa -
tion analysis of IL12p40  gene polymorphic marker with MS has shown 
that at male the *C/*C genotype is connected with the lowered risk of 
development MS (OR=0.12). Our study confirms the involvement of 
cytokines in MS development.
J09.13  sPi polymorphism of collagen i type gene as a marker 
of undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia in children with 
myopia
R. Bannour1, A. Badmaeva2, V. Brezhesky1, V. Larionova1;  
1Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Russia, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Russia, 
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Axial myopia develops due to incorrect intrauterine development of 
the eye (congenital myopia) or the excessive growth of the eyeball. It 
occurs in course of different hereditary connective tissue syndromes 
but more often in undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia. Col -
lagen genes (COL) are candidate to associate with development of 
myopia. OBJECTIVE: to study the association of SpI polymorphism of 
gene COL1A1 and children myopia with dysplasia of connective tis -
sue. STUDY POPULATION: 40 children (80 eyes) aged 5-18 years (15 
girls, 25 boys). Clinical eye and dental examination and genetic testing 
of SpI polymorphism in COL1A1 were done. RESULTS: Myopia was 
diagnosed in 7 children (14 eyes): 5 children (10 eyes) with axial myo -
pia 2,75-7,50 DPT and 2 children (4 eyes) with refractive myopia 3,25-
6,50 DPT. Dental abnormalities were detected in 6 children and other 
bite abnormalities in 25 children. 9 children hadn’t any abnormalities. 
Genotype distribution of COL1A1 revealed that SS genotype was in 1 
child, Ss in 13 children and ss in 26 children. In these 26 children with 
genotype ss: 4 children had low and middle degree of myopia. Among 
children caring Ss genotype 2 children had middle and severe myo -
pia in the absence of dental abnormalities, 2 children with the same 
genotype had bite abnormalities, 1 child had a severe myopia 7, 0 
DPT and dental abnormalities. CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that 
the polymorphism in genes of collagen can influence on appearance 
of myopia with dental abnormalities and may be with other markers of undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia.
J09.14  Psychological aspects of longevity and their genetic 
correlates
D. L. Spivak1, T. Smirnova2, A. Zakharchuk3, I. Spivak2;  
1Human Brain Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Municipal Gerontological Medico-social 
Center of St.Petersburg, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Psychological functioning of 150 healthy patients of gerontologi -
cal clinic, aged 60 to 94 years, was studied (m=76), on the levels of 
neuroticization (both reactive and personal), psychological defence 
mechanisms (negation, exclusion, regression, compensation, projec -
tion, replacement, intellectualization, reactive formation), and intrinsic 
religiosity (along with features of altered states of consciousness). Si -
multaneously a genetic survey was carried out, directed at detection 
of I/D polymorphism of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and A1/
A2 (C102T) polymorphism of gene of serotonine receptor 5HTR2A. 
Correlation between ACE and neuroticization was demonstrated by 
means of factor analysis, as well as with functioning of the cardiovas -
cular system. Another correlation linked serotoninergic system with the 
age of the patients, as well as the level of their intrinsic religiosity. In 
this way, existence of links between the genetic basis of longevity on 
the level of major functional systems, and psychological processes, 
peculiar for it, was corroborated. The study was supported by Russian 
Foundation for basic Research, grant 09-06-00012a; and by Program 
of Basic Research of the Presidium of Russian Academy of Sciences 
‘Fundamental Sciences for Medicine’.
J09.15  the study of  CYP21A2 gene mutations in Russian 
woman with recurrent miscarriages
N. S. Osinovskaya1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, I. Sultanov2;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Recurrent miscarriage (RM) which is known as one of the three or 
more repeated and spontaneous pregnancy losses represents an ac -
tual problem of modern obstetrics. The mild, nonclassic form of the 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is known as a common cause 
of RM (about 25%). CAH is a common autosomal recessive disease 
most frequently due to mutations in the CYP21A2  gene. CAH is re -
sponsible for different forms of virilization of external genitalia in new -
born girls and, in its most severe form, if not treated properly can be 
lethal. Patients with the mild, nonclassic form of the disease have less 
severe symptoms complicated with the symptoms of postnatal andro -
gen excess. Moreover, mutations of CYP21 can lead to various repro -
ductive disorders in females so they can be found in RM patients. By 
means of PCR and RFLP analysis 36 unrelated females with RM and 
48 unrelated donors were screened for 11 the most common mutations 
of CYP21A2 gene including gene deletion ( delA2 ), large gene con -
versions (including 2 or 3 exons), G110del8nt, P30L , I2splice , I172N , 
V281L , Q318X , R356W , E6cluster, P453S  .
Mutant alleles were detected in 1 (2%) donor (gene conversion, in -
cluding V281L and Q318X) and in 6 (17%) RM patients. 3 Q318X  het-
erozygotes and 3 heterozygotes for three other mutations ( I2splice,  
R356W, delA2) were registered.Thus according to our data CYP21A2  
mutations are responsible for the significant proportion of recurrent 
miscarriages. Analysis of  CYP21A2 mutations in the females with RM 
could be recommended for revealing patients with the mild, nonclassic 
form of CAH.
J09.16  Are Endothelial Nitric Oxide (NOs3) gene polymorphisms 
important in Rheumatoid Artritis ? 
S. Pehlivan1, A. Aydeniz2, M. Pehlivan3, T. Sever1, S. Gursoy2, S. Oguzkan 
Balci1;  
1Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3Gaziantep 
University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, GAZIANTEP, 
Turkey.
Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory joint de -
struction. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS3) is involved in key 
steps of immune response. The aim of this study was to explore the 
association between NOS3 gene polymorphisms and clinical param -Complex traits and polygenic disorders22
eters in patients with RA.
Methods: Genomic DNA was obtained from the peripheral blood of 
65 patients with RA and 70 unrelated healthy controls. We genotyped 
NOS3 polymorphisms (+894, intron 4 VNTR) using PCR and/or PCR-
RFLP method. Also clinical parameters, demographic data of the pa -
tients and response to drug treatment were recorded. All data were 
analyzed using SPSS version 14.0 for windows.
Results: NOS3 (+894) TT genotype frequencies were significantly 
higher among RA patients (p=0.029 for TT) than control ones, where -
as no associations with NOS3 (VNTR) polymorphisms. The observed 
genotype counts was not deviated from those expected according to 
the Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (p>0.05). A significant association 
was detected between these polymorphisms and response to treat -
ment in anti TNFα treatment subgroup (improvement in DAS28 scores 
in RA patients anti-TNFα and DMARD treatments) (p=0.004).
Conclusions: In the present study, we made an investigation to es -
tablish to the best of our knowledge for the first time an association 
between two well-established polymorphisms of the NOS3 gene poly -
morphisms and clinical parameters in RA. The present study showed 
that two common polymorphisms of the NOS3 gene were significantly 
associated with occurrence of RA.
J09.17  the genetics of suicide Behaviour
S. Ulivi1, P. d‘Adamo1, P. Gasparini1, M. De Vanna2, D. Carlino2;  
1Medical Genetics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS-Burlo 
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
Suicide is one of the leading causes of death worldwide (Giegling et 
al., 2009). Guided by the twin-, adoption-, and family-based evidence 
suggesting the existence of genetic diathesis for suicidal behaviors, 
molecular studies began to look for specific genetic components of 
this diathesis. The candidate-based association approach has been 
the dominant strategy, and close to 50 candidate genes have been 
investigated. Spurred by the wealth of neurobiologic knowledge, mo -
lecular geneticists focused primarily on neurotransmitter systems and 
less on genes outside of these systems.
Over the past 30 years, indirect evidence for the existence of a genetic 
component in the suicidal diathesis has come largely from family, twin, 
and adoption studies.
In order to uderstand if there was association between suicide behav -
iour and genetic factors, we choose 6 isolated populations located in 
North Italy, in Friuli Venezia Giulia.
Suicidal ideation was defined on the Hamilton Rating Scale for De -
pression (HRSD; Hamilton, 1960), it is a widely used interviewer-ad -
ministered measure of the depressive symptom severity. The HRSD 
suicide item consists of 4 ratings of suicidal behavior: 0 (“absent”), 1 
(“feels life is not worth living or any thoughts of possible death to self”), 
2 (“wishes he were dead”), 3 (“suicidal ideas or gestures”), or 4 (“at -
tempts at suicide”).
We analysed and genotyped 871 people and the age range was from 
18 years old to 65 years old (Akyuz et al.2005). Whole-genome ge -
notyping (Illumina - Infinium ) and association analysis (ProbABEL) 
showed promising preliminary results.
P10 Evolutionary and population genetics, 
and Genetic epidemiology
P10.01  From the diagnosis of Autosomal Recessive disorders 
to the identification of “clusters” of affected patients, up to 
population prevention programs
M. Giovannucci Uzielli1, G. Scarselli1, L. Di Medio1, N. Dayan2, E. Gambineri1, 
E. Lapi3, S. Guarducci3;  
1Department of Paediatrics - University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Genetic 
Science, Florence, Italy, 3Ospedale Anna Meyer, Florence, Italy.
In Italy, as well as in other Countries of the old Europe, the Diagnosis 
of Genetic Disorders with Autosomal Recessive inheritance often con -
cerns villagers of small communities, quite closed and with high rate of 
consanguinity, due to historical and geographical reasons. The iden -
tification of real clusters  of subjects affected by specific AR disorders 
must be carefully pursued to realize prevention programs at population 
levels, by the identification of heterozygote individuals.Here we report three examples of clusters identified in different Ital -
ian regions, starting from a first patient referred for a clinical genetic 
evaluation.
In the geographical area of Brindisi (Puglia region) we made diagnosis 
of 3M dwarfism in a child of consanguineous parents. Ten other af -
fected people were later identified, by clinical and molecular screening 
of CUL7 gene. The number of identified heterozygotes is increasing 
thanks to a collaborative program with the local Medical Doctors.
In the Basilicata region, we made diagnosis of Roberts syndrome (co -
hesinopathy), in two subjects of the same sibship, with consanguine -
ous parents. The molecular screening of ESCO2 gene allowed identifi -
cation of a “local” mutation in a small geographical area.
The third cluster  of patients affected by a metabolic disorder, the Mu -
colipidosis III, was identified in Calabria, in a little village with less than 
100 inhabitants, and about 90% of families with the same surname. 
Our clinical and molecular study was stimulated by the diagnosis of 
this disorder in two “unrelated” girls, with different clinical expression 
but considerably increased levels of lysosomal hydrolases.
P10.02  AcE i/D polymorphism and human longevity - croatian 
senescence study
M. Zajc Petranović1, Ž. Tomas1, P. Krajačić1, J. Miličić1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, S. 
Tomek-Roksandić2, N. Smolej-Narančić1;  
1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Dr Andrija Štampar 
Institute of Public Health - Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia.
The insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism of the angiotensin-1-con -
verting enzyme gene (ACE) has been suggested to be associated 
with disease and longevity but the findings are confounding. There are 
indications that the ACE DD genotype predisposes to several cardio -
vascular diseases including hypertension but it is more frequent in the 
aging populations. We studied ACE I/D polymorphism and hyperten -
sion in Croatian senescent population (85-101 yrs; N=300) where we 
found no genotype association with hypertension, while earlier results 
in young Croatian adults (18-40 yrs) showed such relationship for DD 
genotype. Of the investigated risk factors for hypertension, age, fe -
male sex (OR=2.88; 95%CI=1.49-5.56) and triglyceride concentration 
showed significant influence, while BMI and cholesterol concentration 
did not. Further, we tested the association between ACE I/D polymor -
phism and longevity in Croatian population. For comparison we used 
previously reported frequencies for the general Croatian population 
aged 18-80 yrs. The genotype and allele distributions differed signifi -
cantly between two age cohorts with DD genotype being more frequent 
in senescents than in the younger cohort (42.5% vs. 22.1%), and with 
D allele frequencies of 61.0% vs. 49.4%. This finding supports the as -
sociation of ACE I/D polymorphism with longevity while controversial 
results have been obtained in other European populations. The es -
tablished ACE I/D allele and genotype frequencies fit into the pattern 
of increasing gradient of D and DD frequencies in senescents from 
Northern to Southern Europe. Such genetic differences indicate that D 
allele - in addition to being CVD risk factor - might has some unrecog -
nized advantageous role in successful human ageing.
P10.03**  clear detection of ADIPOQ  locus as the major gene 
for plasma adiponectin: results of genome-wide association 
analyses including 4659 European individuals
P. Henneman1, I. M. Heid2, A. Hicks3, F. Kronenberg4, C. M. v. Dujn5;  
1LUMC Human Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology 
and Preventive Medicine, Regensburg University Medical Center, Regensburg, 
Germany, 3Institute of Genetics Medicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano 
(EURAC)., Bolzano, Italy, 4Division of Genetic Epidemiology; Department of 
Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology; Innsbruck Medical 
University,, Innsbruck, Austria, 5Department of epidemiology, Erasmus Medical 
Center., Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Objective. Plasma adiponectin is strongly associated with various 
components of metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascu -
lar outcomes. Concentrations are highly heritable and differ between 
men and women. We therefore aimed to investigate the genetics of 
plasma adiponectin in men and women.
Methods. We combined genome-wide association scans of three 
population-based studies including 4659 persons. For the replication 
stage in 13795 subjects, we selected the 20 top signals of the com -
bined analysis, as well as the 10 top signals with p-values less than 
1*10-4 for each the men- and the women-specific analyses. We further Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
selected 73 SNPs that were consistently associated with metabolic 
syndrome parameters in previous genome-wide association studies to 
check for their association with plasma adiponectin.
Results. The ADIPOQ  locus showed genome-wide significant p-values 
in the combined (p=4.27*10-24) as well as in both women- and men-
specific analyses (p=8.66*10-17 and p=2.49*10-11, respectively). None 
of the other 39 top signal SNPs showed evidence for association in the 
replication analysis. None of 73 SNPs from metabolic syndrome loci 
exhibited association with plasma adiponectin (p>0.01).
Conclusions. We demonstrated the ADIPOQ  gene as the only major 
gene for plasma adiponectin, which explains 8.7% of the phenotypic 
variance. We further found that neither this gene nor any of the meta -
bolic syndrome loci explained the sex differences observed for plasma 
adiponectin. Larger studies are needed to identify more moderate ge -
netic determinants of plasma adiponectin.
P10.04  concordance of different genetic markers in human 
population studies
N. Pojskic , D. Marjanovic, E. Silajdzic, L. Lasic, B. Kalamujic, L. Kapur;  
Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
A polymorphism of 10 Alu loci (A25, ACE, APO, B65, D1, FXIIIB, HS2.43, 
HS4.65, PV92 and TPA25), 15 autosomal STR loci (D3S1358, THO1, 
D21S11, D18S51, PENTA E, D5S818, D13S317, D7S820, D16S539, 
CSF1P0, PENT.D, vWA , D8S1179, TPOX, FGA) and 6 blood groups 
(Rh, MN, Duffy, Kidd, KELL and Lutheran, genotyped using PCR-RFLP 
and PCR-SSP methods) have been observed. Also, polymorphism of 
10 phenotypic traits (red colorblindness, green colorblindness, PTC 
testing, digital index, ear lobe type, midphalengeal hair, crooked little 
finger, tongue rolling, thumb distal extensibility, thumb proximal exten -
sibility) have been estimated within 300 individuals in human popula -
tions placed in 10 regions across Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Main goal was to compare validity of human population genetics analy -
ses implementing different type of genetic markers.
Classical population genetic analyses have been performed, such 
as deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, genetic diversity, Fst 
and genetic distance. Neighbor-Joining trees were constructed based 
on results of genetic distance analyses. In order to compare results 
of analysis based on different molecular and phenotypic markers we 
have implemented Mantel test for comparison of genetic distance re -
sults, then the statistical analysis for genetic diversity and genetic dif -
ferentiation comparisons, as well as inter-rater reliability test. Trees 
constructed on the basis of the different observed markers traits were 
compared using the tree distance methodology. Modest correlation 
between results of population genetics analyses based on different 
markers has been detected specially between biallelic markers. Strong 
and clear correlation between biallelic and multialleic markers has not 
been detected.
P10.05  Allele frequencies of apoliprotein E gene polymorphisms 
in western romanian population
L. Tamas , E. Seclaman, A. Anghel, C. Samoila;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of apoE alleles 
(ε2, ε3 and ε4) and the genotypes in elderly patients (age > 60 years) 
with symptoms suggestive for Alzheimer’s disease, from western Ro -
mania.
Method. 30 patients were selected based on patients’ history, collateral 
history from relatives, and the presence of characteristic neurological 
and neuropsychological features. For the genotyping we used Real-
Time PCR and melting curve analysis (ApoE ToolSet for LightCycler, 
Roche).
Results. We identified 58 apoE ε3 alleles (96,66%) and 2 apoE ε4 
alleles (3,33%). For two patients we had a heterozygous genotype (ε3/
ε4, 6,66%) and for the rest of the patients the genotypes were homo -
zygous (ε3/ε3, 93,33%). There was a good correlation between the 
heterozygous genotypes of the two patients and their symptomatology, 
however, even if the diagnostic of Alzheimer;s disease can not be ex -
cluded for the rest of the patients based only on apoE genotyping, for 
genetic investigation we need a more thorough selection of patients. 
Also the absence of the risk apoE allele, ε4, in correlation with other 
clinical and imagistic findings, may impose for some patients a change 
of diagnosis.P10.06**  Genome-based prediction of breast cancer risk in the 
general population: a modeling study based on meta-analyses of 
genetic association studies
M. van Zitteren1, J. B. van der Net1, A. N. Freedman2, C. M. van Duijn1, A. C. J. 
W. Janssens1;  
1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Division of 
Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute, MD, United 
States.
Background  Genome-wide association studies have identified novel 
susceptibility variants for breast cancer, which potentially can be used 
to predict breast cancer in asymptomatic women. This review and 
modeling study aimed to investigate the current and potential predic -
tive performance of testing at multiple genetic loci (genetic profiling).
Methods  Genetic profiles were simulated for a population of 10,000 
women, in which we assumed a breast cancer lifetime risk of 10%. 
Genetic profiles were based on polymorphisms from meta-analysis 
including, in separate scenarios, all polymorphisms or statistically sig -
nificant polymorphisms only. We additionally investigated the magni -
tude of the odds ratios (OR) for 1 to 100 hypothetical polymorphisms 
that would be needed to achieve similar discriminative accuracy as 
available prediction models (modeled range of area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve [AUC] 0.65-0.75).
Results Of the 71 polymorphisms that had been investigated in meta-
analyses, 26 showed nominally significant associations. AUC was 0.64 
for genetic profiles based on all 71 polymorphisms and 0.62 for the 26 
significant polymorphisms. Addition of 50 additional variants, each with 
risk allele frequencies of 0.30, would require an OR of 1.2 to increase 
this AUC to 0.65, 1.3 to increase AUC to 0.70 and 1.4 to increase AUC 
to 0.75. To achieve AUC of 0.75, even 100 additional variants would 
need ORs of 1.3 to 1.5 per allele, depending on risk allele frequen -
cies.
Conclusion  A substantially large number of genetic susceptibility vari -
ants need to be discovered and validated to improve the predictive 
performance beyond that of current breast cancer risk models.
P10.07   
Estimation of CFTR mutation carrier frequency based on known 
frequency of p.F0del in Iranian neonates
A. Alavi1, E. Heidary Arash1, K. Inanloo1, S. Banihosseini2, E. Elahi1;  
1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Students’ Scientific Research Center, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disease in 
many Caucasian populations. Approximately one in 2500 newborns in 
populations of European ancestry are affected, wherein the average 
carrier frequency is 1:25. The disease is caused by mutations in CFTR  
gene. Among the more than 1600 mutations identified in the causative 
CFTR  gene, the p.F508del allele is the most common worldwide. 
Among mutated alleles, the frequency of this allele exhibits a north -
west to southeast gradient, ranging from a high of 88% in Denmark to 
a low of approximately 16% in Iran. In the present study, we screened 
for p.F508del mutation in the DNA of 800 placental cord blood samples 
obtained from newborns from 4 geographical regions in Iran. Based 
on the number of carriers identified and the observation that this allele 
accounts for 16% of the CFTR mutated alleles of the Iranian popula -
tion, the frequency of carriers of CFTR mutations in Iran was calcu -
lated to be 0.037 (95% confidence level of 0.037+/- 0.016). This figure 
corresponds to 1:27, very close to the carrier frequency of European 
populations. This finding suggests that CF, contrary to conventional 
thinking, is a disease of considerable public health importance in Iran, 
and probably in other countries of the Middle East.
P10.08  Study on prevalence of cleft lip and cleft palate and effect of consanguinity among iranian population
H. Karimian , C. Azimi;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Clefts of the lip and palate are one of the most common 
congenital birth anomalies. Genetic factors play a great role in the eti -
ology of them and the high percentage of the consanguinity of the 
parents of the affected persons is one of the reasons. These defects 
not only make abnormal changes on appearance of the neonate, but 
make a lot of stress and psychological problems for the patients and Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
their families. Study on the prevalence of clefts, their risk factors and 
also genetic counseling for affected persons and their families can be 
a guideline for general population and probably reduce these anoma -
lies over the generations.
Methods: A total of 7374 pedigrees of all the patients admitted to the 
Department of Genetic, were studied during 2002-2005 and 99 pedi -
grees with the patients with cleft lip ± palate or isolated cleft palate 
were separated. The total number of cases among these 99 pedigrees 
was 136. The effects of consanguinity, positive family history and sex 
were investigated among cases.
Results: 70.8% of patients with syndromic clefts and 58.7% of patients 
with nonsyndromic CL±P had parents with consanguineous marriage. 
In addition 44.4% of patients with nonsyndromic CL±P had positive 
family history.
Conclusion:  In our population prevalence of nonsyndromic CL±P 
(95%CI) is estimated to be 7 in 1000 (5,9) and prevalence of non -
syndromic CP (95%CI) is estimated to be 3.1 in 1000 (1.8,4.4) and 
consanguinity of parents seems to have a significant role  (p=0.02) on 
prevalence of clefts.
P10.09  Recurrence of congenital heart defects in families
N. Øyen1,2, H. A. Boyd1, G. Poulsen1, J. Wohlfahrt1, P. K. A. Jensen1, M. 
Melbye1;  
1Dept Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen S, 
Denmark, 2Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland 
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Background Knowledge regarding the familial contribution to congeni -
tal heart defects (CHD) on an individual and population level is sparse. 
We estimated an individual’s risk of CHD given a family history of CHD, 
and the contribution of CHD family history to the total number of CHD 
in the population.
Methods and Results In a national cohort study, we linked all Danish 
residents to the National Patient Register, the Causes of Death Reg -
ister, the Danish Central Cytogenetic Register, and the Danish Fam -
ily Relations Database, yielding 1,763,591 persons born in Denmark, 
1977-2005 of whom, 18,708 persons had CHD. Individuals with CHDs 
were classified by phenotype. We estimated recurrence risk ratios 
(RRR) and population attributable risk. Among first degree relatives, 
RRR for heterotaxia was 79.1 (95% confidence interval 32.9-190), 
conotruncal defects 11.7 (8.0-17.0), atrioventricular septal defect 24.3 
(12.2-48.7); left 12.9 (7.48-22.2) and right ventricular outflow tract ob -
struction 48.6 (27.5-85.6), isolated atrial septal defect 7.1 (4.5-11.1), 
and isolated ventricular septal defect 3.4 (2.2-5.3). The overall RRR for 
same defect was 8.15 (6.95-9.55), whereas it was 2.68 (2.43-2.97) for 
different heart defects. Only 2.2% (4.2% when excluding chromosomal 
aberrations) of CHD in the population were attributed to CHD family 
history in first degree relatives.
Conclusions Specific CHDs showed highly variable but strong familial 
clustering in first degree relatives, ranging from 3-fold to 80-fold com -
pared to the population prevalence, whereas the cross-over risks be -
tween dissimilar CHD were weaker. Family history of any CHD among 
first degree relatives accounted for a small proportion of CHD in the 
population.
P10.10  inferences from the proportion of compound 
heterozygotes among affected offspring of consanguineous 
parents
L. P. Ten Kate , M. Teeuw, L. Henneman, M. C. Cornel;  
Dept. Clincal Genetics, Section Community Genetics, and EMGO Inst. for 
Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
It is well known that consanguineous parents have an increased risk 
of autosomal recessive diseases in their children. Although most of the 
affected children will show mutations in a homozygous state, some do 
present with two different mutations of the gene concerned.
We wondered what, if any, inferences could be made from the pro -
portion of these compound heterozygotes among affected children of 
consanguineous couples.
We showed that knowledge of (a) this proportion, (b) the inbreeding 
coefficient, and (c) the number and relative frequency of pathogenic 
alleles will be sufficient to calculate: (1) the proportion of homozygotes 
identical by descent, and (2) the proportion of homozygotes non-identi -
cal by descent among affected offspring of consanguineous parents, as well as (3) the sum frequency of pathogenic alleles of a particular 
gene in the population. The last parameter can be used to calculate 
the prevalence of the disease and of carriers in the population.
The equation to calculate the sum frequency of pathogenic alleles (q) 
in the population is
q = [P(CH).(F+q-Fq)] / [(1-F)(1-∑ai2)],
in which P(CH) is the proportion of compound heterozygotes, F is the 
inbreeding coefficient, and ai is the relative frequency of the ith allele.
When the necessary data (a-c) are available, e.g. in a clinical genetic 
laboratory, the method avoids the workload and pitfalls of epidemiolog -
ic surveys. Limitations are broad confidence limits and complications 
resulting from population structure.
P10.11  Association study of 16 susceptibility loci with crohn’s 
disease in Russian population
Y. A. Nasykhova1, A. P. Zhernakova2, E. A. Festen2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, N. 
V. Semenov3, A. G. Kharitonov3, A. Y. Baranovskii3, R. K. Weersma2, C. 
Wijmenga2, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Medical 
Academy of Postgraduate Studies of St.-Petersburg, St-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic relapsing inflammatory bowel disor -
der which is thought to result from a complex interplay of multiple genes 
and environmental factors. At present the incidence of this disorder 
increases in the world. Therefore CD remains to be one of the serious 
problems in the gastroenterology. Genome-wide association studies 
have recently identified more than 30 susceptibility loci for Crohn’s 
disease. We performed a replication study of 16 SNPs of 15 genes 
(PTPN22, IL-23R, IL-10, IL-18RAP, ATG16L1, MST1, IBD5 locus, IL-
12B, IRGM, BTNL2, JAK2, TNFSF15, NKX2-3, STAT3, PTPN2) in 113 
Russian CD patients and 138 controls using TaqMan Assays (Applied 
Biosystems). A selection of SNPs was made based on the data from 
the original genome-wide association studies. The patients and the 
controls were recruited in the North-West region of Russian Federa -
tion. We identified the association of the JAK2 rs10758669 (A>C) poly -
morphism with Crohn’s disease in Russian population. The frequency 
of C-allele was significantly higher in CD patients (p=0.018, OR=1.60, 
95% CI=1.10-2.33). The carriers of homozygous C/C or heterozygous 
A/C genotypes had the 2-fold increased risk of having CD as com -
pared with the carriers of homozygous A/A genotype (OR=2.07, 95% 
CI=1.22-3.52, p=0.0082). Thus, C-allele of JAK2 rs10758669 (A>C) 
polymorphism could be the risk factor of CD in Russian population.
P10.12  Pharmacogenetics of coumarins: prevalence of cYP2c9 
and VKORc1 polymorphisms in the Lebanese population
I. Jureidini, S. Kelechian, N. Hakimeh, N. Chamseddine, R. Naoufal, L. Zahed ;  
Saint George Hospital University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon.
Polymorphisms in the genes encoding the cytochrome P450 2C9 
(CYP2C9 ) and the Vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1) contribute 
to the variability in sensitivity to coumarins. Patients with common ge -
netic variants of CYP2C9 (*2 & *3) or VKORC1 (-1639A allele) require 
a lower dose of coumarin, a longer time to reach a stable dose and are 
at higher risk of serious bleeding.
No prevalence for those variants has so far been reported in the Leb -
anese population. CYP2C9 (*1/*2/*3) and VKORC1 (A/G) were as -
sessed by Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Length Polymor -
phism in 150 unrelated healthy Lebanese volunteers, representing the 
various geographic regions of Lebanon.
We found no significant difference in the frequency of CYP2C9 vari -
ants and other evaluated Caucasians. However, the frequency of ho -
mozygotes for the VKORC1 -1639A was appreciably higher, a finding 
of interest, to be correlated with clinical risk.
Lebanese caucasian Black Asian
cYP2c9*1 / *1 66 % 70 % 96 % 99 %
*1 / *2 15 %29 % 3 % 0 %*1 / *3 15 %
*2 / *2 1 %
4 % 0 % 0 % *2 / *3 1 %
*3 / *3 1 %
VKORc1G / G 25 % 43 % 72 % -
G / A 42 % 45 % 28 % -
A / A 34 % 12 % 0 % -Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
P10.13  spectrum of CFTR  mutations in cF-patients in siberia 
region of Russia
O. Odinokova ;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, 
Russian Federation.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a heterogeneous and the most common auto -
somal recessive disorder. We report the results of CFTR  molecular 
screening of CF-patients referred to the Institute of Medical Genet -
ics (Tomsk - Russia) in the last five years. The DNA samples of 128 
unrelated patients affected by cystic fibrosis, classical form, living in 
Siberia region of Russia had been analyzed. Patients had been tested 
for mutations: F508del, I507del, 1677delTA, CFTRdele2,3 (del21kb), 
R334W, R347P, G551D, R553X, G542X, 2143delT, 2184insA, 
394delTT, 306delTAGA, 3821delT, L138ins, N1303K, W1282X in the 
CFTR gene. In group of 128 tested patients (256 alleles) 86 patients 
(67,2%) were either homozygous of compound heterozygous, 41 pa -
tients (32,0%) carried only one detected mutation. Allelic frequencies 
for tested mutations were: 60,55% (F508del), 7,81% (CFTRdele2,3 
(del21kb)), 5,47% (2184insA), 1,95% (R334W), 1,56% (N1303K), 
1,17% (2143delT) and 1,17% (394delTT), 0,78% (R347P) and 0,78% 
(W1282X), 0,39% (G542X), 0,39% (R553X), 0,39% (3821delT). We 
found one novel for Siberia region mutation - 2-bp deletion in exon 20 
(CFTR  gene) - 3944delGT. We supposed the presence of novel mutat -
ed allele in two patients due to unusual profile of restriction fragments 
(during the W1282X-mutation analysis); and subsequently CFTR  mu-
tation - 3944delGT - was determined by sequence analysis of PCR-
products in DNA of these two CF-patients from different regions of 
Siberia. And since we had included testing of 3944delGT mutation in 
our CFTR -mutation panel for screening DNA from patient affected by 
cystic fibrosis and for prenatal diagnosis in CF-risk families in Siberia 
region of Russia.
P10.14  study of DFNB59 gene (Pejvakin) promoter mutations 
associated with deafness in deaf subjects of chaharmahal va Bakhtiari province in iran
M. Noorbakhsh , M. Abolhasani, E. Farrokhi, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori;  
Cellular and Molecular Research Center Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci., 
Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aims: Hearing loss is a very heterogeneous disorder 
and occurs due to genetic, environmental or both causes. More than 
100 genes have been predicted to cause deafness. More recently a 
gene called DFNB59 has been shown to cause neural deafness in 
4 Iranian families. This study aims to investigate the frequency of 
DFNB59 promoter mutations in a cohort of 100 deaf subjects in Cha -
harmahal va Bakhtiari province.
Materials and Methods: One hundred nonsyndromic hearing loss 
subjects were investigated for presence of DFNB59 promoter muta -
tions. DNA was extracted by phenol chloroform protocol. The mutation 
screening of the gene was performed using PCR-SSCP procedure 
and subsequent direct sequencing.
Results: No mutation was detected in promoter of the DFNB59 in deaf 
individuals studied.
Conclusion: We conclude that the promoter mutations of the gene 
have no contribution in causing deafness in samples studied. However 
to find the cause of deafness in this province, other genes or loci need 
to be investigated in the future.
P10.15  interaction between long-term air pollution exposure and 
genes in relation to levels of inflammatory markers
S. Panasevich1, K. Leander1, T. Bellander1, U. de Faire1,2, G. Pershagen1,2, F. 
Nyberg1,3;  
1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 3AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden.
Background: Air pollution exposure can lead to adverse cardiovascu -
lar effects, possibly via systemic inflammation and altered coagulation 
balance. Genetic variation may play a role in susceptibility to these 
effects.
Objectives: To investigate the modifying capacity of genetic variants in 
genes related to inflammation ( IL6, TNF) and coagulation ( fibrinogen 
Bβ, PAI-1 ) on the effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on blood 
marker levels.
Methods: We studied a population sample of 1013 men and 493 
women aged 45-70 years from Stockholm. Spatial modelling was used to assess long-term air pollution exposure to traffic-related NO2 and 
heating-related SO2 emissions at the home address of each individual 
over retrospective periods of up to 30 years. We investigated polymor -
phisms in IL6 (-598GA, -573GC, -174GC), TNF (-1031TC, -863CA, 
-857CT, -308GA, -238GA), fibrinogen Bβ  (-455GA) and PAI-1  (-675 
4G/5G).
Results: Gene-environment interactions were observed for several IL6 
and TNF SNPs. For example, one-year traffic-NO2 exposure was as -
sociated with levels of IL-6 in homozygote IL6-598AA carriers (+266%; 
95%CI +59% to +744%) per 28.1 µg/m3 (difference between the 5th 
and 95th percentile of exposure), but not in -598GG/GA carriers (+16%; 
95%CI -26% to +80%). One-year heating-SO2 exposure was associ -
ated with levels of TNF-α in homozygote TNF-308AA carriers (+164%; 
95%CI +15% to +503%), but not in -308GG/GA carriers (-6.5%; 95%CI 
-20% to +9%) per 6.8µg/m3.
Conclusions: Genetic variants in IL6 and TNF genes may modify the 
effect of long-term exposure to moderate levels of air pollution on the 
levels of inflammatory blood markers in healthy subjects.
P10.16  single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the NOs2 and NOs3 Genes are Associated with Exhaled Nitric Oxide
S. Dahgam1, A. C. Olin1, Å. T. Naluai2, F. Nyberg1,3;  
1Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 3AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden.
Background: Fraction of Exhaled Nitric oxide (FENO) is a non-invasive 
biomarker of airway inflammation. Nitric oxide (NO) is an endogenous 
molecule synthesized from three distinct NO synthase genes (NOS1, 
NOS2 and NOS3), and plays an important role in pathophysiology of 
airway diseases. The genetic regulation of NO and its influence on 
FENO is not yet well understood.
Aim: To comprehensively investigate Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in the NOS genes and association with FENO.
Method: A population-based study of 2200 randomly selected adults 
was conducted 2001−2003 in Gothenburg, Sweden. FENO was mea -
sured at a flow-rate of 50 mL/s. We genotyped 20 NOS1, 17 NOS2 and 
12 NOS3 tag SNPs. We used linear regression models to estimate ef -
fects of NOS genotypes on FENO. Models were adjusted for age, sex, 
height, atopy and smoking habits.
Results:  The mean FENO level for all subjects was 14.9 parts per bil -
lion. In a multi-SNP model, two SNPs in NOS2 (rs9901734 [C/G] and 
rs3729508 [T/C]) and one SNP in NOS3 (rs7830 [G/T]) were signifi -
cantly associated with higher levels of FENO50. For rs9901734, sub -
jects had 5.3% higher levels of FENO50 per G allele (p= 0.016); for 
rs3729508, subjects with CC or CT genotypes had 9% higher levels 
compared with TT (p =0.0057); and for rs7830, subjects with GT or TT 
had 5.3% higher levels than GG (p = 0.0485).
Conclusion:  Based on thorough genotyping of the three NOS genes, 
polymorphisms in the NOS2 and NOS3 genes were independently as -
sociated with inflammation in the airways, as measured by FENO50.
P10.17  Polymorphisms of folate related genes and a risk of 
having a child with chromosome aneuploidy
S. Kiprijanovska , S. Madzunkova, G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska;  
Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of.
Aneuploidy is the most common chromosome abnormality in humans 
and is the leading genetic cause of miscarriage and congenital birth 
defects. Several studies indicated that polymorphisms in folate-related 
genes can lead to DNA hypomethylation and abnormal chromosomal 
segregation. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible asso -
ciation of four polymorphisms in the three folate-related genes (MTH -
FR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G and MTRR A66G) with a 
risk of having a fetus with chromosome aneuploidy. We studied a total 
of 48 parents with a fetus with trisomy 21 (n=250, trisomy 18 (n=9), 
trisomy 13 (n=3), 45, X0 (n=5), 47, XXY (n=3) and triploidy (n=3). The 
parental origin of the aneuploidy was determined by QF-PCR analysis 
of several STR markers on each affected chromosome in the fetus and 
both parents. The MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G and 
MTRR A66G were genotyped by multiplex PCR followed by SNaPshot 
analysis. The distribution of the allele and genotype frequencies of the 
four studied folate polymorphisms in the parents from whom the aneu -Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
ploidy originated were compared with the frequencies in their partners 
as well as in ethnic matched individuals from the general population. 
No difference was observed in the allele and genotype frequencies of 
the four studied folate polymorphisms between the parents from whom 
the aneuploidy originated and the control groups. In conclusion, our 
study do not support the relationship between the four studied folate 
polymorphisms and a risk of having a child with an aneuploidy.
P10.18  Distribution of FMR1(CGG)n repeats and FRAXAc1/
DXS548 alleles in healthy population of Croatia
K. Crkvenac Gornik1, K. Štingl2, Z. Grubić2, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic1, L. Letica1, 
D. Begovic1;  
1Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical 
hospital centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Centre for tissue typization, Clinical 
hospital centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
Fragile X syndrome is caused by expansion of a (CGG)n trinucleotide 
repeat within the 5‘ untranslated region of the FMR1 (fragile X mental 
retardation 1) gene transcript. The aim of our study was to report the 
distribution of FMR1 (CGG)n alleles and DXS548-FRAXAC1 haplo -
types in a healthy Croatian population.EDTA blood samples were col -
lected from healthy, unrelated individuals from Croatia. We analyzed 
a total of 452 (680 X chromosomes) healthy individuals (224 males 
and 228 females) using PCR and electrophoresis on a 6% polyacryl -
amide gel in an automated sequencer (ALFexpress). Investigation of 
the FMR1 alleles in a sample of the Croatian population revealed that 
98.4% alleles were in the normal range (less than 40 CGG repeats). 
We also identified seven intermediate-sized alleles (40-54 CGG re -
peats). No carriers with premutations (55-200 CGG repeats) were ob -
served in this sample. The most common CGG repeat allele was 29 
allele (20.0%), followed by 28 allele (14.4%). We evaluated the FRAX -
AC1 and DXS54 polymorphism in 366 X chromosomes of 200 healthy 
subjects (60 males and 153 females). Five different FRAXAC1 alleles 
were observed, with a predominance of the FRAXAC1-3 (154pb) allele 
(66.9%). For DXS548, there were seven different alleles observed with 
a predominance of the DXS548-7 (194pb) allele (81.7%). The present 
study provides information about the distribution of FMR1 alleles in our 
population and represents foundation for all future studies of the fragile 
X syndrome among Croatians.
P10.19  G-308A polymorphism in TNF gene in different regions 
of Buryatia
G. Dugarova1, M. Golubenko2, E. Eremina1, V. Puzyrev2;  
1Buryat branch of the Institute of Medical Genetics of Siberian Branch of 
the RAMS, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Medical Genetics of 
Siberian Branch of the RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
G-308A polymorphism in the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) gene 
has been studied in the Buryat population by genotyping samples from 
16 subpopulations from 5 areas of Republic Buryatiya (total N=865). 
The TNF-alpha G-308A polymorphism was assessed by the PCR and 
restriction analysis. It has been shown that mean frequency of allele 
A in Buryats was 11.5 %. At comparison with other Siberian popula -
tions, statistically significant differences with Yakuts were found. The 
frequency of this polymorphism in Siberian populations (8-19%) is 
higher than in populations of East Asia (2-6%). In three Buryat sub -
populations of 16 studied, the deviation of genotype frequencies from 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium has been found. Genetic differentiation 
coefficient which was calculated for all settlements (Gst=0.0167) and 
for 5 investigated areas (Gst=0.0053), did not demonstrate significant 
differentiation of Buryat population by the given polymorphism. The re -
sults describe the prevalence of functionally significant polymorphism 
in TNF gene, which is associated with various common diseases and 
endophenotypes.
P10.20  GcKR gene functional variants in patients with type 
2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome: do the rare variants also 
associate with an increased carotid intima-media thickness in 
metabolic syndrome?
M. Mohás1, P. Kisfali2, L. Járomi2, A. Maász2, E. Fehér3, V. Csöngei2, N. Polgár2, 
E. Sáfrány2, J. Cseh1, K. Sümegi2, K. Hetyésy4, I. Wittmann1, B. Melegh2;  
12nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Pécs, Hungary, 
2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 
3Department of Radiology, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 4Central Laboratory, Aladár Petz Hospital, Győr, Pécs, Hungary.
Background and Aims: Here we analyzed primarily the association of 
two glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) variants (rs780094 and 
rs1260326) with triglyceride and glucose levels in Hungarian type 2 
diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome patients; and also corre -
lated the genotypes with the pooled carotid intima-media thickness 
records.
Methods and Results: A total of 321 type 2 diabetic patients, 455 meta -
bolic syndrome patients, and 172 healthy controls were genotyped by 
PCR-RFLP. Both GCKR variants were found to associate with serum 
triglycerides and with fasting plasma glucose. However, significant as -
sociation with the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and meta -
bolic syndrome could not be observed. Analyzing the records of the 
patients, a positive association of prevalence the GCKR homozygous 
functional variants and carotid intima-media thickness was found in the 
metabolic syndrome patients.
Conclusion: Our results support that rs780094 and rs1260326 func -
tional variants of the GCKR gene inversely modulate serum triglycer -
ides and fasting plasma glucose levels, as it was already reported for 
diabetic and metabolic syndrome patients in some other populations. 
Besides this positive replication, as a novel feature, our preliminary 
findings also suggest a cardiovascular risk role of the GCKR minor al -
lele carriage based on the carotid intima-media thickness association.
P10.21  medical genetically study of hereditary disorders in 
European part of Russia
R. A. Zinchenko , E. K. Ginter;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation.
Based on a medical genetically study, the genetic diversity of AD, AR 
and X-linked recessive hereditary disorders (HDs) in 12 regions and 
ethnic groups of Russia were established: Adygean, Maris, Chuvash -
es, Udmurt, Bashkirs and Russian from seven populations. The size of 
the investigated populations was than 3 million inhabitants. All popula -
tion was examined by standard protocol of medical genetic research 
elaborated in laboratory of genetic epidemiology, Research Centre for 
Medical Genetics. About 2500 HDs of OMIM could be identified by 
this research. Clinical investigations were performed by a geneticist, 
a neurologist, an ophthalmologist and other physicians, focused on 
diagnostic of HDs. In the 12 Russian regions surveyed, we revealed a 
total of 460 (217 AD, 185 AR and 58 X-linked) clinically differing HDs 
(more than 7000 affected). In order to determine the geographic loca -
tion of various populations and ethnic groups in a variety of the studied 
populations of Russia by the prevalence rate (10-3) of AD and AR dis -
eases, we performed the cluster analysis with the use of the average 
linkage method. Analysing the dendrograms showed, that first, all Rus -
sian populations are united into a single cluster, followed by the addi -
tion of the cluster of the Finno-Ugric population and the Chuvashian 
population. The greatest genetic remoteness by genes of HDs was de -
tected for the Bashkirs and the Adygeans. It should be mentioned that 
the obtained pattern of genetic interrelationships between the studied 
populations/ethnic groups is largely similar to that obtained while using 
conditionally neutral polymorphic genetic systems.
P10.22  Y-chromosomal background of gr/gr deletions
D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and 
Metabolic Disorders, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
The gr/gr deletion is a common Y chromosome abnormality that re -
moves 1.6Mb of the AZFc region including two DAZ and one CDY1 
gene copies. The relationship between this deletion and male infertility 
is a subject of a continuing intense debate. The gr/gr deletion is re -
garded as a risk factor for reduced sperm counts in some populations, 
but not in others. We screened a total of 740 men from the Republic 
of Macedonia (520 Macedonians, 140 Albanians and 80 Roma, Serbs, 
Turks and Croats) for the presence of gr/gr deletion. The methodol -
ogy included analysis of AZFc specific STS markers, DAZ and CDY 
gene dosage and single nucleotide variants. The Y chromosome hap -
logroups were determined by 28 Y-chromosome SNP markers, which 
were typed by multiplex PCR/SNaPshot reactions. We found 21 men 
with gr/gr deletion and gr/gr deletion-b2/b4 duplication; 19 Macedo -
nians, one Serb and one Croat. No gr/gr deletion was detected among 
Albanians. Nine different Y chromosome haplogrous were determined Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology27
among men with gr/gr deletions, three of which (I2a-P37b, R1a1-
SRY1532 and J2b2-M241) are among the five most common hap -
logroups in the Republic of Macedonia. The most frequently deleted 
DAZ copy was DAZ1/2, whereas the predominantly missing CDY1 
copy was CDY1b. There was a difference in the haplogroup distribu -
tion of carriers with the loss of CDY1a and CDY1b. The ethnic differ -
ence in the incidence of gr/gr deletion found in our study may have 
relevance for the interpretation of case control studies dealing with 
admixed populations.
P10.23  Prevalence of hereditary deafness in population of 7 
rural Districts of Kirov region, Russia.
A. A. Osetrova1, Y. I. Sharonova2, T. G. Rossinskaya1, R. A. Zinchenko2;  
1Kirov Regional Teaching Children’s Hospital, Kirov, Russian Federation, 
2Research Centre for Medical Genetics Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The current report analyzes the investigation of prevalence of heredi -
tary deafness forms in 7 districts of Kirov region (Bogorodsk, Nema, 
Svecha, Sovietsk, Suna, Uni, Shabalino). The total size of the exam -
ined population was made 84,048 persons. The study was carried 
out according to the protocol elaborated in the genetic epidemiology 
laboratory of Research Centre for Medical Genetics. The protocol al -
lowed to reveal syndromal deafness (not less than 400 hereditary syn -
dromes) and the isolated relative deafness. The examination included 
ENT physician and ophthalmologist examination, genetic counseling, 
and DNA-analysis. The DNA diagnosis was made in all cases of non-
syndromal deafness and in some cases of syndromal deafness. Dif -
ferent forms of deafness were detected in 624 patients (prevalence 
of deafness was 1 per 135 persons). Analysis of etiological structure 
showed that deafness resulting from inflammatory diseases of middle 
ear and presbyacousis had the following prevalence: 1:316 and 1:466 
respectively. Prevalence of non-syndromal deafness with no history of 
environmental risk factors was 1:506 persons (from 1:921 in Nema to 
1:254 in Suna). Prevalence of syndromal deafness was 1:4,002 (from 
1:9,751 persons in Svecha to 1:1,331 persons in Uni). In 7 districts, 
prevalence of mandibulofacial dysostosis was 1:4,000. Examination 
by direct sequencing of the encoding part of gene TCOF1 revealed 
previously unknown mutation in exon 23 in the heterozygous state that 
leads to substitution of aminoacids alanin for glycin in position 1,176 
(Ala1176Gly). Thus, the epidemiological approach to investigation of 
hereditary pathology revealed high prevalence of hereditary deafness 
in Kirov region.
P10.24  monogenic hereditary skeletal disorders in Rostov 
region, Russia
R. A. Valkov1, T. I. Valkova2, S. S. Amelina2, R. A. Zinchenko3;  
1Railroad clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Rostov 
regional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 3Research 
Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
The prevalence and incidence of the majority of hereditary skeletal dis -
orders (HSD) are remains not studied now, in view of the big diversity 
of clinical and genetically form. The purpose of the present research 
was studying of prevalence and genetically heterogeneity of HSD in 
Rostov region (12 districts). The total size of investigated population 
was 497460 persons. The research was conducted under the original 
protocol, providing for detection of more than 2500 various hereditary 
diseases (OMIM) and syndromes, including all hereditary skeletal dis -
orders. In the results 643 patients from 423 families were detected with 
different forms of HSD (including isolated forms HSD and the skeletal 
dysphasia’s which a part of various hereditary syndromes are). Value 
of prevalence of autosomal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive 
(AR) forms HSD was paid off on 10000 surveyed population. For the 
X-linked forms - was paid off on 10000 males. Prevalence of the iso -
lated AD forms of HSD has compounded 5.61 on 10000, AR forms 
- 0.54 on 10000, X-linked forms - 0.12 on 10000 males. Total value of 
prevalence (when isolate and syndromes’ forms of HSD was include) 
of AD forms have compounded 10.92 on 10000 with appreciable sta -
tistically authentic variation between districts from 5.54 to 17.56. For 
AR forms the value was amount 1.73 which vary from 0.39 to 3.25, 
for X-linked forms it was 0.60 with vary from 0 to 2.67. Thus, in the 
presented research we managed to estimate prevalence of HSD in 
Rostov region.P10.25  the occurrence of mutations in HFE gene in Romany 
population in slovakia.
D. Gabriková , J. Bernasovská, I. Bernasovský, R. Behulová, S. Mačeková, A. 
Bôžiková, I. Boroňová, A. Sovičová, P. Švíčková, E. Petrejčíková, M. Soták, J. 
Čarnogurská, V. Čverhová;  
Excellence Centre of Animal and Human Ecology, Faculty of Humanities and 
Natural Sciences, University of Prešov, Prešov, Slovakia.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is a genetic disease characterized by ac -
cumulating of excessive iron in the organism. Three mutations in the 
HFE gene are associated with the disease: C282Y, H63D and S65C. 
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of HFE mutations 
in the Romany (Gypsy) population in Slovakia. Romany community 
in Slovakia is one of the European largest. It represents genetically 
isolated population with a rate of consanguinity and inbreeding about 
10 to 100 time higher than in Slovak (Non-Romany) population. Al -
together 212 healthy individuals of Slovak Romany population were 
analyzed for the presence of HFE mutations. The observed allele fre -
quencies were 3.8%, 4.5% and 0.0% for C282Y, H63D and S65C mu -
tation respectively. We identified 1.4% of H63D/H63D homozygotes, 
no individual in our sample was C282Y/C282Y homozygous or com -
pound heterozygous. Occurrence of H63D mutation in the Romany 
population was significantly lower than in the Non-Romany population 
in Slovakia and it was also lower than the prevalence in the Northern 
India, where Romanies originate. Probable reason of this result is a 
founder effect and a high degree of inbreeding among Romanies in 
Slovakia.
P10.26  interleukin-23 receptor gene haplotypes in diseases 
known to associate with individual interleukin-23 receptor gene 
mutations
E. Sáfrány1, M. Szabó2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Robert 
Koch Hospital, Edelény, Hungary.
The interleukin-23 receptor gene ( IL23R ) encodes a subunit of the 
IL23-receptor binding the IL-23 cytokine. IL-23 induces differentiation 
of naive CD4+ T cells into pathogenic T helper cells (Th17/ThIL-17) that 
produce proinflammatory cytokines and thus play a role in develop -
ment of autoimmune diseases. Previously we investigated the pos -
sible effect of IL23R  SNPs on the development of psoriasis (n=214 
patients) and ankylosing spondylitis (n=206 patients). In psoriasis we 
observed a significant increase in the carriage of the minor allele of 
rs11805303 SNP and in the prevalence of the homozygous genotype 
of rs2201841 and rs10889677 polymorphisms. The results were simi -
lar in the ankylosing spondylitis group with the addition of rs1004819 
and rs11209026 allele distributions also showing significant differenc -
es from those of healthy subjects’. Based on these results we tested 
the haplotype distributions of IL23R  SNPs in these two distinct diseas -
es. Haplotype blocks were determined using Haploview v4.1 accord -
ing to the International HapMap Project database. Block 1 contained 
the rs1004819 and rs11805303 SNPs, Block 2 the rs10489629 and 
rs2201841 SNPs. We found no significant difference between any of 
the haplotype distributions in psoriasis and ankylosing spondylitis. The 
fact that two distinct diseases share the same haplotype profile can 
underline the significance of the IL-23/IL-17 pathway and of the IL23R  
gene in autoimmune diseases, and more importantly indicates the im -
portance of studying the effects of not only individual SNPs but also 
haplotypes on disease development.
P10.27  microsatellite allelic imbalance at 14q13.2 indicates an additional susceptibility locus for the Juvenile idiopathic 
Arthritis in Latvian population
I. Trapina1, I. Rumba-Rozenfelde1, N. Sjakste1, T. Sjakste2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 2Institute of Biology, 
University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is autoimmune, clinically heteroge -
neous, chronic rheumatic disease with onset before age 16 and dura -
tion at least 6 weeks. Both genetic and environmental risk factors are 
involved in pathogenesis of the disease. The described JIA suscep -
tibility genes appear to account only for a small part of genetic con -
tribution to the disease, other susceptibility loci involved in metabolic 
pathways affecting disease pathogenesis should be sought. The 14q 
locus appears to be prospective from this point of view, as it harbours 
several genes linked to autoimmune diseases. To identify novel JIA Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
susceptibility loci, 270 Kb region of chromosome 14q encompassing 
FAM177A1, KIAA0391 and PSMA6 genes was genotyped in 97 oligo -
arthritis (JIoA) and 50 polyarthritis (JIpA) patients and 230 healthy in -
dividuals by five HSMS markers of 14q13.2 region. Direct sequencing 
revealed two variable components of (CAA)n(A)m motif in HSMS602 
(FAM177A1 gene). Repeat (AC)5AT(AC)n of HSMS701 (KIAA0391 
gene) was variable only in its downstream part. Allele (AC)5AT(AC)15 
of HSMS701 was found to be in strong association with JIA (P=4.91x10-
5, OR=15.43) and close to modest with JIpA (P=1.64x10-3,OR=24). 
Alleles (AC)5AT(AC)18 of HSMS701 and (TG)10 of HSMS702 ap -
pear to be JIA and JIoA risk factors (P=1.09x10-3,OR=3.16 and 
P=2.00x10-3,OR=7.39 correspondingly), but allele 168bp of HSMS602 
(P=9.02x10-4,OR=0.28) appears to be protective. Two heterozygote 
genotypes (TG)20/23 of HSMS006 and (AC)22/23 of HSMS801 mani -
fested association with JIA (P<2x10-3), but homozygote (TG)19/19 
was found to be protective (P=5.41x10-4,OR=0.1). Taken together our 
results define an additional susceptibility locus for JIA at 14q13.2 ge -
nomic region encompassing KIAA0391 and PSMA6 genes.
P10.28  Geographic distribution of the LCE3C-LCE3B deletion, a 
susceptibility factor for psoriasis, across different human ethnic 
groups
L. Bassaganyas1, E. Riveira-Muñoz1, M. García-Aragones2, J. R. González3, 
M. Cáceres1, L. Armengol2, X. Estivill1;  
1Genes and Disease Program and CIBERESP, Centre of Genomic Regulation 
(CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2qGenomics Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centre 
for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain.
Copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to inter-individual genomic 
and phenotypic variation. Several studies have demonstrated that 
some CNVs show population differences. Mainly CNVs showing popu -
lation differences contain genes related to disease or to functions in -
fluenced by environment, therefore being potential substrates for natu -
ral selection. One example is the 32-kb deletion involving the LCE3C 
and LCE3B genes (LCE3C-LCE3B_del), which has been significantly 
associated with risk for psoriasis in European and Asian populations. 
Since psoriasis is an immune-related skin disease, with a higher prev -
alence in subjects descending from Northern European countries, it 
would be expected to find differences on the frequency of LCE3C-
LCE3B_del among populations of different geographic origin. Here 
we provide a comprehensive population genetic analysis of LCE3C-
LCE3B_del in populations groups from the Human Genome Diversity 
Panel (HGDP). We have developed a PCR-based genotyping assay 
and have analyzed the pattern of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between 
LCE3C-LCE3B_del and a tagSNP (rs4112788) across the HGDP 
samples. LCE3C-LCE3B_del was detected in all populations, with 
allele frequencies ranging between 30% in sub-Saharan Africans to 
70% in Native Americans. Strong LD between rs4112788 and LCE3C-
LCE3B_del was detected in all HGDP populations with the exception 
of the sub-Saharan Africans. The strong LD and the wide distribution 
of LCE3C-LCE3B_del across populations indicate a single origin for 
this deletion. Moreover, the data suggest that the differences in the 
population distribution of LCE3C-LCE3B_del are not due to natural se -
lection, but are the consequence of genetic drift produced by a strong 
bottleneck during the expansion of humans out of Africa.
P10.29**  Age and origin of the swedish Y111c/ KCNQ1  founder 
mutation
A. Winbo1, U. Diamant2, A. Rydberg1, S. M. Jensen2, E. Stattin3;  
1Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå, Sweden, 2Department 
of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Heart Centre, Umeå, Sweden, 
3Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå, 
Sweden.
Background: The Y111C/ KCNQ1 -mutation has been identified as a 
major cause of the Long QT Syndrome in Sweden. Here we investi -
gate its origin, age and possible founder-nature.
Methods: All identified Swedish Y111C families were genealogically 
investigated. In 26 index families (2 individuals per family) and 24 
healthy Swedish controls haplotype analysis was performed, using 15 
satellite markers, 6 upstream and 9 downstream of the KCNQ1 gene 
(distance ~8 cM). The ESTIAGE computer software was used for esti -
mating the age of the mutation.
Results: We have identified 166 Y111C mutation-carriers in 36 index families. Their ancestors were traced back to a northern inland region, 
from where the population spread, migrating along the Ångerman river 
valley during the 17th-19th century. Twenty-six index cases are genea -
logical descendants of a founder couple born in 1605/1614.
The 26 haplotyped Y111C families share 3-15 (median 13) uncommon 
allele-variants surrounding the Y111C locus, with allele-frequencies 
ranging between 0.02-0.69 (median 0.17) in the healthy controls. Fa -
milial haplotypes co-segregate within the subdivisions of the pedigree, 
supporting the genealogical data.
The estimated age of the mutation is 31 generations (95% CI 23; 41). 
Assuming that one generation is 25 years, the mutation is 775 years 
old (95% CI 575; 1,025).
Conclusion: The Swedish Y111C/ KCNQ1  founder mutation was prob -
ably brought to northern Sweden by settlers in the13th century. Strong 
regional founder effects and a mild phenotype probably enabled the 
enrichment of this mutation in the Swedish population.
The Y111C founder population constitutes an invaluable asset for fu -
ture studies.
P10.30  Polymorphisms of estrogen metabolism genes and 
longevity: a follow-up study in the italian population.
R. M. Corbo1,2, R. Scacchi2, L. Positano1, L. Ulizzi1;  
1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, La Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy, 2CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, Rome, Italy.
Aromatase (CYP19) and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) are both in -
volved in estrogen metabolism. Aromatase catalyzes a critical reaction 
for estrogen biosinthesis from androgens, and estrogen receptor-al -
pha mediates the biological action of estrogens. Recent findings have 
revealed that estrogens have a relevant role not only in female but 
also in male ageing. In the present paper we investigated the possible 
association of ESR1 ( PvuII, rs2234693) and CYP19 (rs4646) poly -
morphisms with longevity by means of a follow-up study. The study 
population consisted of 258 individuals (43.3% males) born in 1900-
1930, who were living in the district of Salerno (Southern Italy) in the 
year 2000. The mortality information of these subjects was collected 
in the year 2009. Using the mortality data the sample was divided into 
two groups of subjects surviving over 90 years (≥ 90yrs) or not. The 
analysis of ESR1 and CYP19 genotype distribution revealed an ex -
cess of homozygotes ESR1 PP (0.30 vs 0.19) and genotypes carrying 
CYP19 T allele (0.69 vs 0.55) in long-lived subjects compared to non 
survivors. The logistic regression analysis showed that, after adjusting 
for sex, both ESR1 and CYP19 genotypes were independently associ -
ated with survival over 90 years with OR= 2.20 (C.I.95% 1.04-4.59, p = 
0.03) and 1.92 (C.I.95% 1.04-3.55, p = 0.03) respectively. Present find -
ings highlight that estrogen metabolism genes are not only involved in 
reproduction, but also in ageing and exert a pleiotropic action across 
the whole human life course.
P10.31  Pigmentation gene mc1R shows strong genetic 
patterning in Eurasia
E. C. Royrvik1, K. K. Nicodemus1, N. Y. Yuldasheva2,3, S. Wells4, R. M. 
Ruzibakiev3, W. F. Bodmer1;  
1Cancer and Immunogenetics, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Division of Cardiovascular 
and Diabetes Research, Leeds Institute of Genetics, Health and Therapeutics, 
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Immunology, 
Academy of Sciences, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, 4The Genographic Project, 
National Geographic Society, Washington, DC, United States.
The population genetics of the Central Asian heartland is of great inter -
est, both in and of itself and because prehistoric populations ancestral 
to those of Europe and East Asia are thought to have passed through 
this region. However, Central Asia has not been as extensively studied 
as the eastern and western parts of the continent. Of particular interest 
in this geographical context is the MC1R gene due to its importance in 
skin pigmentation. We present a comprehensive analysis of allele/hap -
lotype frequencies from five functional SNPs (rs1805005, rs2228479, 
rs1805007, rs1805008, and rs885479) in MC1R throughout Eurasia, 
including from 12,151 individuals from 141 regional populations, focus -
sing on novel genotype data from 38 Central Asian populations.
We performed analyses of allelic differentiation (FST) and direct statisti -
cal tests of allele/haplotype frequency differences using Fisher’s exact 
test. These revealed several significant differences between popula -Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
tions for all SNPs, and a striking pattern of highly significant differenc -
es between even some Central Asian populations (e.g. p=2.38x10-23 
for Iranians from Samarkand and neighbouring Kyrgyz).
Our results confirm divergent trends in eastern and western Eurasia, 
with strong minor allele frequency gradients, perhaps reflecting selec -
tion of different variants in MC1R , such as are seen in other pigmenta -
tion genes. Data from the mitochondrial genome and Y chromosome 
are included to provide a framework for interpretation. Finally, as 
Central Asia consists of a patchwork of linguistic areas with related 
language groups frequently being geographically distant from one an -
other, we investigate whether any subordinate genetic patterning is 
associated with linguistic rather than geographic affiliation.
P10.32  the investigation af c1236t and c3435t Polymorphisms 
in mDR1 (ABcB1) Gene in Familial mediterranean Fever (FmF) 
Patients
A. Rüstemoglu1, S. Yiğit1, Ö. Ates1, N. Bozkurt1, T. Tasliyurt2;  
1Gaziosmanpasa Unıversıty Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, 
TOKAT, Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa Unıversıty Medical Faculty, Department of 
Internal Medicine, TOKAT, Turkey.
The human MDR1  gene encodes a P-gp (P-glycoprotein) plays a 
key role in determining drug bioavailability, and drug response exist 
amongst different populations. Up to date more than 50 SNPs have 
been described in the MDR1  gene .
FMF is considered as an autosomal recessive hereditary disease, as -
sociated with a single gene named MEFV. However, about one-third 
of FMF patients bear a single mutation on one allele, suggesting that 
the disease might be transferred as an autosomal dominant trait with 
partial penetration.
The aim of this study was to performe a genotyping and haplotyping 
analysis of MDR1 gene in FMF patients. Two MDR-1 genetic markers 
(C1236T and C3435T) were analyzed in 142 FMF patients and 107 
unrelated Turkish subjects. All subjects were genotyped by PCR-re -
striction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis, and Arlequin 
Software was utilized to estimate the genotype and haplotype frequen -
cies, and SPSS 16.0 Software was utilized to estimate OR and Chi-
square tests.
In FMF patients showed higher frequency of the 3435 CT genotype 
compared with the control group (0.60 vs. 0.41; P =0.003; odds ratio, 
[OR], 2,14; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.28-3.56) (Table 1). 
For the CC-CT (1236-3435) genotype frequency dedected significantly 
higher in FMF patients compared with the control group (0.13 vs. 0.04; 
P<0.01; OR, 3.83; 95% CI, 1.26-11.68).
Table 1 Compared allelic and genotyping frequencies 
of MDR1 gene loci with FMF patients and control
Position ExonAmino 
acid 
changeAlleleFMF 
(N=284)Control  
(N=214) P GenotypeFMF 
(142)Control  
(107)Odds Ratio  
(95% CI)P
nF nF
1236 12 G412GC 152 0.535 98 0.458
0.053CC 42 211.72 
(0.95-3,13)0.050
CT 68 550.84 
(0.51-1.38)0.285
T 132 0.465 116 0.542 TT 32 310.75 
(0.42-1.33)0.199
3435 26 I1145IC 133 0.468 102 0.477
0.463CC 24 290.55 
(0.30-1.01)0.037
ct 85 442.14* 
(1.28-
3.56)0.003*
T 151 0.532 112 0.523 TT 33 340.65 
(0.37-1.14)0.087
P10.33  Haplotype profile of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1/ABcB1) gene in the average Hungarian and Roma population 
samples
C. Sipeky1, E. Safrany1, V. Csongei1, L. Jaromi1, M. Szabo2, P. Kisfali1, A. 
Maasz1, N. Polgar1, J. Bene1, I. Takacs3, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Koch 
Robert Hospital, Edeleny, Hungary, 32nd Department of Institute of Internal 
Medicine and Haematology, Semmelweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary.
The human multidrug resistance gene (MDR1/ABCB1) is an energy-
dependent drug-transport pump, plays an important role in the bio -availability of a wide variety of drugs and responsible for the multidrug 
resistance in cancer cells. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the genetic variability, haplotype profile and ethnic differences of the 
MDR1 polymorphisms in healthy Roma and Hungarian population 
samples. Therefore, 503 Hungarian and 465 Roma healthy subjects 
were genotyped for the C1236T (rs1128503), G2677T/A (rs2032582, 
Ala893Thr/Ser) and C3435T (rs1045642) variants by PCR-RFLP as -
say. Differences were found in the MDR1 1236 CC (20.7 vs. 33.2%) 
and TT genotypes (30.8 vs. 21.9%), in T allele frequency (0.551 vs. 
0.443) (p<0.002), and in 3435T allele frequency (0.482 vs. 0.527, 
p<0.04) between the two studied groups. Futhermore, the frequency 
of CGC, CGT, CTT haplotypes was significantly higher in Hungarian 
population than in Roma (41.4 vs. 35.3%, 9.04 vs. 6.02%, 2.88 vs. 
1.08%, respectively; p<0.009), whereas the frequency of TGC and 
TTC haplotypes was higher in Roma population than in the Hungarian 
(7.31 vs. 1.68%, 6.67 vs. 2.08%, respectively; p<0.001). The results of 
MDR1 polymorphisms found in the Hungarian population were similar 
to that observed in other Caucasian populations, however, some dif -
ferences were observed in the haplotype structure. By contrast, the 
Roma population differs from Hungarians, from Caucasians, and also 
from populations reported so far from India in the incidence of MDR1 
common variants and haplotypes. Observed interethnic differences 
can have consequences for choice of treatment.
P10.34  molecular epidemiology analysis of the most common 
mtDNA mutations in Hungary
A. Gal1, A. Maasz2, V. Remenyi1, K. Pentelenyi1, K. Komlosi2, B. Bereznai1, A. 
Valikovics3, P. Dioszeghy4, D. Bereczki1, B. Melegh2, M. J. Molnar1;  
1Department of Neurology, Centre for Molecular Neurology, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of 
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Neurology, Borsod – Abaúj – Zemplén 
County Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary, 4Department of Neurology, Jósa András 
County Hospital, Nyiregyhaza, Hungary.
Background:  Many heteroplasmic point mutations in the mitochondrial 
genome (mtDNA) have been associated with a wide scale of neuro -
logical symptoms. We report a prospective 10-year molecular study 
of mitochondrial DNA mutations in Hungarian patients with highly sug -
gestive of mitochondrial diseases.
Methods:  The mutations frequencies of the most common mtDNA 
mutations (A3243G, A8344G, A8356G, T8993C, T8993G, G3460A, 
G11778A, T14484C) were investigated in patients with maternal 
sensoneurial hearing loss, stroke-like episodes, ataxia, epilepsy and 
myopathy with undetermined etiology. We screened 631 Hungarian 
patients in North-East, South-West and Central Hungary for this muta -
tion. The mtDNA analysis was performed mostly from blood. If muscle 
tissue was available, the genetic analysis was performed from muscle 
also. Each substitution were tested by PCR-RFLP methodology with 
different restriction enzymes.
Results:  Of the 631 patients screened for MELAS A3243G, 2,22% 
were positive for the mutation, whereas for MERRF A8344G, 2,53% 
carried the mutation and for LS/NARP T8993C, 0,32% and T8993G, 
0.16% carried the mutation. The outcomes for the LHON mutations 
were and G3460A, 0%, G11778A, 0,32%, T14484C, 0%. In 1 patients 
the mutation was present only in the postmitotic muscle tissue.
Conclusion:  The incidence of the most common mtDNA pathogenic 
point mutations was relatively low in the investigated cohort. The mu -
tation frequency of the analysed substitutions was 4,9% in Hungarian 
patients with suggestive of mitochondrial disorders. Our results sug -
gest that screening the most common alterations of the mitochondrial 
genome is not sufficient to clarify the molecular background of the mi -
tochondrial disorders.
P10.35  inferences of maternal genetic heritage of Bayash Roma in croatia
M. Peričić Salihović1, A. Barešić1, I. Martinović Klarić2, L. Barać Lauc3, B. 
Janićijević1;  
1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Lavandula vera, 
Zagreb, Croatia, 3The national fondation for science, higher education and 
technological development of the Republic of Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia.
The Bayash are a branch of Romanian speaking Roma living dis -
persedly in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. In order to 
investigate the origin of the Croatian Bayash maternal gene pool, we 
have sequenced hyper variable segment I (HVS-I) of mitochondrial Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology20
DNA control region and typed relevant RFLP sites in the mitochon -
drial DNA of 390 Bayash from two Croatian regions: Baranja (235) and 
Medjimurje (155). The most frequent maternal lineages of the Bayash 
in Croatia (M5a and M35) belong to the M cluster testifying about their 
ancient Indian origin. European admixture in Bayash maternal gene 
pool is most evident in the occurrence of haplogroup H lineages (H1, 
H2, H4, H5, H6 and H11) with a frequency of 26%. Characteristic of 
Croatian Bayash maternal lineages is a significantly higher frequen -
cy of haplogroup X2 (19.5%) than in other Roma populations; these 
lineages harbour specific HVS-I mutations not present in any of the 
populations that normally have this haplogroup.
Haplogrups and haplotype distribution clearly shows that Bayash from 
Medjimurje represent isolated subset that shares common origin with 
Bayash from Baranja. Obtained results suggest that today’s Roma and 
Bayash genetic structure was influenced by endogamy and isolation 
along with genetic drift in small and dispersed subpopulations and few 
episodes of gene flow.
P10.36  mitochondrial DNA mutation Associated Leber 
Hereditary Optic Neuropathy: Prevalence Rate Reflected By 
Positive Laboratory t ests in Hungary
A. Maasz , T. Heidecker, B. Melegh;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited 
early-onset acute or subacute central vision loss. Mitochondrial mu -
tations especially in the subunits of NADH dehydrogenase and cy -
tochrome B encoding genes have been found to associate with the 
disease. Here we analyzed the profile of test results of the most com -
mon mitochondrial mutations (primary: G3460A, G11778A, G14459A, 
T14484C, G15257C; secondary: C3275A, G3316A, T3394C, T4216C, 
G7444A, T9101C, G13708A), which variants were analyzed using 
PCR/RFLP assays and direct sequencing of suspected patients’ DNA. 
A total of 126 patients with LHON resembling phenotype (62 males and 
64 females), who were sent to genetic tests between 1999 and 2009, 
were involved in the study. Positive test results were found in 31.3% of 
the males and 26.6% of the females for primary LHON mutations. The 
11778A was the most frequent primary LHON mutation both in males 
and females (n=14, 11.1% and n=11, 8.73% of total patients, respec -
tively). The 3460A was present in one male and five females (3.97% 
of total patients); while the 15257C variant was found in four males 
(3.17% of total patients), and one female. Surprisingly, the 14484C 
variant, which is one of the most common primary LHON mutations, 
was found in only one patient. Besides, only the T4216C and G13708A 
of secondary LHON mutations were detected in our patients (n=16, 
12.7%, n=10, 7.93% in males; n=18, 14.3%, n=13, 10.3% in females). 
Our results suggest that the mutation profile of the disease in Hungary 
differs from that reported from other European populations.
P10.37  mitochondrial DNA diversity in a coastal population from tunisia
E. Kerkeni1,2, R. Kefi-Ben Atig3, S. Hsouna3, S. Sfar2, S. Nouira3, S. Abdelhak3, 
K. Monastiri2, H. Ben Cheikh1;  
102/UR/08-03- Medecine Faculty, Monastir, Tunisia, 201/UR/08-14-Medecine 
Faculty, Monastir, Tunisia, 3Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan 
Diseases- Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Belvedere, Tunisia.
Situated between Europe, the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa, 
Tunisia represents a crossroads for human migrations. Studies de -
scribing the maternal lineage of Tunisian population have so far been 
conducted mainly on Southern and Northern Tunisia, among Berber 
and on few non Berber populations. With the aim to enrich the Tu -
nisian mtDNA reference database we analysed for the first time the 
mitochondrial DNA variability in the population of Monastir, a coastal 
city from central Tunisia.
The hypervariable region HVS1 was sequenced and RFLP analyses 
were carried out in a sample of 52 individuals from Monastir.
46 different mtDNA haplotypes were identified and assigned to 12 hap -
logroups which showed a high heterogeneous gene pool. The main 
haplogroups are U (19.2%), H (15.4%), L3 (13.5%) and T (9.6%). The 
Eurasiatic haplogroups were predominant (63%) followed by sub-Sa -
haran L lineages (23.5%) and specific North African clades: U6 and 
M1 (13.5%).
Compared to previous studies on Tunisian populations this is the first 
time that haplogroup U was among the main haplogroup. In addition, the level of U5 in our study was higher than that found in previous stud -
ies occurred in Tunisia.
P10.38  Haplotypic structure of the mitochondrial DNA 
polymerase gamma (POLG) gene
B. Malyarchuk1, M. Perkova1, M. Derenko1, T. Grzybowski2;  
1Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian Federation, 
2The Nicolaus Copernicus University, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum, 
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
Variation of mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) gene has 
been extensively studied in health and disease because it is a ge -
netic locus for several mitochondrial diseases with over 150 mutations 
currently identified (Copeland 2010). However little is known about 
the haplotypic structure of this gene. Here we have sequenced its in -
tron 2 and analyzed distribution of the POLG gene haplotypes in two 
North Eurasian populations - in Russians (n=63) and Buryats (n=90). 
Five polymorphic loci - three previously described rs2283430 (G/T), 
rs2239286 (G/C) and rs2247233 (G/A) and two novel polymorphisms - 
were revealed. Among novel polymorphisms, first of them was a transi -
tion G>A, which is located in position +14 in relation to rs2283430, and 
second one was a transition A>G at position -5 in relation to rs2239286. 
In total, five haplotypes comprising two haplogroups were revealed. 
Haplogroup A consists of haplotype TGACA and haplogroup B is rep -
resented by haplotypes GGAGG, GGAGA, GAAGG and GGGGG (for 
loci rs2283430, +14 from rs2283430, -5 from rs2239286, rs2239286 
and rs2247233, respectively). Interestingly that previously detected in 
Russian population mutations in exon 3 were found on different back -
grounds - G268A on haplogroup A and T251I on haplogroup B. This 
work was supported by the grant from the Far-East Branch of the Rus -
sian Academy of Sciences (09-3-A-06-221).
P10.39  Genetic variation in Bulgarians: a mitochondrial DNA 
perspective
S. K. Karachanak1,2, V. Carossa3,2, D. Nesheva1, A. Achilli3, A. Olivieri3, Y. 
Yordanov4, A. Galabov5, O. Semino3, A. Torroni3, D. Toncheva1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University-Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2the first two authors contributed equally to this study, Italy, 
3Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 
4Institute of Experimental Morphology and Anthropology with Museum-
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5The Stephan Angeloff 
Institute of Microbiology-Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The structure and diversity of the Bulgarian mitochondrial DNA (mtD -
NA) gene pool is still almost unknown. In the present study, we have 
evaluated the extent and nature of mtDNA variation in the largest Bul -
garian sample to date, comprising 855 healthy unrelated subjects from 
across the country.
The analysis was performed by sequencing about 850 base pairs 
(from np 16000 to np 250) of the mtDNA control region, followed by 
the hierarchical RFLP survey of numerous diagnostic coding-region 
markers. Overall, this approach allowed the identification of 586 dif -
ferent haplotypes and their classification into 79 known haplogroups 
or paragroups.
The observed pattern of mtDNA diversity in Bulgarians is mainly 
shaped by haplogroups (H and U) dated to the Upper Paleolithic pe -
riod. The spread of majority of the subclades of these haplogroups is 
related with waves of post-LGM recolonization. A fraction of the Bul -
garian mtDNA gene pool is allocated to haplogroups, which represent 
Neolithic genetic component.
In the comparisons of the observed haplogroup frequencies with those 
from a wide range of western Eurasian populations, Bulgarians do not 
group with the great majority of other Europeans and differ substan -
tially from Near Eastern populations. This reflects the peculiarity of 
the Bulgarian mtDNA gene pool, determined by its history and demo -
graphic processes.
P10.40  Analysis of human mtDNA mutational spectrum revealed 
by phylogenetic reconstruction
N. Eltsov ;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Brach of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
The mitochondrial genome has been the most widely used system for 
the investigation of the evolutionary history of our species. It has been 
the system of choice because of its high rate of sequence divergence Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology21
and its uniparental, maternal inheritance. Advent of human popula -
tion genomics has lead to rapid accumulation of complete mtDNA se -
quences. At present there are more than 6500 human mitochondrial 
genomes available in GenBank. This report is based on the study of 
mutational spectrum revealed in phylogenetic tree of all available com -
plete genomes. The maximum parsimony tree was reconstructed with 
the mtPhyl package (http://eltsov.org/mtphyl.aspx). The relationship 
between mutation frequency throughout the tree and its conservation 
index was studied as well as dependence of aminoacid change po -
sition in the tree and its physicochemical properties. Equation which 
allows estimating the mutational saturability was deduced with which 
it was shown that approximately 135 000 complete sequences neces -
sary to reach 90% saturation. The analysis revealed mutational hot 
spots and showed that approximately 14% of human mitochondrial 
genomes deposited in GenBank contain errors.
P10.41  mitochondrial genome diversity in Ulchi, the tungusic-
speaking tribe of the Russian Far East
N. Volodko , E. Starikovskaya, R. Sukernik;  
Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Division of 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
The present report is based on the study of mtDNA variation in Ulchi 
(n=74), a Tungusic-speaking tribe of hunters and fishermen dispersed 
along the lakes and reaches of the Lower Amur. MtDNA analysis re -
vealed 39 distinct mtDNA haplotypes belonging to 21 Eurasian hap -
logroups C2-C3, D3-D8, D11, G1-G2, M7-M9, Z, B, F, N9, Y and U4, 
with overall N macrohaplogroup derivatives frequency 53%, M - 43%, 
and R - 4%. It is generally accepted, that rapid migration along the 
Asian Pacific margin brought undifferentiated M as far as Japan and 
Russian Far East. The regionally differentiated MD, MG and M7 mtD -
NA lineages were of our special interest in light of the Late Pleistocene 
migrations of modern humans into circum-Pacific region. One of our 
major findings is the discovery of M7a2 haplotype with 16140-16187-
16209-16223-16519 HVSI motif which is specific for ancient Okhotsk 
people (Sato et al. 2007). Ancient admixture of East and West Eur -
asians is also found in the Ulchi population of the Lower Amur region. 
The presence of such haplogroups as N9 and Y in south-eastern Sibe -
ria, with 50% frequency of Y in Ulchi, reflects complex genetic and de -
mographic history, including natural selection and founder effects. The 
coalescent dates and spatial distribution of N9 and Y across Eurasia 
let us to suggest that the root mutation 5417 emerged somewhere in 
Southwestern Asia ~40.0 ka, and its particular derivatives (N9a, N9b, 
Y) have been involved in the eastward expansion, with the Y lineage 
(~23 ka) being the most successful at the periphery.
P10.42  Effect of the c677t -mtHFR genotype on metabolic 
factors of endothelial disfunction: homocysteine concentrations, 
von Willebrand factor plasma levels and ca2+ concentrations in patients with chronic Heart Failure (cHF) who lived in Blockaded Leningrad during WWii, st. Petersburg, Russia.
M. A. Bogdanova1, O. N. Semenova2, A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, 
S. I. Yagashkina2, B. S. Smirnov3, V. M. Shmeleva4, L. P. Papajan4, V. I. 
Larionova1;  
1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Research Center for People, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St.-Petersburg Electrothecnical University, 
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4St.-Petersburg Research Institute of 
Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Chronic heart failure (CHF) is a major health problem 
for people, who lived in blockaded Lenigrad (bL) during World War II. 
We have the unique opportunity to investigate remote influence of the 
prolonged starvation in childhood on development of CHF in senility. 
We have investigate the associations of the C677T-MTHFR genotype 
on metabolic factors of endothelial disfunction: plasma homocysteine 
concentrations, von Willebrand factor plasma levels and Ca2+ con -
centrations.
Materials: 489 patients with CHF from bL (420 females and 69 males, 
age 68-88 years), 156 individuals with CHF from other places, 85 
women after 80 years without CHF.
Genotypes were determined by PCR-RPLF.
Results: There were no differences in genotypes distributions of 
MTHFR C677T among our groups. In group of patients with severe 
CHF (75 females, 15 males, age 73±1,8 years) plasma homocyste -ine concentrations were not significant higher in T/T cariers (18, 94 ± 
2,91 mkmmol/l, 14,87± 0,84 mkmmol/l, p= 0,11). Significantly higher 
von Willebrand factor plasma levels were in T/T patients compered 
to C/C (238,57±29,29 ; 177,81±10,05, p= 0,04) and C/T carriers 
(238,57±29,29, 176,88±12,68, p= 0,04). C/T patients had higher Ca2+ 
concentrations compared to C/C+ T/T (1,23±0,03 mmol/l, 1,15±0,02 
mmol/l , p=0,01).
Conclusion: T allele of MTHFR gene is risk factor for CHF in this group 
of patients. We suggest that DNA-tasting of C677T-MTHFR genotype 
is important for the prognosis and following drug treatment of such 
patients.
P10.43  mutation rates of 15 short tandem repeat loci used in 
paternity testing and forensic analysis
E. Sukarova Stefanovska , P. Noveski, G. D. Efremov;  
Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian 
Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of.
Knowledge about mutation rates of short-tandem-repeat (STR) or mic -
rosatellite loci used in paternity testing and forensic analysis is crucial 
for the correct interpretation of resulting genetic profiles. The aim of 
this study was to determine the type and frequency of germline mu -
tations in 15 STR loci. A total of 100 paternity cases were analyzed 
using AmpFlSTR Identifiler kit. The parenthood in each of these cases 
was highly validated (probability>99.99%). We identified 7 mutations 
in 6 different loci (D21S11, D19S433, D16S539, D2S1358, FGA and 
CSF1PO) with locus specific mutation rate varying between 0 and 
1x10-2, and overall average mutation rate estimated at 2.3x10-3. Five 
mutations occurred in the male germline while two mutations could 
not be distinguished. All seven mutations were single repeat changes, 
with 5 (71.4%) single repeat gains and 2 (28.6%) single repeat losses. 
In one paternity case with mutation at D16S539 locus, analysis of Y-
haplotype using AmpFlSTR Y-filer kit revealed additional mutation at 
DYS458 locus. The mutation event is very crucial for forensic DNA 
testing and accumulation of STR mutation data is extremely important 
for genetic profile interpretation.
P10.44**  Gene variants from lipid-related pathways and risk 
for myocardial infarction: Results from two community-based 
longitudinal studies
C. SONG1, N. L. Pedersen1, C. A. Reynolds2, A. Syvänen3, J. Prince1, E. 
Ingelsson1;  
1Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 2University of California, Riverside, CA, United States, 3Department of 
Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
Background: Lipoprotein levels in blood and several familial lipid me -
tabolism disorders are closely associated with initiation and progres -
sion of atherosclerosis, and incidence of myocardial infarction (MI). 
Therefore, we hypothesized that variants in genes associated with 
circulating lipid levels also would be associated with MI.
Methods: Using age- and sex-adjusted additive genetic models, we 
analyzed 629 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning 59 
candidate gene regions proposed to be involved in lipid-related path -
ways in relation to incidence of MI in 2,523 participants of the Swed -
ish Twin Register (STR; 57% women). All associations with nominal 
P<0.01 were further investigated in the Uppsala Longitudinal Study 
of Adult Men (ULSAM; N=1,095) by in silico replication supplemented 
with additional de novo genotyping.
Results: There were 14 SNP-MI associations in STR with nominal 
P<0.01 that we attempted to replicate in ULSAM. Of these, data al -
ready available from the ABCA1 locus (rs4149313 in STR; rs7031748 
in ULSAM [r2=1]) showed evidence of replication in ULSAM; the HDL-
lowering allele was associated with a substantially higher MI risk (haz -
ard ratio, 1.34 and 1.42; 95% confidence interval, 1.09-1.65 and 1.08-
1.87; P, 0.005 and 0.013 in STR and ULSAM, respectively). Direct 
genotyping for several other loci is still ongoing.
Conclusions: In two community-based samples, we observed several 
potentially interesting associations between lipid-related SNPs and 
MI incidence. Of these, we could confirm the association between the 
ABCA1 locus and MI across both studies. However, several other as -
sociations in our preliminary analysis in STR could represent true find -
ings, and replication genotyping is currently ongoing.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology22
P10.45**  A genome-wide linkage scan of personality traits 
reveals new loci
N. Amin1, A. C. J. W. Janssens1, I. V. Zorkoltseva2, T. I. Axenovich2, Y. S. 
Aulchenko1, B. A. Oostra1, C. M. van Duijn1;  
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Russian Academy of Science, 
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
The Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Five Factor Inventory (NEO-
FFI) categorizes human personality into five broad dimensions Neu -
roticism, Extraversion, Openness, Conscientiousness and Agreeable -
ness. These traits are highly heritable (20-60%) and have proven to be 
strong predictors of not only several psychiatric and non-psychiatric 
disorders but also to social behavior and work performance. Within the 
Erasmus Rucphen Family study (ERF), we phenotyped 2368 related 
individuals with the NEO personality inventory. Affected-only genome-
wide linkage analysis was performed using the Illumina 6K linkage 
panel for a set of highest scorers (> 90th percentile, n ~ 200) for each 
of the five traits. Multipoint parametric linkage analysis assuming domi -
nant and recessive models and non parametric linkage analysis was 
performed. Significant evidence of linkage to chromosome 20p (LOD 
= 5.86) was observed for conscientiousness, a trait strongly related 
to job performance. Additionally suggestive evidence of linkage was 
observed for Neuroticism at 19q (LOD = 3.73), 21q (LOD = 3.42) and 
22q (LOD = 3.07); Extraversion at chromosomes 1p (LOD = 3.05), 9p 
(LOD = 3), and 12q (LOD = 4.01); Openness at 12q (LOD = 3.71) and 
19q (LOD = 3.0) and Agreeableness at 2p (LOD = 3.11), 6q (LOD = 
3.54), 17q(LOD = 3.32) and 21q (LOD = 3.64). For conscientiousness 
at 20p we identified two distinct haplotypes segregating in 6 families. 
The region overlaps with one identified earlier for cognitive function in 
the same population. These findings suggest that we have identified a 
new locus involved in an important personality trait, which may have 
a wider impact.
P10.46  Association between cystatin c polymorphism and 
corpulence
H. Hooton1,2, B. Dubern1,2, C. Henegar1,2, R. Alili1,2, P. Galan3, S. Hercberg3, F. 
Rousseau4, V. Pelloux1,2, P. Arner5, T. I. A. Sørensen6, K. Clément1,2;  
1INSERM U872 Team 7 Nutriomique Paris France, Paris, France, 2University 
Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3INSERM U556, INRA U1125, CNAM 
EA3200, university Paris 13, nutritional epidemiology research unit, Paris, 
France, 4INTEGRAGEN, Paris, France, 5Karolinska institute, department 
of medicine, Huddinge, Lipid laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Institute of 
preventive medicine, Copenhagen university hospital, centre for health and 
Society, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Background: Cystatin C expression rate in adipose tissue and circulat -
ing levels in blood are two to threefold higher in obese subjects than 
in lean controls.
Work hypothesis: Our hypothesis is that common variants in Cystatin 
C gene could play a role in the evolution of BMI during lifetime.
Methods: Tag SNPs were selected to obtain a full coverage of Cystatin 
C coding sequence based on hapmap data. Tag SNPs were genotyped 
in population based cohorts: 4300 subjects from the SUVIMAX study 
(BMI=23.78 +/-0.05 kg/m², age=49.58 +/-0.10 yrs), 750 women from 
the SPAWN cohort in Sweden (BMI= 21.73 +/-0.10 kg/m², age=29.16 
+/-0.16yrs) and 1500 men from Denmark (BMI=27 .00+/-0.16 kg/m², 
age=19.92 +/-0.05yrs). Association between BMI evolution and geno -
types was carried out with a linear mixed model.
Results: One SNP, rs2424577, was significantly associated with differ -
ences in BMI over time in all three groups. G/G carriers had a signifi -
cantly lower BMI over time (p<0.05) in the SUVIMAX group and in the 
subgroup of Danish men who were lean at inclusion (BMI<30kg/m²) 
than the carriers of the two other genotypes (A/G and A/A). Surpris -
ingly, in the SPAWN cohort, G/G carriers had a significantly higher BMI 
than the carriers of the other genotypes. These observations may be 
due to the effect of a specific haplotype, since no such difference was 
found between males and females in the SUVIMAX group.
Conclusions and perspectives: These results bring insights into the 
contribution of Cystatin C in time dependant corpulence. Haplotype 
analyses are ongoing in all 3 groups.P10.47  the P53 gene polymorphisms and life and family history 
of cancer in croatian elderly population
Z. Tomas1, P. Krajačić1, M. Zajc-Petranović1, T. Skarić-Jurić1, V. Bisof2, J. 
Miličić1, S. Tomek-Roksandić3, N. Smolej Narančić1;  
1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of 
Oncology, Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Dr. A. Štampar 
Institute of Public Health, Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia.
The P53 gene has been suggested to be associated with various dis -
eases and with longevity due to its important functions in preserving 
the genome integrity. In this retrospective study we investigated the 
association of two widely investigated polymorphisms of P53 gene 
with life and family history of cancer  in a sample of Croatian elderly 
population. We studied the Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16bp) polymor -
phisms in 124 persons aged 85-101 yrs. The allele frequencies in se -
nescent sample were similar to those reported for general population 
of Croatia: 77.3% vs. 75.9% (for Arg) and 86.6% vs. 85.7% (for A1).
On total sample level no sex or age differences were found in life and 
family history variables or in genotype distribution. However, when two 
age groups were formed - “younger” (85-90 yrs; N=58) and “older” (91-
101 yrs; N=66) - new relations emerged. In contrast to older subjects 
showing homogeneity for tumor occurrence across genotypes in both 
polymorphisms, in younger subjects Arg allele as well as ArgArg geno -
type of the Arg72Pro polymorphisms was consistently more frequently 
recorded in persons with life and family history of cancer. As it was fre -
quently found for younger persons the present preliminary study sug -
gests that Arg allele carry increased risk for cancer in aged persons 
as well. However, it seems that in very old olds (91+ in the present 
study) the importance of Arg72Pro polymorphism for carcinogenesis 
diminishes. Further studies considering more narrowly defined patho -
logical substrate are needed to disentangle the reasons for obtained 
age-related differences.
P10.48  Polymorphisms with relevant role in platelet function in 
Portuguese population
M. B. Criado1, L. Pina-Cabral1, V. Carvalhais1, B. Mesquita1, A. Santos1, E. 
Ruivães1, M. Monteiro1, C. Pereira1, C. Andrade1, I. Arrieta2, A. Almeida-Dias1;  
1Centro de Investigação em Tecnologias da Saúde - CITS - CESPU, Paredes, 
Portugal, 2Facultad de Ciencias-Universidad del Pais Vasco, Leioa, Spain.
Genetic and environmental factors can be responsible of hyper or 
hypo- reactivity of platelets. We know that more than 30% of natural 
variation of platelet reactivity seems to be related with genetic factors.
The main platelet glycoproteins involved in primary hemostasis are 
GPIb-V-IX, GPIa-IIa and GPIIb-IIIa. Endothelial nitric oxide sintetase 
(eNOS) is also relevant in platelet function. Polymorphisms of these 
platelet proteins and endothelial eNOS can induce functional platelet 
alterations. Differences in platelet reactivity and activation among indi -
viduals can influence normal hemostasis, presence of thrombosis and 
response to antithrombotic therapy.
The purpose of this work is to determine allelic and genotypic frequen -
cies of polymorphisms that affect platelet function, namely Kozak, 
VNTR and HPA-2 polymorphisms of GP1BA gene (GPIb alfa), P1A of 
ITGB3 gene (GPIIIa), C807T of ITGA2 gene (GPIa), Glu298Asp and 
T-786C polymorphisms of NOS3 gene in a control Portuguese popula -
tion. Polymorphisms were studied by RFLP methodology.
For the seven polymorphisms studied there are no previous data for 
Portuguese population. Our results show that allelic and genotypic fre -
quencies in Portuguese population do not differ from the ones found 
for other Caucasian populations. All genotypes are in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium.
The genetic characterization of platelet variants in Portuguese popula -
tion obtained in this work will be important for further studies focused 
on the role of these molecular markers in specific populations and their 
possible clinical implications.
P10.49  Analysis of two polymorphisms in genes suspected to take part in crohn’s disease among Polish patients
L. Jakubowska-Burek1, M. Kaczmarek-Rys2, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska2, M. 
A. Kucharski1, S. Hryhorowicz2, D. Rakowski2, K. Linke1, R. Slomski2,3, A. 
Dobrowolska-Zachwieja1;  
1Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, 
Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, 
Research Institute of Nucleic Acids Functions, Poznan, Poland, 3Department 
of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Natural Sciences in Poznan, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
Poznan, Poland.
Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) belongs to Inflamma -
tory Bowel Diseases (IBD).The etiology of the disease remains un -
identified, but it is known, that it is characterized by multifactorial and 
polygenic background. In the last few years many genes were defined, 
among others ATG16L1 as well as IL23R , which may predispose for 
the disease. Up till now, in Polish populations these genes were not 
studied.The aim of the research was the analysis of polymorphisms: 
rs2241880 in ATG16L1 gene and rs7517847 in IL23R  gene.156 Polish 
patients with CD were qualified for this study.Polymorphism analysis 
was performed in ATG16L1 rs2241880 gene and rs7517847 in IL23R 
gene using pyrosequencing.The results were compared with an ad -
equately chosen population group.In ATG16L1  gene the heterozygotic 
variant TC occurred in 47,9% of patients and did not show significant 
difference as compared to the population group (47,4%). Homozygotic 
CC variants occurred among the patients in 22,9% (population 30,8%), 
however TT genotype occurred in 29,2% among patients and 21,8% in 
healthy population. In IL23R  gene the heterozygotic form GT occurred 
most often (53,7% in patients and 48,7% in population), and GG geno -
type appeared in 11,6% patients and in 11% of healthy individuals. In 
turn the TT genotype was observed in 34,7% CD patients and 43% of 
people not afflicted with the disease. Predominant in both genes were 
heterozygotic variants. In the vicinity of rs2241880 and rs7517847 no 
significant changes in the frequency of occurrence of particular geno -
types were observed, although in other populations these polymor -
phisms were related to IBD.
P10.50  Population study at six supplementary stR loci in the 
representative sample of multinational Bosnia and Herzegovina 
residents
D. Marjanovic1,2, L. Kovacevic1,3, N. Pojskic1, J. Cakar1, M. Dzehverovic1, D. 
Musemic-Buljugic1, K. Bajrovic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Genos, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In our previous population studies of B&H human population, we 
have used 17 STR loci included in the PowerPlex 16® System and 
AmpFlSTR®Identifiler®, twelve Y-chromosomal short tandem repeats 
loci incorporated in the PowerPlex® Y System , 14 X-STR loci, as well 
as 28 Y-chromosome NRY bi-allelic markers. All obtained results were 
included in Bosnian referent database. In order of future development 
of this database we have decide to analyze 6 additional STR loci 
(D22S1045, D1S1656, D10S1248, D2S441, D12S391, SE33). There -
fore, we have tested 150 unrelated healthy individuals born in the 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, from all three main ethnical groups. Qiagen 
DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for DNA extraction from buccal swabs 
and blood stains, Quantifiler® assay for quantification and PowerPlex 
ESI 17® System  for amplification and detection. Amplification was car -
ried out as described previously. The total volume of each reaction 
was 25μl. The PCR amplifications have been carried out in PE Gene 
Amp PCR System Thermal Cycler according to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. Electrophoresis of the amplification products was 
preformed on an ABI PRISM 310. Numerical allele designations of the 
profiles were obtained by processing with Gene Mappe®r IDv 3.2Soft -
ware  Deviation from  Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and ex -
pected heterozygosity, power of discrimination and power of exclusion 
were calculated. Also, we  have compared B&H data with data obtained 
from other European populations with available data for observed loci. 
Results of this study are going to be used as guidelines in additional 
investigation of B&H human population genetic structure.
P10.51  Peroxiredoxin 5 gene polymorphism in the population of 
saint-Petersburg
A. A. Vasilishina1, A. P. Khmyrova2, O. N. Semenova3, V. A. Isacov2, O. A. 
Kononova2, M. M. Shavlovsky1, V. I. Larionova2;  
1St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for People, who lived in 
Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Peroxiredoxin 5 (PRDX5) is a mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme that 
neutralizes reactive oxygen species (ROS). According to the free radi -
cal theory of aging, the accumulation of oxidative damages as a result 
of ROS attack is probably a reason of the aging and age-related pa -thology. Thus PRDX5  gene polymorphism may play a role in human 
longevity. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 5’-flanking 
regulatory region (c.-540A>C) of the PRDX5  gene may cause a differ -
ent expression level of peroxiredoxin 5.
The aims of this study were to compare allele and genotype frequency 
distribution in two groups of unrelated healthy persons: young (4-17 
years old, n=113) and elderly (over 80 years old, n=117, including 
long-livers: 90-106 years old, n=65) and to compare allele frequencies 
between St. Petersburg population and another European population. 
Genotyping was carried out by PCR-RFLP-analysis method. The fre -
quencies distributions were compared by using Chi-square test.
Results: the frequencies of A and C alleles are 63,7% vs 65,4%, 36,3% 
vs 34,6%; the frequencies of AA, AC and CC genotypes are 38,9% 
vs 45,3%, 49,6% vs 40,2%, 11,5% vs 14,5% in young and elderly 
groups, respectively. The genotype distributions are consistent with 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in both groups. No statistically significant 
differences in allele and genotype frequency distributions between 
groups were found. There were also no significant differences in allele 
frequencies between population of St. Petersburg and European pop -
ulation (KYUGEN_CAU200) reported in the NCBI dbSNP database 
(n=200, allele frequencies: A-61,2%, C-38,8%).
P10.52  Population genetic analysis of four microsatellite marker 
linked to retinoblastoma gene
A. Ahani , M. T. Akbari;  
Medical Geneics Dept., Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The most common ocular cancer in children is retinoblastoma. Annual 
incidence in Iran is approximately 100 new cases. Conclusive identi -
fication of RB1 mutations in retinoblastoma is belived to improve the 
clinical management of affected children and their relatives. However, 
despite clear clinical benefits, RB1 screening remains difficult, most of 
the alterations being unique and randomly distributed throughout the 
entire coding sequence of the huge RB1 gene. In some cases mutation 
screening of RB1 gene may be time consuming and not beneficial for 
families that have positive history of retinoblastoma and are planning 
for a new pregnancy. In such cases linkage analysis using polymor -
phic microsatellite markers may be the solution. In this study we are 
evaluating the heterozygosity of four microsattelite markers (D13S128, 
Rbi2, RB1.20, D13S156) that are either intragenic or closely linked 
to RB1 gene. Peripheral blood samples of 100 normal Iranian people 
were collected on EDTA tubes and DNA was extracted from 5-ml whole 
blood sample using a standard protocol. PCR reactions were fulfilled 
for each marker and the PCR products were separated using 12% 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The Heterozygosity of the above 
markers is 93%, 69%, 78% and 85% respectively. Our results show 
that these markers can be used for genetic linkage analysis in Iranian 
families with retinoblastoma.
P10.53  t ranscription of polymorphic human retrotransposon-
insertions negatively regulates candidate tumor suppressor 
genes
A. Nicoulaz1, C. Attanasio2, C. Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1, B. Conrad1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Genomic Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States.
Transposons comprise a significant fraction of mammalian genomes, 
the function of which only gradually emerges. They are silenced, both 
in the germline and in somatic cells to avoid the detrimental effects of 
unrestrained transposition. It is therefore unclear at present, whether 
transposons escaping repression could exert functions that depend on 
their autonomous transcriptional activity in somatic cells. To address 
this, we studied two polymorphic intragenic retrotransposon insertions, 
Ya5-MLS41 (Alu-SINE retrotransposon in FOG2 ) and LTR5_Hs (LTR 
retrotransposon in PSD3 ) that could be present or absent in human 
genomes. The allele with the presence of the Alu has a frequency of 
0.4, while that of the LTR is 0.2 in European chromosomes. Normal -
ized gene and retrotransposon expression was analyzed with quantita -
tive PCR in two cell types of ~200 individuals. For these two candidate 
breast cancer suppressor genes, we found retrotransposon transcrip -
tion to negatively regulate cellular gene expression. This provides for 
the first time evidence for polymorphic variation in gene-regulatory ret -
rotransposon transcription. These findings also imply that such regula -Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
tory retrotransposons become candidate tumor markers and potentially 
novel therapeutic targets. Thus, presence or absence of retrotranspo -
sons could be the causative variation of certain cis-eQTLs.
P10.54  Genetic polymorphisms selective value on pre- and 
postnatal stages of human development
M. S. Nazarenko1,2, O. Y. Botkina1, N. P. Babushkina1, E. Y. Bragina1, V. V. 
Markova1, T. V. Zheykova1, O. G. Polovkova1, I. V. Saltykova2, A. R. Simakina2, 
M. V. Chepa2, S. V. Buikin1, I. A. Goncharova1, N. V. Tarasenko1, M. V. 
Golubenko1, A. N. Kucher1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian 
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Selective value of putatively functional polymorphisms of several 
candidate genes for common diseases was the matter of this study. 
The groups of chromosomally normal spontaneous abortions (5-12 
weeks), middle aged subjects (28-55 years old) and nonagenarions 
(89-100 years old) were collected in the Tomsk population (288 in -
dividuals in total). DNA was genotyped for 19 polymorphisms in 13 
genes: MTHFR rs1801133:C>T, ACE rs4343:A>G, AGTR1 rs5186:
A>C, GNB3 rs5443:C>T, NOS3 rs2070744:T>C, rs1799983:G>T and 
VNTR, ADRB2 rs1042713:A>G and rs1042714:C>G, LTA rs909253:
A>G, TNFA rs1800629:G>A, IL4 rs2243291:G>C, IL4RA rs1801275:
A>G and rs2074570:A>G, IL12A rs568408:G>A, IL12B rs3212227:
A>C and rs3212220:G>T, IL12RB1 rs3746190:C>T and rs11575926:
G>A. There was redistribution of alleles and genotypes of polymor -
phisms of genes TNFA and IL12B in the analyzed groups. The IL12B 
rs3212227 AC/CC genotypes (48% vs 35%; p=0.04) and C allele (28% 
vs 20%, p=0.04) were registered more often among spontaneous 
abortions to compare with combined group of middle aged adults and 
nonagenarions. The TNFA rs1800629 GA/AA genotypes (25% vs 17%, 
p=0.04) and A allele (14% vs 8%, p=0.04) predominated among living 
population to compare with spontaneous abortions. In conclusion, the 
current study provided new facts about different selective significance 
of polymorphisms of genes TNFA and IL12B on the pre- and postnatal 
stages of human development.
P10.55  Additional evidence for the absence of pathogenic 
significance of mutation T1095C (mitochondrial 12S rRNA) in 
deafness
O. L. Posukh1, N. V. Volodko2;  
1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian 
Federation.
Mutations in the mtDNA may contribute to sensorineural hearing loss 
(SNHL) either in isolation or as a part of multisystem disorder. To date, 
several mutations in mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene have been found 
in association with both aminoglycoside-induced and isolated SNHL. 
Pathogenic significance was confirmed only for A1555G and C1494T 
mutations, and remains unclear for other mutations (MITOMAP). The 
T1095C mutation has also been shown to be associated with SNHL in 
some families mainly of Chinese origin. We performed mtDNA muta -
tion analysis in pedigrees of different ethnic origin with nonsyndromic 
SNHL and in indigenous Altaian population (N=230) in the Altai Re -
public (South Siberia, Russia). Mutation T1095C was revealed in one 
Altaian patient with profound congenital deafness and in one unre -
lated control of Altaian ethnicity. We also performed the phylogenetic 
analysis of both mtDNAs with T1095C. The RFLP haplotype and HVS-
1/HVS-2 sequence data revealed that both mtDNAs belong to East-
Asian mtDNA haplogroup M11. The T1095C is a basal polymorphism 
of this haplogroup which has been found earlier in the Altaian popu -
lation with frequency 2.2% (Derenko et al., 2007) and among some 
other East-Asian populations. Based on all these facts, we suggest 
that the T1095C and deafness in that patient are rather a coincidence 
than an association. This case provides additional evidence for the ab -
sence of pathogenic significance of the T1095C mutation in deafness. 
This study indicate an importance of mtDNA phylogenetic analysis in 
mtDNA medical studies in order to avoid erroneous diagnosis and to 
search for immediate causes of disease.P10.56  Analysis of nine Y-chromosome stRs (YstRs) in two 
iranian (Kurds and Lurs) ethnic groups
S. M. Alavi , A. Monavarfeshani, N. Nikpoor, L. Safari, A. Farazmand;  
University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We studied nine Y-chromosome short tandem repeat (STR) including 
DYS19, DYS385 a/b, DYS389 I/II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392 and 
DYS393 in two population of Kurds and Lors with the goal of con -
structing of a representative Y-STR database including all Iranian eth -
nic groups.
Blood samples were obtained from 75 kurds and 50 Lors unrelated 
males. Genomic DNA was extracted by a salting-out procedure and 
loci were amplified in triplex and monoplex PCRs and alleles were 
identified by comparison with an in-house constructed allelic ladder. 
Using an implementation of Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) 
provided at the YHRD website, Fst value was calculated and the mul -
tidimensional scaling analysis (MDS) plot was drawn.
The observed haplotype diversity and discrimination capacity were 
0.997 and 90.6% for Kurdish and 0.998 and 94% for Lors population, 
respectively.
The most common allele in Kurds/Lors for respective loci was DYS19, 
allele 14/14; DYS389I, allele 13/13; DYS390, allele 23/23; DYS391, 
allele 10/10; DYS392, allele 11/11; DYS393, allele 12/12; DYS385a, 
allele 13/13; DYS385b, allele 16/16 and DYS389II allele 28/29.
Gene diversity value was calculated from the allelic frequency for each 
locus. The DYS385b locus proved to be highly polymorphic in both 
Kurds (0.833) and Lors (0.824). Also the DYS391 (0.599) and DYS392 
(0.264) loci showed the lowest value in Kurds and Lors, respectively. 
MDS and Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) revealed large ge -
netic distances among Kurdish people living in Iran, Turkey and Iraq. 
Also based on the same analysis a significant genetic distance found 
between Iranian Lors and Arabs.
P10.57  AssOciA tiON OF sOD1 GENE ALLELic VARiANt WitH 
DiABEtic NEPHROPA tHY iN tYPE 1 DiABEtEs
N. M. Panduru1,2, D. A. Ion2, E. Mota3, M. Mota3, D. Cimponeriu4, M. Panduru2, 
L. I. Chivu2, R. Chivu2, A. C. Covic5, C. Serafinceanu2, D. M. Cheta2, A. Streinu-
Cercel2;  
1IDNBM „N.C. Paulescu“, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Carol Davila“ University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania, 4Genetics Institute of Bucharest 
University, Bucharest, Romania, 5“Gr. T. Popa“ University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
Diabetic nephropathy is a major complication of type 1 diabetes whose 
pathogenesis is insufficiently known, but oxidative stress and genetic 
susceptibility seem to be involved. The purpose of this study is to as -
sess the possible association of +35A/C (rs2234694) polymorphism 
in SOD1 gene with advanced stages of diabetic nephropathy in pa -
tients with type 1 diabetes in Romania. There have been enrolled 238 
unrelated patients, having type 1 diabetes, divided into group A (106 
patients) with diabetic nephropathy - macroalbuminuria or ESRD (End 
Stage Renal Disease) and group B (132 patients) without diabetic 
nephropathy. The genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral 
venous blood and the genotyping of +35A/C (rs2234694) polymor -
phism has been made using the PCR-RFLP technique. The statistical 
analysis has been made using De Finetti’s program. There has not 
been a significant deviation from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for 
none of the groups (p=0,229 respectively p=0,894). The data analy -
sis revealed that the presence of a C allele confers a significant risk 
(p=0.008) for the advanced diabetes nephropathy (OR=4,940, 95%C.
I.=1,341-18,198), and the CA genotype (p=0.015) confers a little lower 
risk (OR=4,491, 95%C.I.=1,203-16,766). This study shows the asso -
ciation of a mutant C allele of rs2234694 polymorphism in SOD1 gene 
with the advanced stages of diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 
1 diabetes in Romania, suggesting the involvement of the defence 
against oxidative stress, as an important link in the pathogeny of dia -
betic nephropathy.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
P10.58  The high SCA1 relative incidence in Poland and the 
evidence of the founder effect.
W. Krysa , A. Sulek, M. Rajkiewicz, W. Szirkowiec, E. Zdzienicka, M. Rakowicz, 
R. Rola, J. Zaremba;  
Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) belong to a group of rare hereditary 
neurodegenerative disorders. In some geographical regions relatively 
high prevalence of a certain SCA types resulting from a founder ef -
fect has been documented. Contrary to the highest worldwide SCA3 
incidence, among patients of Polish origin no SCA3 cases were found, 
although 138 SCA1 and 23 SCA2 and 3 SCA17 pedigrees were identi -
fied. The aim of the study was an attempt at finding evidence of pos -
sible founder effect in the most frequent types of SCA in Poland.
SCA1 is the commonest genetic type of SCA in Poland with relative 
frequency of 67% (among all genetically confirmed SCAs) and ir -
regular geographical distribution within the country. Genetic markers: 
D6S89, D6S109, D6S274, D6S288 linked to the ATXN1 gene were 
analysed and strong association of D6S89 marker’s variant of 197 bp 
was observed in 81 pedigrees.
In SCA2, which account for 11% of spinocerebellar ataxias in Poland, 
no association with the four analysed genetic markers spanning the 
ATXN2 gene was revealed.
P10.59  GALNt2 AND tRiB1 GENEs POLYmORPHisms AND 
tRiGLYcERiDE LEVELs iN mEt ABOLic sYNDROmE PA tiENts
P. Kisfali1, M. Mohás2, A. Maász1, F. Hadarits3, K. Hetyésy4, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 22nd 
Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Markusovszky County Hospital, Szombathely, 
Hungary, 4Central Laboratory, Aladar Petz County Hospital, Győr, Hungary.
Objectives: The rs17321515 was shown to be associated with severe 
HTG and HLP types 2B, 3, 4 and 5,. The human tribbles-1 (TRIB1) 
gene is located at chromosome 8q24. In an Asian Malay population, 
the rs17321515 polymorphism located near the TRIB1 locus showed 
an association with elevated total- and LDL-cholesterol and with in -
creased risk of CHD and CVD and also, in a Japanese cohort this 
variant was significantly associated with triglyceride levels and LDL-
cholesterol concentrations.
The GALNT2 gene is a member of the GalNAc-transferase enzyme 
family responsible for the transfer of an N-acetyl galactosamine to the 
hydroxyl group of a serine or threonine residue in the first step of O-
linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis. The rs4846914 is an intronic vari -
ant of GALNT2 gene, and its minor G allele showed association with 
elevated triglyceride levels. A Hungarian case-control study evaluated 
the association of GALNT2 rs4846914 variant with triglyceride levels, 
and explored their possible contribution to the development of isch -
emic stroke.
Methods and results: A total of 287 metabolic syndrome patients were 
genotyped by PCR-RFLP. We observed relationships between triglyc -
erides and any genotypes of TRIB1 and GALNT2. Triglyceride levels 
where higher in minor homozygotes than in two other genotype groups 
(rs17321515: AA 2.02±0.23; AG 2.01±0.11 GG 2.42±0.25; rs4846914: 
AA 2.18±0.17; AG 1.99±0.14 GG 2.58±0.33 and p<0.05). The total 
serum cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol level did not differ between 
groups of different genotypes.
Conclusions: The analyzed TRIB1(rs17321515) and GALNT2 
(rs4846914) SNPs are associated with elevated triglyceride levels in 
minor allele homozygotes.
P10.60  Genetic structure of rural population Uygur region of 
Almaty area, of Kasakhstan
A. Baysbekova1, G. M. Berezina2;  
1Molecular Medicine Center, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2Scientific Center of 
obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
The study of genetic structure of modern populations of the man is one 
of key problems of genetics. Genetic and demographic information for 
the uygurs population living in the Almaty area of Kasakhstan Republic 
is presented. The Uygur region consist of the 14 rural districts. The 
primary nation amongst the inhabitant in Uygur region were uygurs 
(56,0%).The marital-migrational structure of Uygur region was stud -
ied on the basis of marital recodes. The average value of ethnic mar -
riage assortativeness was found to be 1,68. The respective districts 
are formed the region’s genetic structure of uygur rural population of Almaty area.
The mean number of children per woman constituted 3,65. Crow index 
of total selection (Itot) and its components (Im, If) were 0,34, 0,04 and 
0,29 respectively.The size of the portion of the population of reproduc -
tive age (36,89 % of the total), family size(3,65 ), and the predominance 
of the portion of the population (13,39 % of the total) under reproduc -
tive allow us to classify this population as growing .The parameters of 
isolation of Malecot distance and endogamy index in Uygur region of 
Almaty area of Kasakhstan are counted up. Highest local inbreeding is 
found in the Avat rural county (0,0089).The index of endogamy in over 
is 0,41. Recent social and economic changes have led to an increase 
in general and ethic isolation of uigur rural population of Almaty area 
of Kasakhstan.
P10.61  inherited genetic liver disorder impact on VHc infection 
in Latvia
L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, A. Zariņa1, B. Lāce1, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1, J. 
Keiss2;  
1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, 
Latvia.
Infection rate with viral hepatitis C (VHC) is growing each year world -
wide. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is major cause of chronic liver disease. 
During antiviral therapy there are frequent adverse effects and nega -
tive response to it. Inherited liver diseases as hereditary haemochro -
matosis, Gilbert syndrome and Wilson disease changes liver cell me -
tabolism and possibly influence HCV infection outcome.
Aims - detect mutations C282Y, H63D and S65C in HFE gene, H1069Q 
in ATP7B  gene mutation, and (TA) repeats in UGT1A1 gene promoter 
region in HCV patients group and patients group, to evaluate its fre -
quency and impact on clinical outcome.
Material and Methods - DNA samples from 100 VHC patients and 150 
healthy individuals.
Results - frequency of H1069Q allele in VHC patients group is 0.055 
(in control group 0,06 p=0.0013). Frequency of C282Y allele in patient 
group 0.067,H 63D - 0.25, S65C - 0.013 - with no significant difference 
from control population (p>0.05). In gene UGT1A1 promoter region 
(TA)7 allele was found with frequency 0.402 (in control population 
0.37), there were found two alleles (TA)5 in control and patient groups 
(p>0.05). If patient had at least one of C282Y or H63D mutations dur -
ing antiviral therapy were elevated ALAT comparing to other patients 
group p=0.0331.
Conclusions: Allele H1069Q possibly affects host organism acceptibil -
ity to HCV infection. HFE gene mutations influence adverse effects 
during antiviral therapy. In Latvia is found (TA)5 allele in gene UGT1A1 
promoter region, that has no influence on VHC clinical outcome but is 
rear in Caucasian population.
P10.62  Genetic structure of Western caucasus populations on 
the base of uniparental polymorphisms
S. Litvinov1, E. Khusnutdinova1, I. Kutuev1, R. Khusainova1, R. Valiev1, R. 
Villems2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department of Evolutionary 
Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
The populations of western part of the Caucasus represent significant 
historical, ethno-cultural and linguistic traits. We have analyzed 52 
markers in coding region of the mtDNA and 48 markers in the non-
recombining part of the Y-chromosome in 592 individuals represent -
ing five populations from western Caucasus (Abkhazians, Adyghes, 
Abazins, Georgians, and Circassians). Y-chromosome haplogroups G-
M201 and J2 (J-M172) account for more than 50% of all haplogroup di -
versity in the studied populations. Haplogroup G-M201 in the Western 
Caucasus populations is represented only by subclade G2a (G-P15) 
with the insignificantly low exception in the Adyghe population where 
G1a (G-P20) amounts to less than 1%. In contrast to high frequency of 
J2 haplogroup J1 exhibit moderate occurrence and vary from 2 to 6 %. 
Haplogroup R1a (R-SRY10831.2) is also present in all studied popula -
tions. It is difficult to say though whether this component is a result of 
Eastern European influence or it has arrived from other source. While 
analysis of the coding region with high level of resolution is needed 
to understand the source of high frequencies of haplogroup H, occur -
rence of haplogroup U subclades slightly differs in all 5 populations.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
P10.63  Analysis of 17 Y-chromosomal stRs loci in the iranian 
population
N. Amini1, M. Sharafi Farzad2, S. Kiyanfar1, S. Amini1, M. Asheri1, A. Sarhadi1, 
M. Tavallaei3, S. Zeinali4;  
1kawsar Genomics and Biotech Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Kawsar Genomics and Biotech Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Research Center, Baghiatalah Medical Science 
University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dep’t of Mol. Med. 
Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
One of the smallest human chromosomes is the Y chromosome with 
an average size of 60 Mb. Exchanges is limited to small pseudoauto -
somal regions of the X-Y pair between X and Y chromosomes in the 
meiosis. The Y chromosome in most of its length is male-specific and 
effectively haploid and is transmitted from father to his son unchanged 
unless a mutational event takes place.
Y chromosome-specific STRs have proved to be an important tool in 
paternity cases, especially when the alleged father is deceased, as 
well as forensic and non-forensic fields.
Blood samples were collected from 135 randomly selected, unrelated 
Iranian males, following procedures that are in accordance with Pro -
mega kit and FTA Cards.
All 17 (DYS19, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, 
DYS393, DYS385a/b, DYS438, DYS439, DYS437, DYS448, DYS458, 
DYS456, DYS635, and Y-GATA-H4) markers were co-amplified us -
ing the AmpFlSTR Y-filerTM PCR Amplification kit(Applied Biosystems, 
USA).The amplified products were separated by capillary electropho -
resis on ABI Prism 3130 XL Genetic Analyzer. The sample run data 
were analyzed by GeneMapper IDX Software V. 1.0. Allele frequencies 
were estimated. Haplotype diversity was calculated by Nei‘s formula. 
To determine of other parameters we are using Arlequin software and 
also the online AMOVA tool from YHRD.org3.0 for y-STR haplotyping.
Allele frequencies in our study are similar to reported allele frequen -
cies in Iranian population on Y-STR haplotype databases. In this study 
we found some new mutation as off-ladder which most of them are 
located on DYS458 marker.
P10.64  Hints of positive selection in the promoter of the 
coagulation Factor Vii gene in populations of Asian descent
G. Athanasiadis1, M. Gayà-Vidal1, E. Esteban1, R. Carreras-Torres1, J. 
Dugoujon2, M. Gibert2, P. Moral1;  
1Unitat d’Antropologia, Dpt. de Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CNRS and University Toulouse III Paul 
Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
Background.-  Immoderate blood clotting constitutes a risk factor for 
cardiovascular disease in modern industrialised societies, but is be -
lieved to have conferred a survival advantage, i.e. faster recovery from 
bleeding, on our ancestors.
Aim.-  Here, we investigate the evolutionary history of Coagulation 
Factor VII gene (F7) through the analysis of 5 mutations from the F7 
promoter associated with the risk for cardiovascular diseases, as well 
as 6 neutral SNPs from the flanking region in 3 populations of Asian 
descent (Bolivian Quechuas and Aymaras and Siberian Yakuts).
Methods.-  A total of 133 individuals were typed with the iPLEX™ Gold 
assay on the Sequenom MassARRAY® Platform for the 11 polymor -
phisms. Population differentiation and selection tests were performed 
and linkage disequilibrium patterns were investigated.
Results.- No linkage disequilibrium between adjacent mutations -402 
and -401 was observed in any of the samples, while the long-range 
haplotype test detected a potential signal of positive selection for the 
F7 promoter in the Native Americans, as well as the Yakuts.
Conclusion.- Our data suggest that, in contrast with published data 
from the Mediterranean region, the F7 promoter may have undergone 
positive selection in at least some populations of Asian descent.
J10.01  Variability in the 2‘-5‘-oligoadenylate synthetase gene 
cluster in human populations from North Eurasia
A. V. Barkhash1, V. N. Babenko1, V. F. Kobzev1, A. G. Romaschenko1, M. I. 
Voevoda1,2;  
1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
of Internal Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
2‘-5‘-oligoadenylate synthetases (2‘-5‘OAS) are a family of interferon-
induced enzymes which play an important role in the antiviral defense of mammals. In humans there is a cluster of three genes encoding 
functional synthetases ( OAS1 , OAS2  and OAS3 ). Previously we found 
that five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located within OAS2 
and OAS3  genes are associated with susceptibility/resistance to se -
vere tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV)-induced disease in Russian 
population. In current study we investigated distribution of the three of 
that SNPs ( OAS3  rs2285932 (C/T, Ile438Ile), OAS3  rs2072136 (G/A, 
Ser567Ser) and OAS2  rs15895 (G/A, Trp720Ter relative to p71 iso -
form)) in seven human populations from North Eurasia: Caucasians 
(Russians and Germans (from Altai region)), Central Asian Mongoloids 
(Altaians, Khakasses, Tuvinians and Shorians) and Arctic Mongoloids 
(Chukchi). Highly significant differences between populations in geno -
type, allele and haplotype frequencies for these SNPs were detected. 
Moreover, we found that these frequencies correlate not only with the 
ethnicity of the populations but also with their differential exposure to 
TBEV during their evolution. For example, G/G genotype for OAS3  
gene rs2072136 SNP (that according to our previously obtained data 
“predispose” to severe TBEV-induced disease) was found with the 
lowest frequencies in Altaians, Khakasses, Tuvinians and Shorians 
who highly contacted with TBEV during their ethnogenesis. Thus, data 
obtained allow to suppose that TBEV might act as a selection factor in 
these populations.
J10.02  Analysis of genetic polymorphism of tcF7L2 gene of 
elderly people, residents of besieged Leningrad.
M. A. Glebova1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, L. V. Turjeva1, L. P. Khorohinina1, V. S. 
Baranov1,2;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
TCF7L2 gene encodes a high mobility group (HMG) box-containing 
transcription factor that plays a key role in the Wnt signaling pathway. 
This protein implicates in blood glucose homeostasis. Genetic variants 
of this gene are associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes, insu -
lin resistance. We suggest that ability of this gene to play a part in stor -
age of energy could help to survive of besieged Leningrad residents.
Using RFLP method polymorphism of TCF7L2 (rs7903146, IVS3C>T) 
gene of 97 elderly people was analyzed. This polymorphism was in -
vestigated in 2 groups: 26 elderly people were survived in condition 
of besieged Leningrad (Group1) and 71 elderly people (group2) from 
North-West region of Russia. Distribution of genotypes of TCF7L2 
gene was significantly different between groups (p=0.046, df=2). In -
creasing of T allele in group1 compared with group2 (26.9% and 12%, 
accordantly, χ2=6.34, p=0.01) was founded.
It could be speculated that person with certain T allele of TCF7L2 
genes has some metabolic advantages for longer survival in condition 
of besieged Leningrad. Further it is necessary to perform studies of 
more numerous groups of different age to estimate the role of age-
regulating genes in condition of besieged Leningrad.
J10.03  Analysis of TGFβ1 gene polymorphism in Balkan 
Endemic Nephropathy
Z. M. Krcunovic1, I. Novakovic1, D. Cvetkovic2, N. Maksimovic1, D. Bukvic3, S. 
Simic-Ogrizovic4, S. Jankovic5, L. Djukanovic4;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, 
Serbia, 3Institute of Endemic Nephropathy, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of 
Nephrology CCS, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Institute of Epidemiology, Belgrade, 
Serbia.
Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a multifactorial disorder with 
still unexplained hereditary component. Similarity of BEN and cyclo -
sporine nephropathy suggests possible common ethiopathogenetic 
mechanisms. Considering the role of transforming growth factor β1 
(TGFβ1) in kidney disease, and the link to renin-angiotensin-aldoste -
rone system (RAAS), we performed analysis of G915C polymorphism 
in TGFβ1 in BEN patients. It is known that the less common C allele of 
the TGFβ1  polymorphism is associated with a lower TGFß1 production 
capacity.
The study was carried out in a group of 50 patients with BEN diagno -
sis according to criteria of Danilovic, derived from endemic region in 
Kolubara district, Serbia. Two control groups consisted of 50 healthy 
persons (C) and of 45 patients with other nephropathies (NBEN), both 
matched by age and gender. DNA for gene analysis was extracted 
from peripheral blood leukocytes. For detection of TGFβ1  G915C gene Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology27
polymorphism PCR/RFLPS method was used. TGFβ1  serum level and 
urine excretion in some patients were also measured by ELISA.
We found that frequency of TGFβ1  CC genotype was 33.33%, 14.29% 
and 33.33% in BEN, C and NBEN group, respectively. Our results 
showed significantly higher frequency of TGFβ1  CC genotype in both 
BEN and NBEN group than in C group. There was correlation between 
TGFβ1  genotypes and serum levels of that growth factor.
The obtained results indicate the significant role of immune mecha -
nisms in emergency of kidney diseases such as BEN and other ne -
phropathies, and could help the further investigation of genetic factors 
that contribute to BEN pathogenesis.
J10.04  the combination of rare alleles of some gene 
polymorphism in children and adolescence with risk factors of 
cardio Vascular Disease (cVD)
A. Khmyrova1, A. Vasina2, P. Sinitsyn3, I. Moreno3, E. Kobysia4, I. Yubrina4, O. 
Kononova1, L. Lubashova1, T. Razorenova5, V. Larionova1;  
1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pavlov University, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 3The Russian State Medical University, Moskow, Russian 
Federation, 4St.Petersburg State Mechnikov Academy, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 5Military Medical Museum, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Objectives. To study rare alleles of gene polymorphisms intron4 eNOS, 
I/DACE, W64RADRB3, Q/E2ADRB2, G/R16ADRB2, G-75AApoA1, 
C+83TApoA1, SstApoC3, S19WApoA5,
-1131T<CApoA5 distribution in children and adolescents with risk fac -
tors of CVD.
Study population. We included 100 children and adolescence, whose 
parents suffered SVBD and having risk factors of CVD, age of 5-17 
years (68 males,32 females).
Control group included 145 children and adolescents (73 males, 72 
females) of the same age.
Methods. The analysis of intron4 eNOS, I/DACE gene polymor -
phisms was performed by PCR. G-75AApoA1, C+83T ApoA1, SstA -
poC3, S19WApoA5, -1131T<CApoA5, W64RADRB3, Q/E27ADRB2, 
G/R16ADRB2 gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-LRFP 
method.
Results. Significant differences were detected between the groups in 
frequency of Q/E27ADRB2 gene polymorphism Q27-allele 0,57 vs 0,44 
and E27-allele 0,43 vs 0,56 (n=100 vs n=145 respectively ;p=0,02)
Results of combination of rare alleles investigated gene polymorphisms 
are: one rare allele - 2% vs 17,9%, 2 rare alleles- 17% vs22,1%, 3 rare 
alleles - 29% vs 25,5% , 4 rare alleles 26% vs 15,2,%,5 rare alleles 
- 13% vs 6,2%, 6 rare alleles 12% vs 4,1%, 7 rare alleles 1% vs 0%, 
8 rare allele 0% vs 0,7% (n=100 vs n=145 resp.). In control group 9% 
of children and adolescence haven’t rare alleles of investigated gene 
polymorphism.
Conclusions: In group of children and adolescence, whose parents 
suffered SVD and having risk factors of CVD, frequency of E27 al -
lele gene polymorphism Q/E27ADRB2 was higher. Combination of 3-6 
rare alleles investigated polymorphisms can be considered as addi -
tional risk of CVD.
J10.05  the impact of genetic variability and smoking habits on 
the prevalence of periodontitis among adults
F. S. Bayoumi , F. M. Metwaly, H. M. Rashad, E. H. Abouel-Ezz.;  
National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.
Aim : Elucidate the effect of genetic variance of inflammatory media -
tors expression ,the influence of microbial expression, and smoking as 
a risk factors for periodontitis
Material &Methods: Sample of this study composed of 50 smokers & 
50 non smoker volunteers (unrelated and of the same ethnic popu -
lation) with 40-60 years old .Their periodontal status was estimated 
through periodontal examination ( full mouth clinical attachment loss 
measurement ,probing depths ,plaque index scores, and bleed -
ing on probing). Isolation and detection of certain oral pathogens; 
A.actinomycetemcomitans , Porphyromonas gingivalis ,and Provetella 
intermedia was performed . Genotype for bi-allelic IL-1A+4845, IL-
lB+3954 gene polymorphisms using mouth wash was detected by 
PCR based methods.
Results: There were a significant difference only between the two 
groups (smokers &non-smokers) as regards to colonization of A.actinomycetemcomitans & not among Porphyromonas gingivalis 
& Prevotella spp. There were no significant difference between the 
overall frequencies of carrying allele 2 of IL-l A, IL-1B among smoker 
and non-smokers. The percentage of non smokers having healthy 
periodontal status was much higher than smokers. On the other hand, 
smokers recorded much higher percentage for mild, moderate and se -
vere periodontitis. The difference was statistically significant concern -
ing the percentage of those with severe periodontitis.
Conclusion: Environmental factors play either a direct (i.e., causative 
factor) or indirect (modifying factor) role as a risk factor for periodonti -
tis. The association between genetic polymorphism of allele 2 of IL-l A, 
IL-1B expression & smoking habits caused a synergistic effect for pro -
gression of periodontitis. Smoking initiated A.actinomycetemcomitans 
growth.
J10.06  ANALYsis OF POLYmORPHism A t tHREE NUcLEAR 
GENOmE DNA LOci iN UiGURs
G. M. Berezina1, A. G. Bayisbekova2, G. S. Svyatova1, Z. S. Makhmutova1;  
1The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan, 2The Institute of Molecular Medicine, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
The polymorphic nuclear locus in human genome are the objective 
genetic markers for the analysis of hereditary polymorphism of the 
modern human populations and evolution.
A total of 131 unrelated healthy Uigur people of Kazakhstan were stud -
ied. In lust studies the genotypes and allelic frequencies of ACE, PV92, 
TRA25, APOA1, YaNBC148, YaNBC27, CCR5 genes were revealed. 
The distribution of the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies and 
the indexes of heterozygosity of all genes were completely conformed 
to theoretical of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0,05), except for PV92 
gene (χ2=10,6; p<0,001), for TPA25 gene (χ2=5,1; p<0,001), for YaN -
BC148 gene (χ2=5,1; p<0,001).
The genotypes and allelic frequencies of TNFa gene were: GG - 
36.6%; AA - 1.5%; GA - 61.8%; G - 67.6%; A - 32.4%. The frequencies 
of TP53 gene’s genotypes and alleles were: PP - 38,2%, AA - 15,3%, 
AP - 46,6%, P - 61,5%, A - 38,5%; and of ITGB3 gene’s were: LL - 
19,1%, PP - 10,7%, LP - 70,2%, L - 54,2%, P - 45,8%.
The frequencies of TP53 gene’s genotypes were corresponded to Har -
dy-Weinberg equilibrium completely (p>0,05); the genotypes of TNFa 
and TGB3 gene’s frequencies weren’t corresponded to Hardy-Wein -
berg equilibrium (χ12=20,3; p<0,0001 for TNFa and χ22=20,9; p<0,0001 
for ITGB3 gene).
Thus, the results of our research are evidence of the probable com -
pound ethnic history of Uigur people.
J10.07  A short tandem repeat polymorphism in the inducible 
nitric oxide synthase gene in Buryat and Russian populations.
E. E. Tymkovskaya1, N. V. Petrova1, T. A. Vasilyeva1, R. A. Zinchenko1, B. T. 
Batajargalova2, J. L. Mizernitskiy3;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Children‘s polyclinic № 2, Chita, Russian Federation, 32- Moscow Research 
Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Nitric oxide (NO), an important molecule in various biologic processes 
that include airway inflammation is synthesized from L-arginine by iso -
forms of NO synthase (NOS). Overproduction of nitric oxide (NO) by 
inducible NO synthase (iNOS) has been implicated in the pathogen -
esis of several diseases including airway inflammation of asthma. A 
highly polymorphic pentanucleotide (CCTTT)n repeat located in the 
iNOS gene promoter region has been shown to be functionally impor -
tant in the regulation of iNOS transcription.
Genotype and allele frequency of (CCTTT)n repeat in the promoter re -
gion of the iNOS gene, were analyzed in 90 healthy Buryat individu -
als and in 107 Russian individuals. The Buryats are the ethnic minority 
group of Siberia, which belongs to Mongolic group and the Russians 
belong to East Slavic peoples. We have identified significant difference 
in allele frequencies of repeats between these ethnic groups. In Rus -
sians 7 alleles with 9-15 repeats were identified, whereas 10 alleles with 
10-19 repeats were revealed in Buryats. The most common allele in 
Russians was 12-repeats (26,6%), in Buryats was 14-repeats (13,9%). 
Alleles of 17, 18 and 19 repeats were detected only in Buryat samples. 
According to literature data 17-repeats, 18-repeats and 19-repeats had 
been reported previously in Chinese population and had not been re -
ported in Caucasians. The panel and the frequencies of studied iNOS 
alleles in Russian sample correspond to those ones in Caucasians.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology2
J10.08  Distribution of the ABO Blood Groups and RH in 
KAZAKH.
M. S. Kirikbayeva1, G. M. Berezina1, A. M. Kalimagambetov2;  
1The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan, 2Kazakh national university name of al-Farabi, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan.
The gene pool of any ethnic group it is a result of centuries-old genetic 
significant demographic transformations. Therefore it is represented 
interesting to carry out research of genetic structure of population of 
Zhambyl raion (district) of Almaty region of Kazakhstan on blood type 
ABO and Rhesus factor markers. Research materials: archival records 
of the Kazakh patients of the hospital of Zhambyl raion of Almaty re -
gion (N =3112).
The parity allele’s ABO is presented by the formula: ABO*O > ABO*A 
> ABO*B > ABO *AB. In the Kazakh population the phenotypes fre -
quency were as follows: ABO*O = 36.18%, ABO*A = 30,17%, ABO*B 
= 25.42%, ABO*AB = 8.23% and RH*d = 1.06%. In the rural popula -
tion the alleles frequencies were as follows ABO*O = 0.599; ABO*A = 
0.215; ABO*B = 0.185 and RH*d = 0.103. In Kazakh population the 
heterozygosity (he) indices in respect to the ABO and RH alleles were 
0.560 and 0.185, respectively.
The rural population of Zhambyl raion the heterozygosity indices in re -
spect to the ABO and RH alleles were lower than the some rural popu -
lations of Almaty region. Nevertheless, distribution of the phenotypes 
frequency of the ABO and RH keeps within the variations peculiar to 
the population Central and the Central Asia, in some cases coincides 
with those variations on the people of the Eastern Europe and Forward 
Asia, but the heterozygosity were differs for Russian of Moscow and 
Ukrainians of Donetsk region.
J10.09  the i/D polymorphism of AcE gene may be involved in 
the left ventricular (LV) remodeling process
S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. S. Romashkina2, O. A. 
Mutafyan1, V. I. Larionova2;  
1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical 
Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Background: LV remodeling is the manifestation of a target organ 
damage from arterial hypertension (AH). The role of renin-angiotensin 
system (RAS) genes in the remodeling process has been studied in 
adults.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the RAS gene polymorphism in 
LV remodeling process in children with AH.
Methods: 82 children aged 5-17 with systolic AH were studied. LV 
mass was calculated by Devereux formula. LV mass index was calcu -
lated by dividing LV mass by height2.7. The sex-specific 95th percentile 
for LV mass index in normal children and adolescents was used as 
a cutpoint (Daniels et al., 1995). Relative wall thickness was consid -
ered abnormal when it was 0.41. The I/D polymorphism of ACE gene, 
M235T polymorphism of AGT gene, and A1166C polymorphism of 
AGTR1 gene were detected with PCR-RFLP.
Results: Concentric LV remodeling was found in 7 (9%) patients, con -
centric hypertrophy - in 6 (7%), eccentric hypertrophy - in 10 (12%), 
and normal LV geometry - in 59 (72%) patients. The genotype DD 
frequency of I/D polymorphism of ACE gene was significantly higher 
in children with concentric LV remodeling compared to children with 
normal LV geometry (57% vs 22% p < 0.05). No significant difference 
was found between genotypes and allele frequency of both AGT and 
AGTR1 gene polymorphism in patient according to their LV geometry.
Conclusion: LV remodeling was found in 23 (28%) of hypertensive chil -
dren. We suggested that the I/D polymorphism of ACE gene may be 
involved in the LV remodeling process.
J10.10  tHE ANALYsis OF tHE GENE POOL OF KAZAKH
G. S. Svyatova , G. M. Berezina;  
The Scientific Centre of Obstetric, Gynecology and Perinatology, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan.
The goal of the present research was: to study the polymorphism of 
mitochondrial DNA and DNA of the nuclear genes in Kazakh popula -
tion.
We have analyzed the 129 polymorphic positions, 44 different hap -
logroups (hg) of mtDNA of 304 Kazakh mtDNA samples. The variability 
index of haplotypes was 0,99 and the 80,7% unicum haplotypes were determined in Kazakhs.
We have found that more than 55% of mtDNA lineages belong to 
East-Eurasian specific hgs (D, C, G, A, M, F). The supercluster D was 
found with high frequency (18,1%). The frequencies of the hgs were: 
C - 9,5%, G - 6,6%), A -3,0%; M -2,6%; F -3,6% were determined in 
Kazakhs.
The Western-Eurasian specific hgs (H, T, J, K, U2, U5, HV) were ob -
served in Kazakhs with frequency 41%. Hg H was found with frequen -
cy 14,1% . The frequencies of the hgs T (3,9%), J (3,6%), U5 (3,0%), 
K (2,6%), W (1,6%) V (0,7%) and I (0,3%) were found in Kazakhs 
populations.
We studied 5 polymorphic locus of Alu-insertion : ACE, TPA25, PV92, 
APOA1, NBC27 in population of Kazakhs (n=224). We observed fre -
quencies of insertion for ACE, APOA1, PV92, TPA25, NBC27, and 
their frequencies were respectively 51,3 %, 85% ,52,7%,48,4 %,28,3 
% in Kazakhs.
The obtained data may prove useful in studies of ethnogenetic history 
of Kazakhs. The obtained data allowed us to construct a phylogenetic 
tree for Kazakhs on female lineage and to detect position of the stud -
ied population between ethnic groups in Europe and Asia.
J10.11  mtDNA and Y-chromosomal variation in populations of 
sakha (Yakutia)
S. A. Fedorova1, E. K. Khusnutdinova2;  
1Yakut Research Center of RAMS, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 
Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
We have characterized, at high phylogenetic resolution, mtDNA 
variation (n=694) and Y chromosome haplotypes diversity (n=318) in 
populations of Sakha (Yakutia) -the Autonomous Republic situated in 
northeastern part of the Russian Federation that comprises 1/5 part of 
Russia’s total land area. The results were analyzed in a broader con -
text of the Eurasian mtDNA and Y-chromosomal variability. Extended 
analysis confirms that Yakutia was colonized from the regions west and 
eastward of Lake Baikal with minor gene flow from Lower Amur/South -
ern Okhotsk region and/or Kamchatka. The genetic portraits of studied 
ethnic groups (Sakha or Yakuts, Evenks, Evens, Yukaghirs, Dolgans) 
were obtained and scenarios of ethnogenesis suggested by historians 
and archaeologists were compared with genetic reconstructions. We 
considered our results in connection with some epidemiologic and mo -
lecular genetic researches of hereditary diseases characterized by a 
high prevalence in the region such as spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, 
myotonic dystrophy, 3-M syndrome.
J10.12  The C677T and A1298C Mutations in the methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Gene among the Kazakh 
Population
Z. S. Makhmutova , G. S. Svyatova, G. M. Berezina;  
The Scientific center of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan.
The presence of the C677T and A1298C mutations in the methylene -
tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene has been regarded as a ge -
netic risk factor for neural tube defects, some complication during the 
pregnancy and coronary artery disease.
The prevalence of their mutations has been reported from various 
populations. We have investigated the frequencies of MTHFR muta -
tions in 303 unrelated Kazakhs and compared our results with the find -
ings of other researchers. The frequencies of C677T mutation were: 
CC - 59,1%, CT - 39,4% and TT - 1,6%. Kazakh population, as well 
as Canadian Inuit, South African and sub-Saharan African, show the 
lowest TT genotype in this study. According to a previous report of 
other authors the Mexican population has a highest frequency of TT 
genotype (34,8%). The frequencies of A1298C mutation of Kazakh 
were: AA -55,2%, AC - 38,4% and CC - 6,4%. The prevalence of CC 
homozygosis wasn‘t rare amongst Kazakhs and hasn’t significant dif -
ferences from other world populations.
In addition we revealed the frequencies of MTHFR mutations in 84 
women with fetuses with various neural tube defects. The frequencies 
of C677T mutation were: CC -48,8%, CT -42,9% and TT - 8,3%. The 
frequencies of A1298C mutation Kazakh were: AA -44,0%, AC - 41,7% 
and CC -14,3%. Thus, homozygosity for C677T and A1298C muta -
tions in the MTHFR gene may be a possible genetic risk factor for 
neural tube defects in the Kazakh population.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
J10.13  Research of hereditary ophthalmopathology of the 
Rostov Region, Russia.
O. L. Kireeva1, S. S. Amelina2, O. V. Khlebnikova1, R. &. Zinchenko1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Rostov, Russian Federation.
A genetically epidemiological examining of the population of Rostov 
Region (twelve districts) was implemented. Total size of investigated 
populations was 454524 persons (90% Russians). The research was 
conducted under the original protocol, providing for detection of more 
than 2500 various hereditary diseases and syndromes, including all 
hereditary ophthalmopathology. Hereditary eye pathology is a large 
heterogeneous group of genetic diseases with different prevalence 
rate in various populations. Hereditary diseases eye were diagnosed 
as isolated ones, and they were also a part of hereditary diseases and 
syndromes. Prevalence rate of isolated hereditary eye diseases was 
4,6 (with variation for districts from 0,5 to 9,6 per 10000 of population). 
The most frequent hereditary pathology eye was retina degeneration 
the prevalence rate of which made up 1,3 (with variation for districts 
from 0,2 to 4,5 per 10000). Various forms of congenital cataracts (cata -
ract lamellar, cataract-microcornea synrome, microphthalmia with cat -
aract) were ranked second as per their prevalence. Total prevalence 
rate there of was 1,3 (from 0,2 to 2,8 per 10000). Prevalence rate of 
congenital monogenic malformations of eye was as follows: coloboma 
of iris 0,2 (with variation for districts from 0,2 to 1,3 per 10000), aniridia 
0,1 (from 0,2 to 1,7 per 10000), ptosis hereditary congenital 0,5 (from 
0,2 to 2,1 per 10000). Ehlers-Danlos, Marfan, Usher, Sturge-Weber 
syndromes, osteogenesis imperfect were the most frequent mono -
genic syndromes followed by eye pathology. Prevalence of hereditary 
diseases of retina and congenital cataracts in the Rostov region turned 
out higher than in other previously examined populations of Russia.
J10.14  Analysis of uncoupling protein 2 and 3 genes 
polymorphisms in elderly people, residents of besieged 
Leningrad.
I. V. Tarkovskaya1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, L. P. Khoroshinina1, V. S. Baranov1,2;  
1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russia, 
St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-
Petersburg, Russia, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Our goal was to investigate whether polymorphisms in UCP2 and 
UCP3 genes influence life expectancy. UCP2 and UCP3 belong to mi -
tochondrial carrier protein family of genes which provides opportunity 
to study thermogenesis in humans. These genes supervise heat ex -
change which influences preservation of energy necessary not only for 
living, but also survival in extremely situations.
We have analyzed UCP2 Ala55Val and UCP3 C-55T polymorphisms 
by RLFP method of 133 elderly people (group 1) and also of elderly 46 
residents of besieged Leningrad (group 2) from North-West Region of 
Russia. Distribution of genotypes of UCP2 gene was significantly dif -
ferent between groups (p=0.032, df=2). Increasing of Ala allele in group 
1 compared with group 2 (23.3% and 6,5%, accordantly, χ2=6.26, 
p=0.012) was founded. No significant different between genotypes of 
the C-55T polymorphisms in the UCP3 gene was found. However, we 
are registered increasing frequency of T allele in group 1 compared 
with group 2 (33,8% and 26,1%, accordantly, p=0.098).
Consequently we suggest that UCP2 Ala55Val polymorphisms are sig -
nificant for survival. It also seems interesting that Val allele which is as -
sociated with reduced thermogenesis is prevalence in elderly residents 
of besieged Leningrad. On the basis of these results we suppose that 
those who have Ala allele, have less charge of heat.
P11 Genomics, Genomic technology 
including bioinformatics methods, gene 
structure and gene product function and 
Epigenetics
P11.001  Genetic analysis of AcE polymorphisms in children 
with secondary high blood pressure
C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, E. Kiss1, V. Bodescu1, I. Muntean3;  
1Pediatric Department No 2, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, 
Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Third Cardiology Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, 
Romania.
Several genetic investigations have been attempted to elucidate the 
association of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene polymor -
phism and arterial hypertension.The essential role of the renin-angio -
tensin system (RAS) in controlling blood pressure has been well estab -
lished. Genes encoding components of the RAS have been proposed 
as candidate genes that determine genetic predisposition to hyperten -
sion. The purpose of this study was to analyze angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphisms in romanian hy -
pertensive children in Mures region. Twenty hypertensive children (1-
17 years old, blood pressure ≥95th percentile for age, sex and height) 
and a control group of thirty normotensive children were included in 
the study. We analyzed the ACE gene I/D polymorphism by using a 
polymerase chain reaction assay, and agarose gel electrophoresis 
system. The results of the study showed that the frequency of DD, ID 
and II genotypes were 21,43%, 42,86% and 35,71 % in hypertensive 
group respectively 46,67%, 43,33% and 10 % in control group with 
significantly higher frequency of II genotype in patients as compared 
to the control group. The frequency of ACE II genotype in patients with 
secondary hypertension (35.71%) was significantly higher than in con -
trols (6,67%) in the men. This result suggested that ACE II genotype 
may be associated with secondary hypertension in the men, not in the 
women, and showed the possibility of ACE II genotype as a potent 
risk factor for secondary hypertension for the men not for the women. 
Acknowledgments: This study was supported by a CNCSIS Grant - 
137/2008 for Young PhD, Romania.
P11.002  study of the AcVR1 gene expression and regulation.
M. Mura1, F. Giacopelli1, S. Cappato1, R. Ravazzolo1,2, R. Bocciardi1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 
2University of Genoa and CEBR, Genoa, Italy.
ACVR1 encodes a BMP type I receptor mutated in Fibrodysplasia Os -
sificans Progressiva, a severe form of heterotopic ossification. Mecha -
nisms regulating ACVR1 expression are still unknown. According to 
data available in GenBank, ACVR1 has two main transcripts differing 
for their 5’UTR end. Our bioinformatic analysis of the genomic region 
containing the gene reveals the presence of several ESTs, predicting 
the existence of multiple transcripts in which different 5’UTR exons 
are combined to a common coding sequence. The 3’UTR region is 
common to all transcripts and contains AU-rich elements and putative, 
well-conserved binding sites for miRNAs.
Following the above prediction, we found transcripts with different 
exon composition at the 5’UTR and show their expression profile in 
different tissues. These data suggest complex regulation, with different 
transcription start sites and promoter regions and possible elements 
controlling transcript stability or translation.
Functional analysis of the 3’UTR region by Luciferase reporter as -
says revealed a negative role in gene expression. ACVR1 transcript, 
assessed by quantitative PCR after treatment with inhibitors of tran -
scription, appeared unstable. We show experiments that demonstrate 
negative regulation by miRNAs: transfection of Pre-miR miRNA Pre -
cursor Molecules in presence or absence of specific Anti-miR miRNA 
Inhibitors showed an effect of mir-365, -148b, -384, -381 on ACVR1 
transcript, quantified by quantitative PCR.
Our results highlight the complexity of transcriptional and post tran -
scriptional regulation of ACVR1 gene expression.
P11.003  correlation Between t ransposon-Derived Repeats and 
markers of Germline methylation in the Human Genome
M. I. Sigurdsson1,2, A. V. Smith3, H. T. Bjornsson4,5, J. J. Jonsson1,2;  
1Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, 
Iceland, 2Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali - University 
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Icelandic Heart Association, Reykjavik, Iceland, 
4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Harriet Lane Pediatric 
Residency Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
A potential relationship between transposon-derived repeats (TDR) 
and human germline methylation is of biological importance since it 
could affect the expression and function of nearby genes. Further -
more, DNA methylation has been proposed to serve as a defense 
mechanism against genome stability threats posed by TDR. Using a Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics270
recently published marker of germline methylation, density of HapMap 
methyl-associated SNPs (mSNPS), we studied the correlation of the 
marker and regional proportion of TDR. After correcting for confound -
ers, we found a strong negative correlation between proportion of Alu 
repeats and mSNP density for 125-1000 kb windows. However the 
correlation between the proportion of L1 repeats and mSNP density 
was negligible in 125-500 kb windows, but strong and negative for 
the largest 1000 kb windows. Using bisulfite sequencing methylation 
data from the Human Epigenome Project on sperm, the final product 
of the male germline, we found a lower proportion of Alu repeats ad -
jacent (3-15 kb) to hypomethylated amplicons. In contrast, we found a 
higher proportion of L1 repeats adjacent (3-5 kb) to hypermethylated 
amplicons.
Our results indicate that DNA methylation is unlikely to be a global 
defense system against genome stability threats by TDR. Although a 
cause-and effect relationship should not be determined using correla -
tion data, we offer the most parsimonious explanation of our results. It 
suggests the germline insertion of the two major human repeat families 
(L1 and Alu) into hypomethylated regions. This is followed by post-in -
sertional methylation of sequences adjacent to L1 repeats or post-in -
sertional selection against L1 repeats in hypomethylated regions.
P11.004  iron/copper metabolism in mild cognitive impairment 
(mci) and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)
M. Martins1,2, Â. Crespo2,3, L. Marques3, E. Marcelino1, C. Maruta1, S. Costa4, 
Â. Timóteo4, F. S. Couto1, A. Herrero4, A. Verdelho1, M. Guerreiro1, C. Costa4, A. 
de Mendonça1, L. Costa3;  
1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de 
Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 4Hospital Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal.
Alzheimer’s disease is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease. 
Patients with MCI are at higher risk for progressing to dementia of the 
Alzheimer type, and therefore represent an important population to un -
derstand AD and early neurodegeneration mechanisms.
In this study, we further investigated the implication of the redox-active 
biometals, copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) imbalance in the oxidative injury 
hypothesis of AD pathogenesis by: (I) comparing serum biochemical 
markers of Fe/Cu metabolism in a sample of 73 AD patients, 24 MCI 
patients and 60 controls; (II) testing, in the same sample, a set of Fe/Cu 
metabolism-related genes and APOE  for association with MCI/AD.
Significant differences were found between AD patients and con -
trols for serum Fe concentration ( p=0.001) and transferrin saturation 
(p=0.007). A significant association with AD was found for TF - trans -
ferrin gene  (p=0.0082) and for the first time for SLC40A1 - ferroportin 
(Fpn) gene ( p=0.0355). APOEε4  was also significantly associated with 
AD (p=0.0004), in agreement with previous studies. Statistical analysis 
is underway for the MCI population.
We hypothesize that the lower serum Fe concentration observed in AD 
patients can be due to impaired Fe excretion from cells, since Fpn is 
the only known Fe exporter in mammalian cells. The intracellular accu -
mulation of Fe, particularly in the brain, where Fpn is also expressed, 
would lead to a rise in oxidative damage, contributing to the AD physio -
pathology. The advent of using a pre-AD state such as MCI may further 
contribute to elucidate the involvement of Fe metabolism in AD.
P11.005  An automated analysis protocol for aneuploidy 
detection of QF-PCR data generated on capillary electrophoresis 
instruments
E. Currie-Fraser1, S. Sharp1, V. Bansal1, S. Higgins2;  
1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gen-Probe Life Sciences, 
Abington, United Kingdom.
Molecular methods for aneuploidy analysis have become important 
tools for the study of chromosome abnormality in conditions such as 
Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome and Patau syndrome.
Researchers who routinely perform this type of research have a need 
for automation of data analysis and concise report generation. An in -
novative strategy for the detection of chromosomal aneuploidy at the 
molecular level is analysis of short tandem repeat markers using quan -
titative fluorescence PCR. Such techniques will help diminish work -
flow bottlenecks introduced by more time consuming, conventional 
research methods. This poster will present an automated procedure 
for analysis and report generation for aneuploidy detection of chro -
mosomes 13, 18, 21, and of sex chromosomes X and Y, in sample data generated on capillary electrophoresis instruments using frag -
ment analysis software tools. We will demonstrate how key features in 
the software, such as sample quality values, allele binning and report 
analysis, enable this workflow to be a significant improvement over 
traditional detection methods.
For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human thera -
peutic or diagnostic use.
P11.006  Two new cases of 6q16 microdeletion: clinical findings 
and cognitive profile associated
C. Orellana1,2, J. Bernabeu3,2, M. P. Roselló1, S. Monfort1, S. Mayo1, S. Oltra1, 
R. Quiroga1, F. Martínez1;  
1Unidad de Genetica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain, 
2Departamento MIDE. Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Unidad de 
Oncología Pediátrica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain.
Introduction: most patients with interstitial deletion at 6q16 showed hy -
potonia and developmental delay, some of them have also a Prader-
Willi-like phenotype with obesity. Here we present detailed clinical and 
cognitive findings in two new patients with 6q16 microdeletion.
Material and methods: whole genome array-CGH was performed on 
Agilent oligo-chip 44K. Microsatellite markers were used to confirm the 
array-CGH findings. A number of neuropsychological tests were per -
formed to establish the cognitive-behavioural profile of the patients.
Results: in a series of 200 patients with mental retardation associated 
with congenital anomalies, we found two patients with an interstitial de -
letion in 6q16. Both deletions occurred de novo in the paternal chromo -
some, and are very similar in size (9-10 Mb) and position (from posi -
tion 93,932,682 to 104,244,422). Detailed cognitive-behavioural profile 
showed interesting similarities with a generalized cognitive deficit in all 
the tested areas specially in language and fine motor skills tasks. In 
behaviour highlights: cognitive slowing and attention deficits.
Discussion: The clinical characteristics of these two new cases of 6q16 
deletion are compared with those previously reported cases with simi -
lar deletions. We also propose that this anomaly could be associated 
with a characteristic cognitive-behavioural profile.
P11.007  Fine-mapping analysis of the 5q35 region through a 60K customized cGH-array in patients with sotos syndrome.
J. NEVADO1, E. Vallespin1, P. Arias1, M. Palomares1, A. García-Cazorla2, E. 
Geans3, A. Rodriguez4, V. Soler5, M. Del Campo6, L. Perez-Jurado6, E. Guillen7, 
A. Martinez-Carrascal8, P. Lapunzina1;  
1INGEMM-IdiPaz/CIBERER-Madrid (HULP), MADRID, Spain, 2S. Neurología, 
Hospital San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 3S. Genética, Hospital San Juan 
de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain, 5Hospital 
de Madrid, Montepríncipe, MADRID, Spain, 6Unitat de Genética, Hospital del 
Vall de Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 
8Hospital de Requena, Requena, Valencia, Spain.
Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth disorder characterized by exces -
sive growth during childhood, macrocephaly, distinctive facial gestalt, 
learning difficulty and other variable minor features. The diagnosis is 
suspected after birth because of excessive height and head circum -
ference, advanced bone age, hypotonia and feeding difficulties. In 
Europeans, mutations (85%) and deletions (15%) of the NSD1  gene 
located at chromosome 5q35 (coding for a histone methyltransferase 
implicated in transcriptional regulation) are responsible for the majority 
of cases.
Sixteen out of 101 patients with Sotos syndrome have deletions en -
compassing the NSD1  gene. All patients were initially diagnosed with 
a combination of MLPA and/or microsatellite analysis. A customized 
8x60K oligonucleotide CGH array, spanning the 5Mb surrounding the 
NSD1 locus, was designed to evaluate the critical Sotos syndrome 
region.
Four patients had very small deletions (3.8-12.2 Kb) affecting some 
NSD1  exons (1,2, 5, 9-12) and the remaining individuals showed larg -
er deletions (0.8-2 Mb) including the entire NSD1  and some neighbour 
genes. In addition to the classical deletion, one patient also had distal 
5q35 duplication encompassing ADAMTS2  and TRIM41 , suggesting a 
different mechanism of rearrangement of the distal chromosome 5.
Oligonucleotide CGH-array is a useful tool for fine-mapping analysis of 
the 5q35 region in patients with Sotos syndrome and microdeletions. 
Partial, small deletions of the NSD1  gene and large deletions affecting 
other genes can be correctly diagnosed with this technology. Further 
comparative studies of patients with well characterized genotype, phe -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics271
notype and microdeletion sizes and breakpoints will help to determine 
possible influence of clinical outcomes.
P11.008  The study of DNA methylation patterns in the forkhead 
transcription factor (Foxp3) gene in asthmatics and controls
S. Zeilinger1, N. Klopp1, H. Baurecht2, E. Rodriguez2, T. Illig1;  
1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Division of 
Environmental Dermatology and Allergy, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich and 
ZAUM-Center for Allergy and Environment, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany.
Background: DNA methylation is the most frequent and stable form of 
epigenetic modifications. Epidemiological evidence increasingly sug -
gests that environmental exposures early in development have a role 
in susceptibility to disease in later life.
DNA methylation of genes critical to T-helper cell differentiation may in -
duce polarization toward or away from an allergic phenotype like asth -
ma. One of these genes is Foxp3, which is specifically expressed in T 
regulatory cells (Tregs) and plays a central role in Treg development 
and function. Methylation leads to less Foxp3 expression and reduced 
Tregs function. Asthma is probably characterized by a deficiency in 
Tregs allowing TH2 cells to expand.
Aim: To investigate the impact of environmental exposures on the 
methylation status of asthma candidate genes and on the develop -
ment and severity of asthma phenotypes later in life.
Methods: The detection of DNA methylation is based on the ability to 
distinguish cytosine from 5-methylcytosine in the DNA sequence and 
is performed through chemical modification of DNA by bisulfit treat -
ment, followed by PCR, base-specific cleavage and analyses of the 
cleaved fragments by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Sequenom-
EpiTYPER Software).
Results: The methylation patterns of the Foxp3 gene will be investi -
gated in a subset of the KORA survey (F4; 100 asthmatics and 100 
controls). First results point to no methylation differences in human 
blood between asthma cases and controls.
P11.009  Unblocking the flow of genetic variation data - a variant 
browser case study
G. Dobson , M. Cornell, A. Devereau;  
NGRL, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
As part of the EU framework 7 project Gen2Phen we are working to 
provide effective mechanisms to allow genetic variation data to flow 
between systems. There is a large quantity of such data available, 
but it is stored, accessed and presented in heterogeneous ways. In 
most cases it is useful for human consumption, but difficult to access 
for machines. Moreover, there are social and legal issues involved 
which complicate the sharing of this data. With the increasing neces -
sity of automated analyses, and the resulting need to integrate data 
into a range of bioinformatics applications, it is important to address 
this data flow problem. Here, we discuss some of the issues involved 
and the solutions that the Gen2Phen partners are developing. These 
include web service interfaces for machine-to-machine communica -
tion, a model and format for exchange of variant data and a refer -
ence sequence standard which provides a means to record variation 
in an unambiguous and immutable fashion. We demonstrate the use of 
these technologies through their integration into a gene browser appli -
cation (the NGRL Universal Browser) which provides a unified view of 
variation data from multiple sources. We assess what improvements in 
data flow have been made by comparing with our own experiences of 
performing the same data integration tasks before the contributions of 
Gen2Phen and after. We also identify improvements that could further 
streamline the flow of data in the future.
P11.010  In silico  analyses of promoter regulatory targets in the 
iron metabolism pathway
N. J. Strickland , M. G. Zaahl;  
Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
Aim: Investigate the promoter region of genes of the iron metabolism 
pathway by employing comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, in order 
to elucidate specific mechanisms of gene regulation.
Introduction: The human genome is a system regulated at many differ -
ent levels. Transcriptional regulation is the first, and arguably the most 
important, step in the process of gene expression. This process is gov -erned by the presence of specific cis-regulatory regions ( cis-motifs) 
residing within the promoter region of genes and the functional interac -
tions between the products of specific regulatory genes (transcription 
factors-TFs) and these cis-motifs. Bioinformatic tools can be utilised to 
formulate putative predictions on how specific cis-motifs may influence 
the expression patterns of specific genes or groups of genes (e.g. iron 
metabolism pathway).
Method:
• Retrieve 2kb 5-prime UTR (promoter) sequences from the human 
Ensembl database.
• Conserved Nucleotide Sequence (CNS) analysis of promoter regions 
using specific software tools (e.g. VISTA).
• Computational analysis and in silico  design of promoter models us -
ing probabilistic detection methods such as expectation maximization 
(MEME).
• Refined analysis and identification of detected motifs analyzed using 
TRANSFAC and JASPAR.
Results: Specific and/or combinations of cis-motifs were discovered 
within a CNS identified in the promoter of seven of the tested iron 
genes. Within these motifs, relevant tissue- and pathway-specific TF-
binding sites were predicted to occur.
Discussion: Accurate analyses of cis-motif architecture combined with 
integrative in silico modelling (once validated by experimental analy -
sis) could offer insights into complex mechanisms governing tran -
scriptional regulation, serving as a refined approach for prediction and 
study of regulatory targets.
P11.011  Analysis of in-silico tools for the prediction of 
pathogenesis in missense variants
E. Hellen , A. Devereau;  
NGRL Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Missense variants occurring in disease related genes can often cause 
pathogenesis by mutating the protein product of the gene. However, 
missense variants can also occur with non-pathogenic effects, coding 
for amino acid changes which do not significantly affect the protein 
product. It is often very difficult to determine whether an unknown vari -
ant is pathogenic or not. In silico  tools can predict the pathogenicity of 
a variant based on the change in amino acid. These tools use features 
such as the evolutionary conservation of the amino acid position or the 
physical characteristics of the amino acids such as size, hydrophobic -
ity and polarity.
Although a large number of tools exist which aim to predict the patho -
genesis of a missense mutation, only a small number of these tools are 
regularly used by laboratory scientists. This study aims to benchmark 
these, and other, prediction tools and to provide guidance about which 
are the most reliable.
Ten prediction algorithms have been chosen for the analysis. The 
ability of these tools to accurately predict both pathogenic and non-
pathogenic missense mutations was assessed. The performance was 
assessed using a dataset consisting of 1656 pathogenic variants and 
570 non-pathogenic variants, retrieved from locus specific databases 
(LSDBs) for 26 different genes. The results of the analysis show that 
while some of the tools currently used by laboratories are high per -
forming, other less well known tools may be a useful addition to the 
bioinformatics analysis of unknown missense variants.
P11.012  Haplotype Specific Amplification in High Throughput 
tumor sequence Data
N. Dewal1, M. Freedman2,3, T. LaFramboise4, I. Pe‘er1;  
1Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 2Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
United States, 4Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United 
States.
During tumor progression, culprit genes and variants confer selec -
tive advantage to progenitor cancer cells via allowing them to bypass 
normal growth control mechanisms. Regions of somatic amplification 
represent one such variant type and are a hallmark of tumor genomics. 
When integrated with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) informa -
tion at the germline level - the second variant type - causal oncogenes 
may be localized within such regions. This integration was explored 
previously on SNP arrays using allele specific copy number calls at 
each marker. However, the relative sparseness of SNP arrays and the 
fidelity of these calls leave room for improvement. The advent of high Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics272
throughput sequencing technologies provides an exciting opportunity 
to examine massive amounts of genomic data at the nucleotide reso -
lution. We propose a novel Hidden Markov Model-based method that 
analyzes tumor sequence data to infer amplified alleles and haplo -
types in pre-determined somatically amplified regions. Our method is 
designed to handle biases in read data as well as handle rare variants. 
Furthermore, it utilizes existing information from public repositories, 
such as the 1000 Genomes Project, when inferring haplotypes. We 
thus believe our method will help further the integration of variant types 
in sequence data and aid the cancer community in identifying causal 
variants.
P11.013  cellular expression of human plakophilin-2 mutations 
suggests the involvement of proteolytic degradation in 
the disease process of arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy
F. Kirchner1, A. Heuser1, L. Thierfelder1, B. Gerull2;  
1Max-Delbrueck Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2University of 
Calgary, Department of Cardiac Sciences, Calgary, AB, Canada.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a geneti -
cally determined heart muscle disorder characterized by progressive 
loss of cardiomyocytes and fibro-fatty replacement. The armadillo 
protein plakophilin-2 (PKP2) has been identified as the most preva -
lent disease gene. To get further insights in the underlying genetic 
mechanisms of these mutations and to investigate their influence on 
cellular junctions integrity, protein stability and cell signalling we over-
expressed different human missense (C796R, S615F, K654Q) and 
frame-shift (C693fsX741) mutations in epithelial cell lines (A431, Hela-
M2).
In contrast to the wild-type protein and two unclassified variants (V587I, 
I531S), which showed the expected localization at the junctional 
plaque, the mutant proteins demonstrated a cytoplasmatic expression 
pattern with accumulation around the nucleus. Western blot analysis 
demonstrated significantly lower levels of the mutant PKP2 proteins. 
Additionally we investigated direct interactions of mutant PKP2 with 
desmoplakin (DSP) by co-expressing both proteins. In contrast to the 
proper membrane associated localization of PKP2 and DSP after co-
transfection of both wild-type proteins - mutant PKP2 proteins were 
not able to interact with DSP to enable the assembly at the junctional 
plaque. This indicates the requirement of functional PKP2 for DSP in -
tegration in to the desmosome.
To prevent the potential degradation of mutated PKP2 proteins we 
used different inhibitors of the calpain and ubiquitin-proteasome sys -
tem (UPS) and could stabilize the mutant proteins at equal amounts 
compared with the wild-type protein. In summary, we describe evi -
dence that mutations in PKP2 produce unstable proteins in vitro, which 
might be removed rapidly from the cell by proteolytic degradation.
P11.014  cHiP-based sequence analysis of 34 cardiomyopathy 
genes reveals new genes involved in Hcm and Dcm and multiple 
pathogenic mutations in single patients
I. Krapels1, W. van Dijk1, A. Stassen1, P. Lindsey1, Y. Arens1, A. Helderman1, 
C. Marcelis2, J. van der Smagt3, S. Heymans1, P. Volders1, R. Jongbloed1, H. 
Smeets1, A. van den Wijngaard1;  
1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2University 
Medical Center St Radboud Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Utrecht Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Inherited cardiomyopathy is a common cardiac disease with a preva -
lence of 1:500 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and 1: 2500 for 
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). The large genetic and clinical hetero -
geneity and the laborious screening methods, hamper rapid detection 
of the genetic cause in all cases. Current diagnostic screening solves 
only 60-70% of the families by testing a limited number of genes and 
usually stops when a pathogenic mutation is found. However, double 
pathogenic mutations seem to be present in 5-10% of the familial 
cases. In order to create a fast, parallel genetic screening pipeline for 
inherited cardiomyopathy, we designed a resequencing array (Cardio -
CHIP) covering 34 genes in duplicate (300Kb). Genes known to be 
involved in DCM, HCM, non compaction cardiomyopathy, Limb Girdle 
Muscular Dystrophy and candidate genes based on their presence in 
the sarcomere and Z-disc were included, as also exons and flanking 
introns (38bp) covering the heart- and muscle-specific RNA-isoforms 
were included. The 5’UTR and 3’UTR regions and, for a selection of genes, the promoter regions were included as well. So far, 250 patients 
were sequenced for all 34 cardiomyopathy genes. The mutation detec -
tion rate is around 99% and about 98%  of the novel exonic variants 
can be confirmed by conventional sequence analysis. In addition to 
mutations detected in the 13 genes routinely tested for HCM or DCM, 
we identified mutations in the 21 additional genes, some of which were 
the first for those new candidate genes. We present several families in 
which up to 4 pathogenic mutations were identified.
P11.015  Specific missense mutations affecting the N-terminal region of NiPBL almost completely abolish adherin complex 
formation with the cohesin-associated protein mAU-2
D. Braunholz1, M. Albrecht1, M. C. Gil-Rodríguez1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, J. 
Wilde2, M. A. Deardorff2, F. J. Kaiser1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Childrens Hospital, Philadelphia, 
PA, United States.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a dominantly inherited genetic 
disorder. The phenotype is characterized by typical facial features, up -
per limb defects, growth and mental retardation. Mutations in the co -
hesin associated factor NIPBL or the highly conserved structural com -
ponents of the cohesin ring SMC1A and SMC3 have been identified in 
about 60% of the patients.
NIPBL directly interacts with MAU-2 to form a heterodimeric complex 
called adherin which regulates the loading and unloading of cohesin 
onto chromatin.
Using two hybrid-based techniques we could narrow down the criti -
cal region for this heterodimerization to a stretch of 40 amino acids 
within the N-terminus of MAU-2 and the N-terminal region of NIPBL. 
Sequencing analysis of NIPBL  in a cohort of about 100 patients with 
CdLS, identified six new missense mutations affecting this region.
Reporter gene assays of these six as well as two further mutations 
could show that missense mutations G15R and P29Q almost com -
pletely abolish the NIBPL-MAU-2 complex formation. Whereas muta -
tions S111T, A179T, P192L, D246G, L254V and S262A do not alter 
heterodimerization.
While no detailed clinical data was available for patient P29Q, patient 
G15R is severely mentally retarded, shows a typical CdLS phenotype 
without any abnormalities of the limbs.
Our data show for the first time that specific missense mutations affect -
ing the N-terminal region of NIPBL can almost completely abolish ad -
herin complex formation. Whether these mutations result in an altered 
cohesion loading or unloading to distinct gene loci which maybe modify 
the expression of specific genes is currently under investigation.
P11.016  Centaurin-α2 and tubulin interaction increases 
microtubule stability
M. Stroppi1, D. Cartelli2, G. Cappelletti2, M. Venturin1, S. Rigoletto1, E. 
Battaglioli1, P. Riva1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
Centaurin-α2 is constituted by an Arf-Gap zinc binding domain and two 
PH domains. In EGF stimulated cells, centaurin-α2 localizes at plasma 
membrane through PIP2/PIP3 binding and it promotes the inactivation 
of Arf6, involved in intracellular vesicular trafficking and in cytoskeletal 
rearrangement. With the final aim of elucidating the centaurin-α2 mo -
lecular pathways and its biological role/s, we searched for centaurin-
α2 interacting proteins by an yeast two-hybrid assay: our studies evi -
denced the interaction between centaurin-α2 and tubulin β, confirmed 
by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Confocal microscopy analysis 
allowed us to co-localize centaurin-α2 with microtubules. By western 
blotting analyses we found that centaurin-α2 is preferentially associ -
ated with polymerized fraction of tubulin and remained associated with 
microtubules resistant to cold or/and nocodazol treatment. Moreover in 
cell transfected with centaurin-α2, we observed an increase of acety -
lated microtubules (MT), a well known marker of stable MT, suggesting 
that centaurin-α2 increases the stability of MT.
We are going to define the centaurin-α2 domain/s interacting with tubu -
lin β by β-galactosidase assay and immunofluorescence experiments.
We will check by live imaging the co-localization of centaurin-α2 with 
tubulin β during its translocation from cytosol to membrane, by means 
of GFP-centaurin-α2 transfection following EGF stimulation. Our find -
ing allow us to speculate that centaurin-α2 can move to plasma mem -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
brane through microtubule anchoring and that this protein could act as 
agent stabilizing microtubules.
P11.017  Heterozygous 5p13.3-13.2 deletion in a patient with type 
i chiari malformation and bilateral Duane retraction syndrome
F. Bayrakli1, I. Guney2, K. Bilguvar3, T. Cankaya4, M. Gunel3;  
1 Cumhuriyet University, School Of Medicine, Department Of Neurosurgery, 
Sivas, Turkey, 2 Marmara University, School Of Medicine, Department Of 
Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3 Yale University, School Of Medicine, 
Department Of Neurosurgery, New Haven, Ct, United States, 4 Dokuz Eylul 
University, School Of Medicine, Department Of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey.
Chiari malformations are part of the spectrum of cranio-spinal malfor -
mations. Duane‘s syndrome is an unusual congenital form of strabis -
mus characterized by horizontal eye movement limitation and specifi -
cally by globe retraction with palpebral fissure narrowing on attempted 
adduction. Here we report a 22-year-old syndromic male patient that 
combines the clinical and radiological features of these two malforma -
tions.
The authors used high-resolution array-based comparative genome 
hybridization (CGH) analysis to characterize the ~2.2 million-bp dele -
tion on chromosome 5 that accounts for this syndromic clinical presen -
tation. Genetic analysis using array-based CGH revealed a deletion 
affecting multiple genes at the 5p13.3-13.2 locus. Quantitative real-
time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on genomic DNA confirmed 
this genomic lesion.
A syndrome combining features of Chiari malformation and bilateral 
Duane’s retraction syndrome can be added to the group of entities that 
result from deleterious genetic variants involving a group of genes and 
possibly producing contiguous gene syndrome. The deletion detected 
in our patient can be easily detected using either array-based chromo -
somal analysis or quantitative RT-PCR.
P11.018  SOLiD™ ChIP-seq kit for ChIP and ChIP-Sequencing 
from low cell number samples
O. Stephan1, P. Loni2, C. Rucipero3, D. Kissinger2, K. Clancy2, D. Leon2, M. 
Nisha2, R. Hart3, Z. Chen2, R. Bennett2;  
1Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany, 2Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, 
United States, 3Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay is the widely used and 
a powerful method to identify regions of the genome associated with 
specific proteins. Combined with massively parallel next-gen DNA se -
quencing technology, ChIP-sequencing provides a high resolution digi -
tal solution for genome-wide survey of protein-DNA interactions.
We developed a SOLiD ChIP-seq kit, which offers an optimized ChIP 
workflow and an efficient ChIP-seq library construction from low cell 
number samples. ChIP procedure is usually laborious, time consum -
ing, and requires large starting cell numbers. We use MAGnify ChIP 
System, which is suitable for fast enrichment of chromatin complexes 
and DNA recovery, for ChIP workflow in the kit. It is able to use less 
than 300,000 cells for ChIP thus preserving precious samples such as 
primary cells and biopsies. This new approach allows faster throughput 
to investigate different chromatin and transcription time-course events 
as well as enable antibody screening to determine ChIP compatibil -
ity. In addition, we develop a sensitive ChIP-seq library construction 
procedure which enables users to construct a complex library using 
as low as 1 ng ChIP DNA. Combining with SOLiD’s high sequencing 
throughput, SOLiD ChIP-seq offers a highly sensitive, hypothesis-neu -
tral approach to accurately characterize protein-DNA interactions at 
genome-wide scale.
Using SOLiD ChIP-seq kit, we characterize transcriptionally permis -
sive and repressive histone H3 modifications and transcriptional regu -
lators in the MCF7 cells on the SOLiD platform. The data demonstrate 
that SOLiD ChIP-seq kit provides a streamlined and reproducible as -
say for the enrichment of chromatin/protein complexes, DNA recovery 
using magnetic bead capture technology and construction of sequenc -
ing library.P11.019  study of gene expression by DNA microarray 
technology in c-kit mutant mice
G. Cardos1, C. Ardeleanu1,2, G. Butur1, M. E. Hinescu1,2;  
1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Carol 
Davila“ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
The c-kit gene codifies for a tyrosine-kinase receptor with essential 
role in development of interstitial Cajal cells (ICC) from gastro-intesti -
nal tract, involved in digestive motility and neurotransmission, but also 
in GIST (gastro-intestinal tumors) pathogenesis. Interstitial Cajal-like 
cells (ICLC) have been identified in several extra-digestive organs, 
their functions being yet unknown.
In order to contribute in understanding the physiology of ICC and ICLC 
we have performed comparative investigation of gene expression in 
normal and mutant mice by DNA microarray.
Total RNA was extracted by AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) from 
different digestive and extra-digestive organs sampled from control 
and mutant mice (WBB6F1/J-KitW/KitW-v/J strain) and analyzed by 
Bioanalyzer and RNA 6000 Nano assay Kit (Agilent Technologies).
DNA microarrays from Whole Mouse Genome Microarray Kit (Agilent 
Technologies) hybridized and scanned by Agilent DNA Microarray 
Scanner were analyzed by Feature Extraction 5.1.1. and GeneSpring 
GX 10.Expression Analysis Software (Agilent Technologies).
DNA microarray analysis showed differential expression (>2 fold) of 
more than 3000 genes in mutant versus control mice. Thus, genes 
involved in apoptosis, intra-cellular transport and inter-cellular com -
munication (such as Wnk1, Sema5a, Nf1, Tnfrsf21 genes) were down-
regulated. Other genes involved in transcription regulation (such as 
Eif4a1, Zfp593, Zfp69, Dmbx1), cellular transport and cell junctions 
(Hbb-b1, Abi2, CaCng8), signal transduction and metabolic process 
regulation (Calcr, Cyp3a44, Mcpt1 genes) were up-regulated in mu -
tant versus control mice. Some of these genes may become candidate 
biomarkers for studying ICC and associated pathology in humans after 
validation by RT-qPCR.
Financial support: PN 06.26 - 02.18 and PN 09.33.02.09 Projects
P11.020  increased sensitivity of copy number variation using a new high density array cGH platform.
R. Selzer , C. Shaw, K. O‘Moore, T. Richmond, J. Geoghegan, N. Jiang, R. 
James;  
Roche NimbleGen, Inc., Madison, WI, United States.
Array CGH methods are widely used to investigate DNA copy num -
ber variation (CNV) associated with complex disorders. Disease-as -
sociation studies have become increasingly focused on CNVs, and 
recent reports show links between CNVs and schizophrenia (Stefans -
son 2008; Stone 2008), autism (Sebat 2007; Marshall 2008; Glessner 
2009), and cancer. More recently, the focus of CNV research has mi -
grated to detection of rare variants, with an allelic frequency of less 
than 5% (Conrad 2009, Manolio 2009). In an effort to increase detec -
tion of rare variants as well as more common CNVs, we sought to 
develop the highest density oligo array available for CNV detection, as 
well as a more sensitive algorithm for CNV detection on NimbleGen 
arrays.
The NimbleGen 2.1M and 3x720K CNV arrays contain empirically op -
timized probes, with the most comprehensive collection of targeted re -
gions available, including Asian population-specific CNV regions. Utili -
zation of the CNV arrays enabled detection of several hundred CNVs 
per individual. When compared to whole-genome tiling arrays, 2- to 
3- fold more CNVs were detected with the CNV arrays. The Nimble -
Gen CNV arrays detected 300% and 245% more CNVs, respectively, 
and the higher probe density allowed 2-fold higher detection of CNVs 
shorter than 1 kb when compared to competitor arrays. The increased 
sensitivity of CNV detection was aided by an improved segmentation 
algorithm (segMNT), included in NimbleScan v2.6 software. A compar -
ison between the segMNT v1.1 and segMNT v1.2 algorithms shows in -
creased sensitivity in detection of CNVs resulting in about 2-fold more 
CNVs detected per sample with segMNT v1.2.
P11.021**  Phenotypic severity of CRLF1  associated disorders 
depends on the secretion of the mutated protein
A. Meloni1, J. Herholz2, M. Marongiu1, F. Chiappe1,3, M. Deiana1, C. Roche4, G. 
Zampino5, H. Hamamy6, Y. Zalloum7, P. Waaler8, G. Crisponi9, L. Crisponi1, F. 
Rutsch2;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
Ricerche, Monserrato (CA), Italy, 2Department of General Pediatics, Münster 
University Children’s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 3Università degli Studi di 
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Hospital Universitario La Paz Neurologia Pediatrica 
Paseo de la Castellana, Madrid, Spain, 5Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 
Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli”, Servizio di Neurofisiopatologia, L.go A. 
Gemelli, Roma, Italy, 6Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, 
Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Arab Medical Center, 
Amman, Jordan, 8Øvre Folldalslia, Rådal, Norway, 9Casa di cura Sant’Anna, 
Cagliari, Italy.
Crisponi syndrome (CS) and Cold-induced sweating syndrome type 1 
(CISS1), are disorders caused by mutations in the cytokine receptor-
like factor 1 ( CRLF1 ) gene. The two syndromes share some clinical 
characteristics, including dysmorphic features, scoliosis and cold in -
duced sweating, while Crisponi patients usually show a severe clinical 
course in infancy involving hyperthermia, muscular contractions and 
feeding difficulties.
To evaluate a potential genotype/phenotype correlation and whether 
CS and CISS1 represent two allelic diseases or manifestations at dif -
ferent stages of the same disorder, we performed a detailed analysis of 
the clinical phenotype of 19 patients carrying mutations in CRLF1 . 14 
of these patients were originally classified as Crisponi syndrome and 5 
as Cold induced sweating syndrome type 1.
We studied the functional significance of the mutations by site directed 
mutagenesis and analysis of the mutant constructs after transfection.
We found that phenotypic severity of the two CRLF1  associated disor -
ders does not depend on the different type/localization of mutation but 
on altered kinetics of secretion of the mutated CRLF1 protein.
A lacked, delayed or partial CRLF1 secretion was associated with a 
severe clinical phenotype, while a full secretion was associated with a 
milder clinical phenotype.
We therefore propose a novel classification of patients with CRLF1 
mutations depending on the secretion of the mutated protein.
P11.022  Identification of cryptic recombination signal 
sequences containing cpG sites
A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2;  
1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of 
Opole, Opole, Poland.
It is known that inhibition of interactions between RAG1/2 proteins 
and their DNA target sites in vitro can be caused by mCpG sites lo -
cated inside target sites. For example, methylation at the third cytosine 
of heptamer on the top strand responsible for direct inhibition DNA 
cleavage by RAG1/2. By contrast, mCpG sites at other positions block 
RAG1/2-mediated cleavage if mCpG interact with methyl-CpG bind -
ing-domain proteins.
In this study we analyzed nucleotide composition of 5649 human cryp -
tic recombination signal sequences (cRSS) which supposedly have 
high recombination potential (their heptamer/nonamer sequences 
corresponded to CACAGTG/ACAAAAACC structure or differed from 
them for 1-2 non functional nucleotides). These cRSS previously were 
found by us in the human genome outside Ig and TCR loci. We con -
sider, that RAG1/2 theoretically can interact with such motives and 
mediate instability of human genome when V(D)J-recombination sys -
tem gets out of control. We have found CpG sites in 1513 (27%) cRSS 
(697 of such cRSS are located in protein-coding genes). 1245, 180, 87 
and 1 cRSS have 1, 2, 3 and 4 CpG, respectively. Methylation at the 
third cytosine of the heptamer can be possible at 221 cRSS. We found 
that 26%, 69%, 5% CpG are located in heptamers, spacers, nonamers 
of cRSS, respectively. CpG frequency in 23cRSS is 3.3-fold bigger 
than in 12cRSS (cRSS with 23 bp and 12 bp spacers, respectively). 
We propose that in vivo when V(D)J-recombination system gets out of 
control 1513 cRSS containing mCpG will be less effective interact with 
RAG1/2 then 4136 cRSS without mCpG.
P11.023  Development of a simplified and sensitive microarray-
based method for mutation detection with optimised probes for 
cystic fibrosis
M. Paolucci1, L. Lonie1, M. Macek jr2, J. Ragoussis1;  
1Wellcome Trust center for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Charles 
University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
Oligonucleotide microarrays represent a versatile platform which al -
lows the rapid and cost effective screening of a large number of muta -
tions and sequence variations in specific parts of genomes. Microarray techniques are being continuously improved to increase the reliability 
and precision of this method[1]. Here we present the development of 
an improved mutation detection method using a pool of 40 mutations of 
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) 
that include the 21 most frequent in the Caucasian UK population. An 
extensive oligonucleotide design was produced by the IsoDice software 
and utilized in order to identify probes sets with the highest sensitivity 
and specificity. This design study allowed us to address, investigate 
and identify many factors that affect the hybridization kinetics of oligo -
nucleotides. A direct-hybridization gain-of-signal approach[2] allowed 
the selection of probe pairs for each mutation, working optimally under 
one single hybridization condition. Testing of the oligonucleotide pairs 
on different microarray platforms showed the robustness and reliability 
of the method, showing conserved discrimination between wild type 
and mutant genotypes. IsoDice and the hybridization protocol were 
applied to 13 polymorphisms linked to cardio vascular diseases and 
optimal probe pairs were successfully selected. We have shown a cost 
effective, simplified and comprehensive CFTR genotyping method on 
microarrays that can be readily expanded to include additional muta -
tions, and adapted as a diagnostic tool for other diseases.
P11.024  Association of Xq28 recurrent duplication with 
Dandy-Walker malformation: a putative role for filamin A as 
predisposing factor.
F. Martínez , S. Monfort, M. P. Roselló, S. Oltra, R. Quiroga, S. Mayo, C. 
Orellana;  
Unidad de Genética. Hospital Universitario La Fe, VALENCIA, Spain.
The Dandy-Walker malformation is considered as a continuum of pos -
terior fossa anomalies comprising from the classical malformation to 
megacisterna magna of unknown etiology.
Three patients of the same family, two brothers and one maternal 
nephew, with mild-moderate mental retardation, and Dandy-Walker 
malformation in two of them, were investigated by array-CGH.
A duplication of nearly 0.3 Mb was observed at Xq28 between posi -
tions 153.2 to 153.5Mb, that perfectly overlaps with the recently de -
scribed copy-number gain with two, three or five copies of the genes 
annotated. Our results fit well with the suggestion that the copy num -
ber correlates with the severity of clinical features, where GDI1 is the 
most likely candidate gene in impaired cognition. However, the Dandy-
Walker malformation or megacisterna magna, clearly associated to 
this CNV in four different families, is better correlated with FLNA copy 
number. Altogether, it is present in 4/8 patients with two copies and in 
2/2 patients with three copies of this gene.
At present the mechanism(s) underlying Dandy-Walker malformation 
remains unknown. A pathogenic theory holds that the primary defect is 
vermis hypoplasia due to an inhibition of cell migration from rhomben -
cephalon. Filamin A, a widely expressed protein that regulates reorga -
nization of the actin cytoskeleton, is required for locomotion of many 
cell types. Mutations in this gene lead to a broad range of congeni -
tal malformations, including a localized neuronal migration disorder. 
Hence, deregulation of neuronal migration favoured by an increased 
expression of filamin A would be in good accordance with a predisposi -
tion to this abnormality.
P11.025  tHE iNsiLicO DA tABAsE: AN EFFiciENt st ARtiNG 
POiNt FOR GENOmic DA tA ANALYsis
N. Walker ;  
IRIDIA, Université Libre de Bruxelles,, Brussels, Belgium.
There is a large and rapidly growing amount of genomic data freely 
available in the public domain, but this data is often in a raw form 
and requires tedious and error-prone retrieval and compilation before 
it can be used in analysis tools. The In Silico database allows fast 
data import and collaborative curation from the public databases. Raw 
biological data are pre-processed uniformly and the biological sample 
description is compiled into a thesaurus form. These features allow the 
efficient aggregation of the data as well as the sample annotation from 
multiple studies for joint analysis.
The genomic datasets compiled in the In Silico database can then be 
seamlessly queried and retrieved along with the biological information 
for export to analysis platforms such as R/bioconductor and GenePat -
tern.
We compare and contrast the functionality with other similar systems 
and outline the key features of the systems. We present a case study Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
over the term «age» across multiple human expression datasets. The 
system is available at http://insilico.ulb.ac.be
P11.026  Diagnostic mutation Database, Repository of UK 
molecular Diagnostic mutation data
B. Kattamuri1, A. Devereau1, G. Taylor2;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory , Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom, 2Genetics & Experimental Therapeutics, Leeds, United Kingdom.
The Diagnostic Mutation Database (DMuDB) is a repository for sharing 
variant data among UK molecular diagnostic laboratories, developed 
and curated by the National Genetics Reference Laboratory (NGRL) in 
Manchester, UK. The database is accessed through a secure website. 
Data are anonymised and are shared according to the Data Protection 
Act 1998. They are uploaded manually (one referral at a time) by labo -
ratories when diagnostic reports are issued, or in bulk (more than one 
referral at a time) by the database curator. DMuDB variant names are 
based on HGVS nomenclature but it can also store other nomencla -
ture systems. NGRL has also developed the Universal Browser to view 
data from DMuDB , dbSNP, LSDBs and other data sources graphically 
in an integrated display.
DMuDB was first released in 2005. It is centred on patient referrals 
and presently holds 6,900 referrals which contain more than 13,000 
individual variants in 30 genes. There are 228 active users from 39 
diagnostic laboratories. BRCA variants (~9200) and HNPCC variants 
(~1100) currently predominate but the range of data is expanding, for 
example we are currently expanding DMuDB to support EGFR muta -
tion, treatment and response to treatment information.
Users outside of UK laboratories can enquire about variants in DMuDB, 
and will be put in touch with a relevant submitting laboratory when 
appropriate. We are also developing partnerships, e.g. with ENIGMA 
group for BRCA data and InSIGHT for Lynch Syndrome data, so that 
DMuDB data can be submitted to publically accessible databases.
P11.027  A novel mutation on cOcH gene in an italian family.
M. Perrone1, F. Faletra1, A. Fabretto1, N. Pirastu2, A. Somaschini2, C. Zadro2, C. 
Zadro2, P. Gasparini1;  
1Medical Genetics-Department of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, 
Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-IRCCS Burlo Garofolo Hospital, Trieste, Italy.
Hearing loss is the most common form of sensory impairment, affecting 
millions of individuals worldwide. Pre-lingual non-syndromic hearing 
loss is present in 1 on 700 children and it is thought that in half of the 
cases the hearing impairment is caused by genetic factors. Progres -
sive late onset hearing loss is much more frequent than pre-lingual 
deafness. Most cases are caused by interactions of non-genetic (in -
fection, acoustic trauma and ototoxic drugs) and predisposing genetic 
factors. We analysed an Italian family with a bilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss attended in many family members and inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner.
The subjects were genotyped with the SNPs array using the Hu -
manCNV370-Duo platform (Illumina, San Diego, California) accord -
ing to manufacturer’s protocol. Then we performed parametric linkage 
analysis using Merlin which identified a close to significant 40 Mb locus 
on chromosome 14.
The only gene known to cause deafness in this region was COCH. The 
sequence of all exons and the flanking regions of the gene allowed us 
to identify a novel mutation A487P. This mutation was found in all of the 
affected family members and was not found in healthy family members 
or in 100 healthy controls.
P11.028**  Diamond-Blackfan Anemia associated mutations in Ribosomal Protein s19 impair its binding to its own mRNA
A. Fröjmark , J. Schuster, P. Nilsson, J. Badhai, A. Virtanen, N. Dahl;  
University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a congenital pure red cell aplasia 
(OMIM 205900) typically presenting within the first year of life. The dis -
ease is also associated with growth retardation, congenital malforma -
tions and heterozygous mutations in a subset of ribosomal protein genes. 
Heterozygous mutations in the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) gene are 
observed in approximately 25% of DBA patients. The mutations result in 
perturbed rRNA processing and impaired ribosomal subunit formation. 
The mechanisms whereby disruption of ribosome biogenesis results in 
anemia remain to be defined. We hypothesized that RPS19 interacts 
with its own mRNA as part of a regulatory mechanism.We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and filter bind -
ing experiments to address whether rRPS19 binds to the 5’ untrans -
lated region (5’ UTR) of its own mRNA and whether this interaction 
is of biological significance. We show that RPS19 binds specifically 
to the 5’ UTR of its own mRNA with an equilibrium binding constant 
(KD) of 4.1±1.9 nM. The binding is sequence and structure dependant 
as mutations introduced into the 5’UTR lower RPS19’s affinity to the 
substrate. Additionally, we investigated the mRNA binding properties 
of two mutant RPS19 proteins (W52R and R62W) identified in DBA 
patients. We observed a significant increase in KD for both proteins 
(16.1±2.1 and 14.5±4.9 nM, respectively), indicating a reduced RNA 
binding capability ( p<0.05). We suggest that the binding of RPS19 to 
its mRNA has a regulatory function and hypothesize that the weaker 
RNA binding of mutant rRPS19 may have implications for the patho -
physiological mechanisms in DBA.
P11.029**  Tissue-specific conserved coexpression for disease 
gene prediction and hypotheses generation
R. M. Piro , U. Ala, I. Molineris, E. Grassi, C. Damasco, C. Bracco, P. Provero, 
F. Di Cunto;  
Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino, Italy., Torino, Italy.
Even considering recent technological and methodological advances, 
such as next generation sequencing and genome-wide association 
studies, the identification of genes involved in human hereditary dis -
ease remains a demanding task that can be significantly aided by com -
putational predictions.
We discuss a method based on high-throughput microarray expres -
sion data that uses the conservation of coexpression as a powerful 
filter for biological significance and allows to specifically focus on tis -
sue-specific relationships between disease and candidate genes.
The most important novelty of our approach, the tissue-specificity that 
we show to be highly complementary to multi-tissue coexpression, 
has allowed to identify novel high-confidence candidates for several 
genetic diseases. Moreover, disease gene prediction via tissue-spe -
cific conserved coexpression can additionally generate meaningful hy -
potheses about functions of candidate genes and biological processes 
underlying disease. Notably, these hypotheses can be important also 
for cases other than disease conditions, and have provided us with 
several promising novel candidates for pluripotency.
Through an explicit integration of phenomics, in particular the con -
cept of phenotype similarity, we can apply our method also to disease 
phenotypes with so far unknown molecular basis. We present a user-
friendly web tool for custom analysis, discuss the results obtained, and 
describe a case study that confirms USP9X as a particularly interest -
ing candidate for X-linked mental retardation. The latter is also a proof 
of concept that our method can be efficiently integrated with deep se -
quencing to provide high-confidence candidate genes.
P11.030  t argeted Diagnostic sequencing of patients with 
genetic disorders
E. Turbitt , K. Bell, A. Sinclair, S. White;  
Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia.
It has been estimated that 5% of live births are affected by a genetic 
disorder that will manifest before adulthood. These disorders can have 
a significant, lifelong impact on affected individuals and their families, 
along with major economic burdens on society in general. Being able 
to provide a rapid and accurate diagnosis is beneficial for effective 
treatment of patients as well as counselling of family members.
Recent developments in DNA sequencing technologies have great 
potential for advancing genetic research and diagnosis. Sequencing 
the entire genome of an individual however is still prohibitively expen -
sive for the majority of research and diagnostic laboratories, and the 
amount of data that needs to be analysed will in the majority of cases 
preclude a rapid result being provided to the clinician.
We have developed a technique that captures multiple genomic re -
gions of interest for sequencing. It is based on the immobilization of 
target DNA to small nylon filters, which are then used to capture se -
quences of interest from fragmented and bar-coded genomic DNA. We 
have trialled this technique using PCR products and BAC sequences 
as capture material and in each instance have found >10,000 fold en -
richment for the DNA sequences targeted. We are currently developing 
several specific target mixes, particularly focussing on genes involved 
in Disorders of Sex Development (DSD) and Premature Ovarian Fail -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
ure (POF). This approach has the potential to allow the rapid and cost-
effective diagnosis of a range of genetic disorders.
P11.031  Automatically extracting implicit knowledge from 
literature for biological data interpretation and function 
prediction.
H. van Haagen1, J. den Dunnen1, B. Mons1, M. Schuemie2, P. ‘t Hoen1;  
1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
The amount of scientific knowledge needed to generate hypotheses, 
conduct experiments and interpret results in the biomedical domain 
is increasing rapidly, and reading all the relevant literature is already 
infeasible for any human. This is especially true when studies become 
more and more interdisciplinary. To tackle this problem we developed 
techniques that generate „concept profiles“ from literature, an ap -
proach we call “Biosemantics” (www.biosemantics.org).
Biosemantics tools include Anni, a multipurpose text-mining tool that 
can be used to analyse gene expression profiling data, and Nermal. 
Nermal predicts Protein-Protein Interactions (PPIs) based on the simi -
larity of the context in which the individual proteins appear in literature. 
It outperforms previously developed PPI prediction algorithms that rely 
on the conjunction of two protein names in MEDLINE abstracts. We 
show significant increases in coverage (76% vs. 32%) and sensitivity 
(66% vs. 41% at 95% specificity) for the prediction of PPIs currently 
archived in six PPI databases. The practical value of the method for 
discovery of novel PPIs was illustrated by the experimental confirma -
tion of the predicted interaction between CAPN3 and PARVB, based 
on shared concepts such as Z-disc, dysferlin and alpha-actinin. Us -
ing similar Biosemantics approaches we are currently studying the 
predictive power of our methods for relationships between genes and 
phenotypes (e.g. diseases). Using roll back analysis we simulate the 
prediction of a disease-causing gene before publication of the actual 
landmark paper describing the connection between the gene and the 
disease.
P11.032  improved detection of cell-free methylated DNA in 
plasma
I. S. Pedersen1, H. B. Krarup1, O. Thorlacius-Ussing2, P. H. Madsen1;  
1Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Dept. of Surgical Gastroeneterology, Aalborg 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
Detection of cell-free methylated DNA in plasma is a promising tool 
for tumour diagnosis and monitoring. Due to the very low amount of 
cell-free DNA in plasma, sensitivity of the detection methods are of ut -
most importance. The vast majority of currently available methods for 
analysing DNA methylation are based on bisulphite-mediated deami -
nation of cytosine. Cytosine is rapidly converted to uracil during bisul -
phite-treatment, whereas 5-methylcytosine is only slowly converted. 
Hence, bisulphite-treatment converts an epigenetic modification into a 
difference in sequence, amenable to analysis either by sequencing or 
PCR based methods. However, the recovery of bisulphite-converted 
DNA is very poor. Here we introduce an alternative method for the 
crucial steps of bisulphite removal and desulphonation, vastly improv -
ing recovery, especially for specimens with low levels of methylated 
DNA (table 1).
Table 1 Detection frequency of methylated copies
Methylated genome copies 1.25 2.5 5 10
Detection frequency* 31 % 45% 66% 86%
*calculated as the percentage of positive results of 18 markers anal -
ysed 6 times each.
The method is based on an accelerated deamination step and mag -
netic silica purification of DNA in combination with a first round of PCR 
amplifying 18 methylated markers concurrently, followed by individual 
detection of the 18 methylated markers by real-time PCR. This method 
allows low levels of DNA to be easily and reliably analysed, a prereq -
uisite for the clinical usefulness of cell-free methylated DNA detection 
in plasma.
P11.033  methylation markers of early-stage non-small cell lung 
cancer
K. Kirotar1, T. Vooder1,2, R. Kolde3, K. Välk1, M. Solovjova1, R. Roosipuu4, T. 
Annilo1, A. Metspalu1,5, N. Tõnisson1,6;  
1IMCB University of Tartu / Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Lung Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Computer Sciences, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Pathology Dept. of Tartu University Hospital, 
Tartu, Estonia, 5Estonian Genome Project, Tartu, Estonia, 6Dept. of Genetics, 
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
DNA methylation changes are common and relatively stable in various 
types of cancer and may be potentially used as diagnostic or prog -
nostic biomarkers. Over 100 methylated loci and genes were previ -
ously known in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We’ve focused 
our methylation study on early-stage NSCLC.
We’ve analysed stage I NSCLC samples from 49 patients together with 
19 matching macroscopically cancer-free control samples for methyla -
tion changes with Infinium HumanMethylation27 beadarrays (Illumina 
Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) that cover the predicted promoter regions 
of over 14 500 genes. Cluster analysis was performed with Limma 
program of Bioconductor package in R statistical computing software. 
We’ve detected 264 genes hyper- and 423 genes hypomethylated in 
NSCLC (Bonferroni corrected, p<0.01). From these genes, 113 genes 
were differentially methylated in adenocarcinoma and 194 genes differ -
entially methylated in squamous cell carcinoma (Bonferroni corrected, 
p<0.01). Five genes showed significant differences in methylation level 
in the patients with up to 1 years survival, compared to patients with 5 
and more years survival (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p<0.05). At the time 
of abstract submission, correlation analysis with gene expression data 
of the differentially methylated genes is underway.
The methylation markers found will need a further validation. To our 
surprise, the number of hypomethylated genes in stage I NSCLC was 
higher compared to the number of hypermethylated genes.
P11.034  Quantitative one-step DNA methylation analysis using 
native genomic DNA as template
T. von Känel1, D. Gerber1, A. Schaller1, A. Baumer2, E. Wey2, C. B. Jackson1, F. 
M. Gisler1, K. Heinimann3, S. Gallati1;  
1University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland, 3University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
During the last few years, analysis of DNA methylation has become 
a standard procedure in both research and diagnostics. Analysis of 
DNA methylation currently requires multi-step procedures that are 
either based on conversion of unmethylated cytosines by bisulfite or 
on methylation-sensitive endonucleases. In the present study, we in -
vestigated the potential of a novel one-step approach we refer to as 
quantitative one-step DNA methylation analysis (qOSMA). The assay 
is based on the combination of methylation-sensitive FastDigest® en-
donuclease digestion and quantitative PCR (qPCR) in a single reac -
tion, with reaction conditions providing DNA digestion in a first step, 
followed by endonuclease inactivation and qPCR. The degree of DNA 
methylation is determined by comparing the quantification cycles (Cq) 
of reactions containing either a methylation-sensitive endonuclease 
or a sham mixture with no endonuclease. Using our novel approach, 
we correctly diagnosed the imprinting disorders Prader-Willi syndrome 
(PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) in 35 individuals by determining 
methylation levels of the SNRPN  promoter. Control reactions interro -
gating an unmethylated locus detected possible endonuclease inhibi -
tors and were simultaneously used for copy number assessment by 
means of standard qPCR with the deltadeltaCq method. In addition, 
we propose a model for digestion bias correction, which significantly 
increases assay accuracy and allows analysis of DNA samples with 
decreased digestibility like they occur in retrospective studies. Our pro -
cedure strongly reduces both hands-on time and the risk of handling 
and pipetting errors and allows DNA methylation analysis to be com -
pleted in less than 90 minutes after DNA extraction, predestining the 
assay for high-throughput analyses.
P11.035  Deep sequencing analysis of pre-mRNA splicing in the 
human DMD  gene.
I. Gazzoli , Y. Ariyurek, G. van Ommen, J. den Dunnen, A. Aartsma-Rus;  
Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a recessive X-linked disorder 
and is caused by mutations in the DMD  gene that disrupt the open 
reading frame, resulting in a truncated and non-functional protein. The 
absence of the dystrophin protein causes a progressive neuromuscu -
lar degeneration, which develops into complete loss of muscle fibers 
and muscle function. A possible conversion in a milder phenotype is Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics277
achieved by an innovative approach which restores the semi-function -
al dystrophin proteins, using antisense oligonucleotides (AONs). This 
strategy has been successfully used for single and double exons skip -
ping, but it is not full efficient for multiple exons, although it might be 
improved by an increased acknowledge of the splicing of DMD  gene.
We present a first preliminary study of a complete transcriptome analy -
sis of the human DMD  gene, characterizing all encoding transcripts, 
splice junctions, the order of intron removal and alternative splicing. 
To accomplish these aims, we performed deep sequencing of entire 
2.4 Mb DMD  transcript (Solexa Illumina), after the capture of the frag -
mented reverse transcripts by hybridization to oligonucleotide probes 
in solution (SureSelect system from Agilent). To target all introns, 79 
exons and the 8 alternative transcripts, we created a biotinylated li -
brary, which minimally overlap to the complete coding and non-coding 
regions. Paired end sequencing will allow confirmation of the enriched 
DMD  gene. The enormous amount of processed data can support a 
different correlation between the transcripts abundance and the re -
moved introns stage, providing a novel insight into the mechanism and 
the regulation of the splicing of DMD  gene.
P11.036**  A functional link of DYt1 and DYt6 dystonia: 
Repression of t OR1A (DYt1) gene expression by the 
transcription factor activity of tHAP1 (DYt6)
A. Erogullari1,2, A. Osmanovic1, A. Rakovic2, S. Orolicki2, D. Braunholz1, T. 
Lohnau2, M. Albrecht1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, C. Klein2, K. Lohmann2, F. J. 
Kaiser1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Section of Clinical and Molecular 
Neurogenetics at the Department of Neurology, Lübeck, Germany.
Dystonia is clinically characterized by involuntary twisting, repetitive 
movements and abnormal postures. The monogenic forms of prima -
ry (isolated) dystonia are associated with mutations in two genes: i) 
mutations in the TOR1A gene cause DYT1 dystonia; ii) mutations in 
the recently identified THAP1  gene lead to the phenotypically similar 
DYT6 dystonia. The THAP1 protein is a sequence-specific DNA-bind -
ing factor involved in transcriptional regulation, with a characteristic 
THAP zinc-finger domain at the N-terminus.
To illuminate the molecular association between DYT1 and DYT6 dys -
tonia, we performed luciferase reporter gene assays. For this, the TO-
R1A core promoter was narrowed down to a stretch of 200 bp and in -
serted into the pGL4 luciferase reporter plasmid. Co-transfection of the 
TOR1A  core promoter with a THAP1-expression plasmid decreases 
TOR1A  promoter activity in a concentration-dependent manner. In ad -
dition, DYT6 dystonia-associated mutant THAP1 proteins generated 
via site directed in-vitro  mutagenesis showed impaired THAP1-medi -
ated repression of TOR1A . This was confirmed in vivo  by measuring 
TOR1A  expression in primary fibroblasts from THAP1 mutation carri -
ers by quantitative PCR, where mutation carriers showed a two-fold 
increase in DYT1  expression as compared to controls. Furthermore, 
we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in human neu -
roblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) to prove that THAP1 binds to the TOR1A 
promoter.
Our data collectively demonstrate that THAP1 regulates the transcrip -
tion of TOR1A,  establishing transcriptional dysregulation as a cause 
of dystonia. Further, we provide evidence that the molecular pathways 
underlying DYT1 and DYT6 dystonia are linked with a central role of 
TorsinA in the pathogenesis of dystonia.
P11.037  A novel approach for denaturating high-resolution DNA electrophoresis of mLPA and stR-t yping samples in 
microfluidic chips
M. G. Gassmannn ;  
Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany.
The Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument platform is designed for per -
forming fast electrophoretic analysis of DNA, RNA and proteins based 
on microfluidic chip technology. It is widely used for the analysis of PCR 
products and restriction digests. However, the resolution of the current 
DNA assays is not sufficient to separate DNA fragments generated in 
applications like e.g. STR-typing, AFLP and MLPA. As these methods 
require a very high resolving power in the electrophoresis involving de -
naturing conditions, usually capillary-based DNA sequencers are used 
to separate the DNA fragments. However, due to a growing number of 
new applications, there is a strong demand for an alternative separa -
tion platform that is fast, flexible and easy to use.Here we describe a novel Bioanalyzer assay prototype that is able to 
perform fast, sensitive, high resolution separation of labeled DNA frag -
ments on a modified Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument. A new dena -
turating gel matrix has been developed that enables the separation of 
DNA fragments between 10 and 550 bp with a resolution approaching 
2 basepairs. By the use of an internal size standard very precise sizing 
results can be achieved (standard deviation approx. 0.1-0.2 bp). The 
significantly increased resolution of the new assay together with the 
possibility to use an internal size standard enables applications like 
STR-typing and MLPA analysis on the Bioanalyzer.
P11.038  GENCODE: Creating the Human Reference Geneset
A. Bignell1, A. Frankish1, B. Aken1, M. Diekhans2, F. Kokocinski1, M. Lin3, M. 
Van Baren4, J. Gilbert1, M. Brent4, M. Gerstein5, R. Guigó6, R. Harte7, M. Kellis3, 
S. Searle1, J. Harrow1, T. Hubbard1;  
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Center for 
Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California, CA, United 
States, 3MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Laboratory for 
Computational Genomics and Department of Computer Science, Washington 
University, St. Louis, MO, United States, 5Department of Molecular Biophysics 
and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 6Centre for 
Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 7Center for Biomolecular Science and 
Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project aims to identify 
all functional elements in the human genome. Having the best possible 
annotation of coding and non-coding genes and pseudogenes is an 
essential part of achieving this goal. The GENCODE consortium are 
producing the reference human gene set which will provide the basis 
for subsequent analysis. This is being achieved using a combination of 
manual annotation, computational prediction and experimental valida -
tion. The manual gene annotation, while requiring support from tran -
script or protein evidence, is both informed by and QC tested against 
computational gene predictions of alternatively spliced transcripts, 
supported introns, U12 introns, coding exons and pseudogenes to en -
sure high sensitivity and specificity. Manually annotated gene models 
are then validated by RT-PCR and sequencing.
To achieve a more complete coverage of loci and alternative splice 
variants (including the complete set of Consensus Coding Sequenc -
es (CCDS)), manual annotation from the HAVANA group has been 
merged with automated gene predictions from Ensembl. A non-redun -
dant set of transcripts with confidence levels to clearly indicate their 
source has been created and is available via the Ensembl and UCSC 
genome browsers and DAS servers.
In addition to the ENCODE project, both the 1000 Genomes Project 
and the International Cancer Genome Consortium have adopted GEN -
CODE as the reference gene set for analysis.
P11.039  Gene expression analysis under the action of selank 
and its fragments
T. Kolomin , M. Shadrina, Y. Agniullin, S. Shram, P. Slominsky, S. Limborska, 
N. Myasoedov;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
Selank is a synthetic peptide which consists tuftsin (Thr-Lys-Pro-Arg) 
and C terminal Pro-Gly-Pro peptide. Selank has a nootropic and anx -
iolytic effects, and exhibits an antiviral effect.
To study the effect single and course intranasal Selank administra -
tion on gene expression we have analyzed the expression profiles of 
12000 genes in rat hippocampus. Single and course administration of 
Selank caused a more than 2,5-fold change in the expression of 18 
and 15 genes, respectively. Both single and course administration of 
Selank caused change in the expression of five genes: Actn1 , Cx3cr1 , 
Fgf7, Ptprn2  and Xtrp1 . Also it was shown that the effect of Selank 
on the expression of these genes in the spleen is much stronger than 
in the hippocampus. The most significant increase was observed for 
three genes ( Ptprn2, Actn1 and Cx3cr1 ) after a single administration 
of Selank.
For a more detailed study the action of Selank and its fragments - Gly-
Pro, Arg-Pro-Gly-Pro and tuftsin - on the gene expression analyzed the 
expression of 84 genes involved in processes of inflammation in the 
mouse spleen 6 and 24 hours after single intraperitoneal injection of 
peptides. The result was a significant change in the expression of 34 Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
genes. In most cases the response was observed 6 hours after of pep -
tides injection. Also should be noted that each of the peptides gives an 
individual picture of changes in the expression of genes under study.
P11.040**  Deficiency of Npps attenuates atherosclerosis lesion 
progression in apoE deficient mice
Y. Nitschke1, G. Weißen-Plenz2, R. Terkeltaub3, F. Rutsch1;  
1Münster University Children’s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 2Leibniz-Institute of 
Atherosclerosis Research, Münster, Germany, 3Department of Rheumatology/
Immunology, VAMC, UCSD, La Jolla, CA, United States.
Mutations in ENPP1  are associated with media calcification in general -
ized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI). ENPP1  encodes for Ecto-
Nucleotide Pyrophosphatase/ Phosphodiesterase 1 (NPP1), which 
generates inorganic pyrophosphate, a physiologic inhibitor of hydroxy -
apatite deposition. The role of NPP1 in atherosclerosis is not known. 
Npps /apoE  double knockout mice were generated by cross-breeding 
Npps-deficient ttw/ttw mice with apoE  null mice and were fed a high 
fat/ high cholesterol diet. Atherosclerotic lesion area and calcification 
were examined. In 28 week old Npps+/-apoE-/- and Npps-/-apoE-/- mice 
atherosclerotic lesion size was 64% ± 20% and 59% ± 22% smaller 
than in Npps+/+apoE-/- mice (p<0.05). However, there was no signifi -
cant difference in plaque calcification, whereas only Npps-/-apoE-/- mice 
developed media calcification. In aortic smooth muscle cells isolated 
from Npps+/-apoE-/- and Npps-/-apoE-/- mice expression of the pro-ath -
erogenic mediator osteopontin (Opn) was 14% ± 8% and 30% ± 7% 
less than in Npps+/+apoE-/- mice (p<0.05). Opn was previously shown 
to be a chemoattractant for monocytes and macrophages, which play 
a key role in early stages of atherosclerosis, i.e. monocyte transen -
dothelial migration, differentiation into macrophages and macrophage 
uptake of modified lipoprotein. The present study shows that a truncat -
ing mutation on one or both alleles of Npps  reduces atherogenesis in 
a mouse model of atherosclerosis. We found evidence that decreased 
plaque formation in mice carrying mutations in Npps  was mediated 
through decreased Opn expression levels. We conclude that although 
mutations on both ENPP1 alleles lead to GACI, heterozygosity of the 
ENPP1  locus may be protective against atherosclerosis.
P11.041  High throughput t argeted Resequencing of the Human 
Exome Using solution-Phase sequence capture 
X. Zhang , B. Thomson, J. Wendt, M. D‘Ascenzo, M. Brockman, T. Richmond, 
T. Albert, D. Burgess;  
Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States.
Human exome resequencing is an efficient way to identify functional 
genomic variation underlying both Mendelian and complex genetic 
diseases ( e.g. cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease). The term 
“exome” refers to all the exons in the human genome, which are ar -
guably the most functionally relevant 1% of the genome. Currently 
over 80% of all known mutations for human genetic diseases reside in 
coding exons and splicing sites, making resequencing this 1% portion 
of the genome highly attractively. Here we present a high throughput 
method to capture ~36Mb of target sequence, encompassing the lat -
est definition of the human exome, in a single tube with 2.1 million 
distinct DNA oligonucletide probes. Probe design, library construction, 
library amplification, hybridization and washing have been optimized 
to delivery highly uniform, specific, and reproducible enrichment of the 
human exome. We demonstrate that deep coverage of the exome and 
accurate detection of variants can be achieved using this technology at 
only a fraction of the cost of whole genome sequencing.
P11.042**  Comparison of gene expression profile during normal 
and FsHD myogenesis support a defect in early stages of the 
disease
S. Cheli1, S. Francois2, B. Bodega1, F. Ferrari3, E. Tenedini3, E. Roncaglia3, S. 
Ferrari3, E. Ginelli1, R. Meneveri2;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Milano-
Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal 
dominant disorder mainly associated with a contraction of the subtelo -
meric repeat D4Z4 on chromosome 4. The D4Z4 copy number is high -
ly polymorphic in normal individuals ranging between 11-150 copies, 
whereas almost all FSHD patients (FSHD-1) carry fewer than 11 re -peats. Nevertheless there is a subgroup of patients presenting clinical 
signs of disease without D4Z4 contraction (FSHD-2). Current hypoth -
esis on FSHD-1 pathogenesis foresee the presence of an epigenetic 
molecular mechanism, but, how the contraction of D4Z4 array could 
determine alterations in chromatin structure and trigger transcriptional 
deregulation of target genes is not clear. Moreover the specific gene(s) 
responsible for FSHD phenotype have not yet been identified. To clar -
ify some of these aspects, we used the Human GeneChip Exon 1.0 
ST platform to analyze the global gene expression profiles of FSHD-1, 
FSHD-2 and controls proliferating myoblasts and the corresponding 
myotubes. Comparisons of normal and FSHD-1 myoblasts identified 
a greater number of deregulated genes in comparisons to normal and 
FSHD-1 myotubes, suggesting a defect in early stages of FSHD-1 dif -
ferentiation. Moreover, the gene-expression profiles of FSHD-1 and 
FSHD-2 myoblast exhibited different categories of deregulated genes, 
demonstrating that different molecular mechanisms are responsible of 
the disease. The obtained results also suggest that miRNAs could be 
involved in the regulatory network of FSHD. Our approach provided 
new insights into the molecular mechanism of FSHD, allowing the 
identification of new candidate genes that may represent potential tar -
gets for clinical application.
P11.043  chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in mice 
heterozygous for the Fgf10  gene
J. Klar1, C. Brunmark2, C. Brange2, H. Falk-Håkansson2, J. Badhai1, N. Dahl1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2Department of Biological Sciences, AstraZeneca, Lund, Sweden.
The most important risk factor for the development of Chronic Ob -
structive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is cigarette smoking, but only a 
minority of smokers will develop COPD, which implies that genetic fac -
tors may be involved. Familial aggregation of lung function has been 
demonstrated and COPD also demonstrates clustering within families, 
which supports a genetic contribution to pulmonary function. Genetic 
studies in human and animal models suggest that genes originally 
associated with lung developmental processes could be implicated 
in COPD. Fibroblast growth factor-10 (FGF10) signalling through the 
FGFR2b receptor is required for the development of many branched 
organs including lungs, thyroid, pituitary, lacrimal, and salivary glands. 
The most compelling evidence that the FGF10-FGFR2b pathway is 
essential for lung development was first demonstrated by the profound 
disruption of branching morphogenesis in mice with either disrupted 
FGF10  or FGFR2b  gene.
We hypothesized that haploinsufficiency of Fgf10 influence lung func -
tion and lead to the development of lung disorders. To examine this 
hypothesis, we measured the pulmonary functions of mice heterozy -
gous for Fgf10 . Fgf10  +/- mice show decreased body and lung weight, 
although the lung/body weight ratio does not differ from the wild type 
littermates. Fgf10 +/- mice exhibit a significant decrease in FEV75, 
FVC, as well as a decrease in the FEV75/FVC quota when compared 
to wild type littermates. This would correspond to an airway obstruction 
in humans. From our results, we suggest that the FGF10 pathway may 
be highly relevant in search of targets for intervention in obstructive 
lung disease in humans.
P11.044  microFiND approach for Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FisH) detection of genetic lesions from scarce 
cell samples in hematological malignancies
R. Carbone1, A. Zanardi1, S. Venturini1, S. Fabris2, D. Bandiera1, E. Barborini1, 
G. Lambertenghi Deliliers2, A. Neri2;  
1Tethis S.r.l., Milano, Italy, 2Medical Science Department, University of Milan 
and Hematology 1, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milano, Italy.
Despite improvements in sensitivity for the identification of chromo -
somal aberrations by fluorescence based methods (1, 2), low cell 
number recovery from pathological samples may make it difficult in 
diagnostics. Therefore, processing of limited number of cells still rep -
resents a technological challenge.
We have developed a microfluidic device (microFINDTM) for collect -
ing living cells for FISH analysis. microFINDTM is a glass slide coated 
with a nanomaterial (3) that immobilizes cells inside a microchannel: 
a miniaturized FISH protocol is carried out and the slide evaluated by 
high resolution fluorescence microscopy.
We validated microFINDTM in samples from patients affected by Mul -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
tiple Myeloma (MM), a malignant proliferation of bone marrow plasma 
cells. Often, cell purification is needed for investigations because of 
the small percentage of clonal plasma cells present in the bone mar -
row. We analyzed 4 MM patients: PCs were purified from bone mar -
row aspirates using MidiMACS system (4) and directly immobilized on 
microFINDTM.
We compared FISH performance by microFINDTM and standard 
protocol of specific MM genetic lesions and demonstrated that micro -
FINDTM approach allows FISH analysis of scarce cell samples (down 
to 1000 plasma cells/µl), with the same reproducibility compared to 
standard protocol.
Furthermore the assay miniaturization offers a cost saving approach 
(only 0.3µl of fluorescent probe/sample) suitable for automation and 
throughput increase for screenings of MM in a “chip” configuration.
1. Ntouroupi et al. Br J Cancer . 2008 (99)
2. Medintz et al. Int J Nanomedicine. 2008 (3)
3. Carbone et al. Biomaterials. 2006 (27)
4. Fabris et al. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2005 (42)
P11.045  molecular characterization of FKRP related Limb-Girdle 
type 2i muscular Dystrophy
T. Fagerheim1, M. Alhamidi2,1, E. Kjeldsen Buvang2, V. Brox1, M. Van Ghelue1, 
Ø. Nilssen1,2;  
1University Hospital of North Norway, Norway, 2University of Tromsø, Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, Norway.
Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I) is an autosomal, 
recessive, disorder caused by mutations in the FuKutin-Related Pro -
tein gene ( FKRP ). Muscle biopsy extracts from LGMD2I patients show  
incomplete/aberrant O-glycosylation of the membrane/extra-cellular-
matrix protein alpha-dystroglycan . However, our knowledge of the 
function of FKRP is limited and the underlying molecular aetiology of 
LGMD2I is currently unknown.
Here, we provide data on the posttranslational modification and molec -
ular self-interaction of FKRP (495aa). Deglycosylation of FKRP with ei -
ther PNGaseF or EndoH results in a FKRP MW shift from 58 to 54 kDa. 
When over expressed in mammalian cells, FKRP assembles into DTT 
sensitive complexes of 115 -120 kDa that are DTT insensitive upon 
in vitro  chemical cross-linking. Pair-wise Yeast 2-Hybrid experiments 
with FKRP/FKRP in bait/pray combination sustained growth of yeast 
on selective medium. Immunogold Transmission Electron Microscopy 
of rectus femoris  muscle sections show that antibodies to FKRP co-
localize with Golgi marker mg160
We conclude that FKRP in human skeletal muscle, is localized to the 
the Golgi compartment, close to the Z-lines between the myofibrils. 
FKRP contains two potential N-glycosylation sites. Both are occupied 
with high mannose (and/or hybrid) oligosaccharides. FKRP homo-
dimerization, indicated by chemical cross-linking, was confirmed by 
pair-wise Yeast 2-Hybrid analysis. FKRP involvement in higher MW 
complexes (>180 kDa) was also observed. The content of these com -
plexes remains to be investigated.
P11.046  siVA is unlikely to contribute to the pathogenesis of Familial mediterranean Fever (FmF): A genetic, structural 
biological and functional study
E. Petraki1, D. Vassou1, E. Eliopoulos2, D. Iliopoulos3, I. Aksentijevich4, P. 
Sidiropoulos5, D. Kardassis6, D. T. Boumpas7, G. N. Goulielmos1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, Medical School of 
Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Agricultural University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular 
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, Boston, 
MA, United States, 4Genetics Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, 
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, 
USA, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of Rheumatology, Clinical 
Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece, 
6Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Medicine, University of Crete, 
Greece, Heraklion, Greece, 7Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human 
Genetics, Medical School of Crete and Department of Rheumatology, Clinical 
Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece.
Background: Mutations in MEFV  gene encoding pyrin account for Fa -
milial Mediterranean fever (FMF), which is characterized by recurrent, 
acute and self-limiting attacks of fever. Pyrin plays a major role in the 
regulation of IL-1 beta secretion and the pathogenesis of FMF.
Aim: To explore the potential contribution of the interaction between pyrin and the proapoptotic protein Siva-1 to the pathogenesis of FMF.
Materials and methods: The three-dimensional model (3-D) model of 
Siva-1 was created with MODELLER and the Swiss-model automated 
protein structure homology-modelling server. HEK293 (human embry -
onic kidney) and THP-1 (human monocytic leukemia) cell lines were 
used for transfection experiments and apoptosis was measured by 
FACS-Annexin-PE staining using the Annexin-V kit.
Results: In the 3-D model of Siva-1 we defined three distinct domains. 
In immunoprecipitation experiments on transfected HEK293 cells, Siva 
bound both to wild type pyrin and its mutant forms. No differences in 
rates of apoptosis in THP-1 upon transfection with mutant forms of 
pyrin were observed. Patients with FMF did not display any mutations 
in the Siva gene.
Conclusions: The positions of the PRYSPRY C-terminal domain of 
pyrin, found mutated in FMF patients, are not required for binding to 
Siva-1. We were not able to demonstrate an increase of Siva-induced 
apoptosis in the presence of the mutant forms of pyrin. Siva is unlikely 
to contribute to the pathogenesis of FMF through the postulated mo -
lecular mechanism.
P11.047  A missense mutation within the fork-head domain of the 
FOXG1 gene affects its nuclear localization
T. Le Guen1,2, Y. Fichou1,2, J. Nectoux1,2, N. Bahi-Buisson2,3, D. Héron4, J. 
Chelly1,2, T. Bienvenu1,2;  
1Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 2Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, 
CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
The fork-head box G1 gene (FOXG1, MIM 164874) encodes a tran -
scriptional factor that is critical for forebrain development. It has re -
cently been associated with the congenital variant of Rett syndrome 
(RTT, OMIM 312750), and so far 17 mutations, including microdele -
tions, nonsense, missense, splice and frame-shift have been reported. 
We screened the coding region by direct sequencing in 50 patients 
affected by postnatal microcephaly, and identified two missense 
mutations: the c.326C>A (p.L109P) substitution inherited from the 
healthy father; and the de novo c.730C>T transition, which induces 
the p.R244C mutation within the DNA-binding fork-head domain. This 
latter mutation is carried by an 8-year-old girl, who was born at full term 
with normal weight and height, but relative little head circumference 
(33 cm, 10th percentile). At last evaluation, she presented with severe 
microcephaly (<3rd percentile), and MRI showed frontal, gyral simpli -
fication without pachygyria, severe hypomyelination, and thin corpus 
callosum. She was able to walk with aid and combined dyskinetic 
movement disorders with hand stereotypies, relative good eye contact 
and communication skills that contrast with severe motor impairment. 
We constructed a plasmid encoding the mutant FOXG1_p.R244C pro -
tein to investigate its subcellular pattern. Immunofluorescence analy -
sis of the wild-type protein revealed a homogeneous nuclear staining 
excluding the nucleoli, while the mutant showed abnormal nuclear foci 
in a large proportion of cells, suggesting that its mislocalization may re -
duce and/or impair target recognition. Molecular analyses are currently 
in progress to investigate FOXG1 putative targets and to elucidate the 
molecular pathways involved in the pathophysiology of the disease.
P11.048  Methylation patterns associated with FRA12A
S. Metsu , L. Rooms, R. F. Kooy;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
Dynamic mutations are repetitive sequences that undergo unstable 
inheritance. Repeat expansion may lead to methylation and transcrip -
tional silencing of associated genes, which is a major cause of human 
diseases, including cognitive dysfunction. When cells are grown under 
specific cell-culture conditions they become visible as chromosomal 
gaps or breaks, called fragile sites. So far, eight rare folate-sensitive 
fragile sites were cloned, four of which are associated with mental re -
tardation.
Recently we cloned FRA12A and demonstrated that the molecular ba -
sis of this rare folate-sensitive fragile site is a CGG-repeat expansion 
at the 5’ end of the DIP2B  gene, resulting in methylation of its pro -
moter region. The phenotype of FRA12A-carriers varies from severe 
mental retardation to apparently unaffected. Recurrent miscarriages 
have also been reported. In all affected patients the repeat was meth -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics20
ylated. In unaffected FRA12A carriers however, the repeat was either 
methylated or unmethylated. Expression of the DIP2B  gene was on 
average higher in unaffected FRA12A carriers compared to affected 
patients. Unmethylated FRA12A carriers rather showed overexpres -
sion of DIP2B .
We hypothesized that the difference in expression and phenotypic fea -
tures could be the result of the varying degree of methylation of CpG-
islands between affected patients and unaffected FRA12A carriers. 
Therefore we are establishing a methylation profile of the CpG-islands 
surrounding the repeat for all available patients, their family members 
and a control population. So far we found convincing evidence that at 
least one CpG-island is less densely methylated in unaffected carriers 
than in affected carriers, supporting our hypothesis.
P11.049  Validation of two new PcR technologies for diagnostic 
testing of the Fragile X cGG repeat as well as FMR1  methylation 
status.
E. M. J. Boon , P. A. van Bunderen, E. Bakker;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Almost all cases of Fragile X syndrome are caused by an expansion 
of a CGG repeat in the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene to more than 200 
repeats. Molecular diagnostic testing is currently performed by both 
PCR of the CGG repeat and Southern blot analysis.
We are validating two new PCR technologies from Asuragen Inc. USA. 
The first is a kit that supports two PCR configurations: a gene-specific 
FMR1 PCR and a CGG repeat primed PCR. With this kit it should be 
possible to detect the full range of CGG repeats and provide informa -
tion on the zygosity status in all samples. We tested 75 samples (25 
prenatal and 50 postnatal) including full expanded alleles, premuta -
tions, intermediates, homozygous normal females and normal males. 
All results were concordant with previous results. In cases of homozy -
gous normal females, the CGG repeat primed PCR was proven to be 
very useful and Southern blot analysis is no longer required in these 
cases.
The second technology we are validating is a prototype PCR method 
that was developed to detect the  FMR1  methylation status. Currently, 
the methylation status can only be detected by performing Southern 
Blot analysis, which is very labor intensive, needs a lot of input, has 
a low throughput and is not amenable to automation. We have tested 
both prenatal and postnatal samples to investigate whether this meth -
ylation PCR could replace the Southern Blot analysis.
Data from both PCR technologies will be presented in this poster as 
well as in the Eurogentest Satellite meeting.
P11.050  Easy, accurate genome-wide detection of gene fusions with the sOLiD system using Bioscope software
P. Vatta , O. Sakarya, H. Breu, L. Popescu, A. Siddiqui, F. C. Hyland;  
Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States.
Gene fusions are implicated in the initiation of tumorigenesis and are 
important diagnostic/prognostic indicators in leukemia and solid tu -
mors.
The SOLiDTM System 4.0 generates up to 1 billion mapped reads per 
run, enabling genome-wide hypothesis-free detection of gene fusions. 
DNA barcoded paired-end reads facilitate cost-effective concurrent se -
quencing of many samples.
We developed a novel algorithm to detect exon junctions with strand-
specific SOLiD system transcriptome sequencing, to predict fusion 
transcripts and alternative splicing. For paired-end whole transcrip -
tome sequencing experiments, we require two types of evidence; the 
two tags must map uniquely to two different exons, and a single tag 
must span the exon junctions. Single-read placement is done with a 
novel algorithm that allows fast detection of reads split between any 
pair of exons. Gene fusions are called if there is sufficient non-redun -
dant evidence of both types.
We validated the algorithm with real and simulated data; we detect 
>80% of simulated human gene fusions at well covered exons.
We sequenced UHR, and we predicted 36 fusions using initial thresh -
olds. We validated these predictions with TaqMan assays. 44% of our 
predictions were correct, including the three previously annotated 
gene fusions in UHR; BCR-ABL1, BCAS4-BCAS3 and GAS6-RASA3. 
We validated an additional 13 novel gene fusions, many of which are 
putative read-throughs from genes in close proximity. 13 of these gene 
fusions are also present in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line.Easy, low-cost genome-wide detection of novel gene fusions allows 
interrogation of large numbers of samples and discovery of biologically 
important gene fusions.
P11.051  Using GEN2PHEN software to integrate genotype-to 
phenotype data.
M. J. Cornell , G. Dobson, A. Devereau;  
National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
The GEN2PHEN project is developing new software to enable the in -
tegration of Genotype-To-Phenotype data. In order to assess the ef -
fectiveness and utility of GEN2PHEN software, we are conducting a 
series of project evaluations with the clinical and research communi -
ties, using the software to explore and interpret areas of biomedical 
importance. The second evaluation focuses on three areas.
(1) Generating LRGs to describe BRCA1 and BRCA2. At present, 
many genes have multiple locus specific databases (LSDBs) devel -
oped by different research groups. This can create problems for clini -
cal scientists since it may not be clear how variant data in these data -
bases can be reconciled. GEN2PHEN has developed the LRG (Locus 
Reference Genomic) standard to describe reference sequences and is 
developing web services to allow LSDB data to be accessed by other 
programmes.
(2) Development of a BioMart for LSDB data. This allows users to com -
pose complex queries over multiple datasets, such as genetics vari -
ants and phenotype ontologies.
(3) Routine calculation of the consequence of genetic variation. Ge -
nome resquencing projects are generating large quantities of variation 
data. This creates a need for software that enables the consequence 
of genetic variation to be determined. The SNP Effect Predictor anno -
tates variants using the Ensembl API and databases.
For each area we will present tools to researchers and clinicians and 
gather feedback. This will be used to ensure that deliverables remain 
relevant to needs.
P11.052  Advances in gene expression microarray profiling 
from small amounts of adenocarcinoma and normal total RNA 
samples
A. Bergstrom Lucas, G. Lin, S. Jacobs, S. Fulmer-Smentek, E. Leproust ;  
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
Gene expression profiling by microarray analysis provides an impor -
tant avenue for understanding biological mechanisms, classifying tis -
sue and tumor types, and identifying signs for diagnosis and progno -
sis. To address the need for high sensitivity gene expression profiling 
of low quantities of total RNA, we have developed a modified linear 
amplification procedure that generates quantities of Cy-labeled cRNA 
suitable for oligonucleotide microarray experiments from total RNA in -
put amounts as low as 10 nanograms. This new procedure, available in 
the new Low Input Quick Amp Labeling Kit, employs the AffinityScript 
Reverse Transcriptase, a mutant MMLV-RT that binds primer-template 
complexes with 10-fold higher efficiency than wild type MMLV-RT, re -
sulting in increased cDNA yields and improved sensitivity from smaller 
sample inputs. The protocol uses a single round of IVT amplification 
without purification of the cDNA product resulting in labeled cRNA 
in less than one day, enabling gene expression profile comparisons 
in less than two days. Comparisons of probe signals from technical 
replicate samples demonstrate high reproducibility with wide dynamic 
ranges, and generally comparable signals across a broad range of 
input amounts. This new labeling approach was used to detect differ -
ences in gene expression between cancerous and normal cells using 
new gene expression arrays with updated content resulting in gene 
expression profiling results consistent with the current literature.
P11.053  Next generation sequencing to reveal new variants into 
cancer research
X. Yang ;  
BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
The human genome lies at the core of human disease research. The 
remarkable technological advances in sequencing have enabled the 
sequencing of individual human genomes.
Using next generation sequencing technology such as Illumina/So -
lexa, we could get an all-round view of complex diseases including 
cancer at DNA level, RNA level, and epigenetic level.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics21
Applying whole genome resequencing and with a high enough level 
of coverage, somatic mutations from cancer genome can be obtained. 
The accompanying pathogen genomes will also be collected.
Exome capture sequencing is a relatively economical strategy at the 
present stage, which is more suitable. This study will analyze the exome 
of several human cancers by concurrently sequencing several cancer 
exomes and their paired non-disease tissue. Cancer-specific genetic 
mutations will be identified by directly comparing exon sequences from 
a patient’s tumor to its non-disease exons. In addition, SNP genotypes 
will be calculated for each patient as well as structural variations.
Next generation sequencing could also be applied to RNA of cancers 
to investigate the first phenotypic effects of all the DNA changes. Start -
ing with RNA, using transcriptome sequencing, digital gene expression 
profiling and small RNA sequencing technologies, cancer-specific al -
terations in expression levels, aberrant splicing and fusion transcripts 
could easily be defined.
With further adaptation sequencing technology could be extended to 
detect epigenetic changes of the cancer genome. Whole-genome bi -
sulfite sequencing, MeDIP-sequencing and ChIP-sequencing are used 
to discover aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications, which 
are now well established in the development and progression of can -
cer and other complex diseases.
P11.054  Display of high-throughput genomic data in the Ucsc 
Genome Browser
R. M. Kuhn1, A. S. Hinrichs1, A. S. Zweig1, G. Barber1, D. Karolchik1, W. J. 
Kent1, D. Haussler1,2;  
1Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Santa Cruz, CA, United 
States, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
The UCSC Genome Browser has become an valuable tool for the 
analysis of genomic data. Attracting over 3 million hits a week from 
more than 80,000 different IP addresses per month, it provides ac -
cess to genome annotations, links to other online resources and an 
integrated view of disparate datasets.
Increasingly focused on data of relevence to human health, the brows -
er has released data tracks displaying annotations from the Database 
of Genetic Assocation Studies of Complex Deseases and Disorders 
(GAD), Online Mendelian Inhertance in Man (OMIM), Genome-wide 
association studes from NHGRI (GWAS), the Database of Genomic 
Variants (DGV), commercial gene-chip probe mappings for compara -
tive genome hybridization and other datasets valuable to research and 
clinical geneticists..
These public data are displayed together, mapped against the UCSC 
Genes track and data from dbSNP, and the ENCODE, HapMap and 
other projects, providing users with a graphical view of complex data 
from many sources at once. Users can upload their own lab data to 
view alongside these resident tracks.
With the increasing availability of next-generation sequencing, many 
laboratories are generating large datasets requiring genomic coordinate 
mapping. New data formats are now available for the UCSC browser 
to create a custom track from private data on the browser without up -
loading gigabytes of data. We describe how to use the compression 
and indexing scheme that creates a file on the user‘s machine. This is 
accessed by the Genome Browser, which extracts only the information 
needed for the custom track at the display coordinates .
P11.055  comprehensive in silico prediction of mRNA splicing 
effects in BRcA1 and BRcA2 variants
P. K. Rogan1, E. Mucaki1, S. Bacopoulous1, K. Gerster1, P. J. Ainsworth2;  
1University of Western Ontario (UWO), London, ON, Canada, 2London Health 
Sciences Centre / UWO, London, ON, Canada.
The influence of variants of uncertain significance in the BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 genes has confounded testing for predisposition to and herita -
bility in breast cancer. Variants are often singletons, in which the phase 
is unknown, and the familial history is either sparse or unavailable. 
Using information theory-based analysis, we examined the all vari -
ants in the Breast Cancer Information Resource for potential effects 
on natural splice sites. BRCA1: Among 505 missense changes, 5 are 
splicing mutations that abolish 2 donor sites and 15 are leaky splicing 
mutations that occur at 4 acceptor and 5 donor sites. Most leaky muta -
tions have <20% of normal splice site strength, however some have 
modest effects. Of 58 synonymous codon substitutions, one abolishes 
and 3 are predicted leaky donor site splice sites. Of 124 intronic vari -ants, 13 presumably abolish splicing and 38 are predicted to be leaky; 
intronic cryptic splice site activation is predicted for 10 acceptor and 
7 donor sites. BRCA2: Of 916 missense changes, 2 abolish a single 
donor splice site, 15 are leaky splicing mutations (at 8 donor sites) 
and 5 activate in frame cryptic splice sites. One of 63 synonymous 
changes abolish splicing and 5 reduce splice site recognition. Of 161 
intronic changes at natural sites, 35 are predicted to be leaky and one 
activates a cryptic acceptor splice site. Splicing mutations in BRCA1/
BRCA2 that coincide with intronic, silent and/or missense changes af -
fecting the same splice site are frequently leaky, suggesting that high 
levels of these gene products are essential for tumour suppression.
P11.056  mutation screening by High Resolution melt Analysis in early onset forms of Hereditary spastic Paraplegias.
P. Montieri1,2, C. Babalini1, M. Varlese1,2, L. Carosi1,2, G. Bernardi1,2, A. 
Orlacchio1,2;  
1Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC-IRCCS Santa Lucia, Roma, roma, Italy, 
2Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Roma “TorVergata”, 
Roma, Rome, Italy.
The hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are an etiologically hetero -
geneous group of neurological disorders which results from the se -
lective degeneration of upper motor neurons, of which key diagnostic 
clinical findings are spasticity and pyramidal weakness of lower limbs.
Although genetically diverse with 46 genetic loci for HSP and 20 
genes identified, it is often difficult to separate the disorders on clinical 
grounds.
This study aims at genetic-molecular investigation of families affected 
by early onset forms of ADHSP, ARHSP, and apparently sporadic cas -
es, based on HRM, direct sequencing and MLPA techniques.
We performed HRM tecnique (LightCycler 480, Roche Molecular Sys -
tems) to screen two “early onset” HSP genes, SPG3A  and SPG5A . 
We studied a total serie of 9 unrelated autosomal dominant and 5 au -
tosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia families, and in 18 ap -
parently sporadic patients, manifesting either pure or complex forms 
of the disease. Then by direct sequencing we analyze samples with 
putative mutations.
Sequencing the SPG3A  gene disclosed a novel heterozygous mis -
sense mutation in exon 12, observed also in another family showing 
similarity in phenotype. On the whole we identified six mutations, of 
which three novel: one segregating in two unrelated ADHSP families, 
two in two unrelated ARHSP families, the others in apparently sporadic 
cases.
Our data confirm an high mutational frequency in SPG3A  and SPG5A  
genes in early onset forms of ADHSP and ARHSP (respectively 20% 
and 7%) and apparently sporadic cases.
P11.057**  molecular strategies for Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Genetic Analysis: correlation between 
genotyping and expression data
S. R. Susana1,2, A. T. Freitas3, C. M. Machado4, P. Branco5, L. Silveira5, I. M. 
Carreira6, M. Antunes7, C. Monteiro1, A. R. Fernandes8,9;  
1Faculdade Farmácia, Universidade Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Universidade 
Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal, 3INESC_ID/IST, 
Universidade Técnica de Lisboa, Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Departamento de 
Informática, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 
5Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa,, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 6Un. Citogenética e Diag.Pré-Natal, Fac. Medicina, Universidade de 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra,, Coimbra, 
Portugal, 8Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 9Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common hereditary 
cardiovascular disease. The benefits of a gene-based diagnosis for 
both basic research and clinical medicine are limited by the high con -
siderable costs of current genetic testing strategy due to the elevated 
number of genes and mutations involved in HCM. We demonstrate 
coupling Mass Spectrometry Genotyping and High Resolution Melting 
as a new strategy for HCM diagnosis. This strategy allowed us to iden -
tify HCM known mutations and several new mutations in sarcomere 
and cytosqueleton genes including a mutation in CSRP3 gene, not 
usually studied in current HCM genetic diagnosis. In a new approach 
we hypothesized that sarcomere gene transcripts represent molecular 
markers for HCM evaluation being gene expression profile an indicator Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics22
of the cardiac remodeling process. Real-Time analysis of sarcomere 
genes have been done using RNA extracted from interventricular sep -
tum and skeletal biopsies from HCM patients. Unsupervised machine 
learning methods were used to distinguish differences between groups 
of patients, tissues and genes. Clustering algorithms revealed two main 
groups both with a strong correlation between the genomic expression 
pattern in cardiac and skeletal muscles for MYH7 and TNNI3 genes. 
The transcriptional differences between the two group clusters could 
be due to different morphologic HCM features and to DNA genetic 
profile. Moreover, the correlation (sarcomere-skeletal) transcriptional 
profile will allow the inference of skeletal muscle as a valid biomarker 
of HCM. Together the new genotyping strategy and the establishment 
of a correlation of the genetic-transcriptional profile will have important 
implications for HCM clinical management and prognosis.
P11.058  Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for disease 
modeling of neurodevelopmental disorders
J. Schuster , M. Sobol, J. Dahlqvist, G. Annerén, N. Dahl;  
University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
Congenital neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders constitute 
a heterogeneous group which affects approximately 3% of the popula -
tion. Genetic factors play a major role in a large proportion of cases. 
Studies of the underlying disease mechanisms have been hampered 
by the unavailability of the appropriate tissues as well as the lack of 
model systems. The recent progress in genomic reprogramming of hu -
man somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) followed 
by lineage specific induction has provided a tool for the study of human 
disorders. With the availability of patient derived somatic cells, e.g. 
fibroblasts, the method offers a unique opportunity to study and model 
specific human disorders that affect neuronal cells.
We have established somatic cells from different neurodevelopmental 
disorders including lissencephaly, leukodystrophy, agenesia of corpus 
callosum and acrania. These cells are being reprogrammed to iPSC 
and analyzed for pluripotency, i.e. potential to differentiate into cells 
of the three germ layers, and differentiated into neuronal cells. iPSC 
derived neuronal subtypes will be scored for number, morphology, 
migration and apoptosis. iPSC from normal individuals are used as 
controls. The expected results from this effort will provide novel and 
basic understanding about pathophysiological mechanisms in neuro -
developmental disorders.
P11.059  t ransgenerational methylation changes induced by the 
endocrine disruptor vinclozolin on imprinted genes
A. Paoloni-Giacobino1,2, C. Stouder1;  
1Geneva University Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for 
Applied Human Toxicology, Geneva, Switzerland.
Endocrine-Disruptors have been suggested to affect the reproductive 
system. In this study, Vinclozolin, an endocrine-disruptor with anti-an -
drogenic properties, was administered at low doses (50mg/kg/day) 
to pregnant mice at the time of embryo sex determination. The pos -
sible effects on the differentially methylated domains of 5 imprinted 
genes: H19, Gtl2, Peg1, Snrpn and Peg3 were examined in the male 
offspring, by bisulfite treatment - pyrosequencing, over 3 generations. 
Both somatic and germ cells were analysed. In the sperm of controls 
the percentages of methylated CpGs were close to the expected theo -
retical values. However, in the in utero  exposed mice, VCZ induced 
impressive changes in the percentages of methylated CpGs of all 5 
genes. The effects of VCZ were transgenerational, with however a 
gradual disappearance from F1 to F3. No uro-genital malformations 
were noticed. A possible effect on spermatogenesis was explored. In -
terestingly, the mean sperm concentration of the VCZ-administered 
female offspring was severely decreased as compared to the controls, 
in the F1 generation. The effect was no more significant in the F2 and 
F3 generations.
These drastic changes in the pattern of methylation of the examined 
imprinted genes, in the germ cells of the offspring, congruent with a 
deleterious effect on sperm concentration, suggest that the observed 
methylation changes may indeed be responsible for the observed 
spermatogenic impairment.P11.060  Evaluation of cellular activity status by in situ Proximity 
Ligation Assays
O. Söderberg , I. Weibrecht, K. Leuchowius, M. Jarvius, T. Conze, C. Clausson, 
U. Landegren;  
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Although there are several methods for determining levels of proteins 
in tissues and cells, there is a great need for more selective methods 
as well as methods that will enable detection of the functional state of 
proteins. The activation status of proteins is in most cases regulated by 
post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as phosphorylation that 
cause structural changes in the proteins and thereby expose catalytic 
sites or promote interactions with other proteins. By binding partner 
proteins, i.e. forming protein complexes, they will gain additional func -
tion such as the ability to target substrate molecules. There is also 
a need to measure many parameters in single cells, such as protein 
levels, protein activity, mRNA expression and DNA sequence to obtain 
a more accurate view of the status of the cell and to identify cell-to-cell 
variation in a heterogeneous cell population such as a tissue section. 
The activity status of a protein or signaling pathway can be visualized 
with in situ Proximity Ligation Assays using a pair of antibodies target -
ing the interacting proteins or PTM, using an attached DNA molecule 
to the antibodies to template the creation of a circular DNA molecule 
that is a surrogate marker for the interaction. It can then be ampli -
fied by rolling circle amplification and detected with a single-molecule 
resolution in fixed cells or tissues. Combining this method with padlock 
probes, for detection of DNA and mRNA with a single-nucleotide reso -
lution, now gives us the tool to monitor cellular activity status in clinical 
material.
P11.061  Optimization of the protocol for DNA purification from 
blood for Thermo Scientific KingFisher Flex
M. Suomalainen , S. Suomalainen, V. Puro, V. Kytöniemi, A. Lamberg;  
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland.
The pure and intact DNA or RNA is an important starting point for vari -
ous experiments. Thermo Scientific KingFisher Flex offers an efficient 
and rapid automated system for isolation of high quality nucleic ac -
ids. The technology is based on magnetic rods transferring particles 
through several purification phases and it is adaptable for all magnetic 
particle separation kits.
To obtain the optimal yield and ratio of purified DNA we analyzed the 
mixing speeds of the protocol for DNA isolation from blood. Faster mix -
ing speeds were found to increase the yield of DNA and additionally 
the slow mixing speeds resulted in the impurities in the elution buffer. 
However, especially in the heated steps with simultaneous mixing the 
slow speeds are necessary.
In several applications the highest possible ratio of isolated DNA is not 
the prime goal but instead the briefness of the protocol is essential. We 
compared conventional and rapid protocols for DNA purification from 
different volumes of blood. The results indicated that although DNA 
isolated with the conventional protocol had better quality and quantity 
than DNA isolated with the rapid protocol, the latter proved to have 
sufficient quality for several down stream applications, for example for 
PCR.
The KingFisher® Flex together with the easily modified Thermo Scien -
tific BindIt software provides large variety of options to create different 
purification protocols. Mixing combinations can be optimized depend -
ing on the starting material, the purified product or demands on the 
rapidity of the protocol.
P11.062  An automated analysis protocol for research of 
KRAs/BRAF mutation detection for data generated on capillary 
electrophoresis instruments
E. Currie-Fraser1, J. Walker1, J. Wang2;  
1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2TrimGen Corp., Sparks, 
MD, United States.
Biomarker research continues to be an important focus in oncology 
studies, including the role of KRAS and BRAF mutations in CRC and 
other EGFR-associated cancers. This has lead to increased research 
of these genes as possible predictive markers and targets for contin -
ued study.
With this increased interest comes a need for automation of data 
analysis and report generation to decrease bottlenecks in the research 
laboratory by reducing manual review time. This poster will present an Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
automated workflow for detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations and 
concise report generation in sample data generated on capillary elec -
trophoresis instruments using fragment analysis software tools. We 
will demonstrate how key features in the software, such as sample 
quality values, allele binning and report analysis, enable this workflow 
to be a significant improvement over visual scoring methods.
For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human thera -
peutic or diagnostic use.
P11.063  KRAs mutation screening by HRm analysis: a 
comparative study
C. Lauricella , F. Orsini, A. Colosimo, N. Marziliano, V. Motta, M. Gambacorta, 
S. Veronese;  
Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy.
Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common hu -
man malignancies with more than 300.000 cases both in the United 
States and in the European Union each year. Kirsten RAS (KRAS) is 
a small GTPase that plays a key role in Ras/mitogen-activated pro -
tein kinase signaling pathway (GO:0008284); somatic mutations in 
the KRAS gene are frequently found in many cancers and result in a 
constitutively active protein. Furthermore the responses to anti-EGFR 
monoclonal antibodies therapies in colorectal cancer are associated 
with the KRAS mutational status
This study aims at performing the KRAS mutation detection on for -
malin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues by High Resolu -
tion Melting analysis (HRM) and compare the results with sequencing 
analysis.
Methods: Thirty FFPE samples were macrodissected to enrich sam -
ples for tumor cells. KRAS gene amplification was performed using 
two different sets of primers for HRM and direct automated sequenc -
ing.
Results: Our results showed a strong concordance between the HRM 
analysis and cycle sequencing (29/30, 96,6%); however the HRM 
could not predict the type of mutations. In only one sample (3.3%) the 
HRM analysis showed a mutated profile which was not subsequently 
confirmed by direct sequencing.
Conclusion: We plan to expand our cases to validate its efficacy as a 
prescreening tests, also in terms of specificity and sensitivity.
Our preliminary data support the notion that HRM analysis could be an 
affordable test and valuable methodology for the detection and screen -
ing of somatic KRAS mutations in clinical samples prior confirmation 
cycle sequencing.
P11.064  Detection of translocation breakpoints in a leukemia 
cell line by sOLiD(tm) sequencing of mate paired fragments
L. B. Cavelier1,2, C. Tellgren-Roth1, U. Gyllensten1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2Clinical Genetics, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
The aim of this project is to combine current massive sequencing 
technology and bioinformatics to generate a sequence-based karyo -
type with kilobase resolution. As a pilot project we have performed a 
translocation analysis on a whole genome sequence generated from 
a B-cell leukemia cell line previously characterized using G-bandning, 
M-FISH and affymetrix SNP.6 array. Two mate-paired libraries were 
constructed using two different fragment sizes. The sequenced librar -
ies contained the 25 bp paired-ends of fragments with an average size 
of 1,5kb and 3,2 kb. A total of 16*109 basepairs were obtained of which 
5,5*109 were present in paired fragments. The translocation analysis 
was performed by selecting reads matching to two different chromo -
somes and sorting them according to the position of the first and then 
the second tag. The fragments were clustered in pairs according to the 
library fragment size. Groups with at least four fragments and pres -
ent in both sequencing runs were retained while those present in an 
independent control sample were removed. This filtering resulted in 
50 groups of fragments representing hypothetical translocation break -
points, including two of the translocations characterized cytogeneti -
cally. Breakpoint analysis revealed the juxtaposition of an enhancer 
element located on 12p to the MYC gene on 8q, as the underlying 
change of one of the previously known translocations. Experimental 
verification of the remaining hypothetical rearrangements will be per -
formed. In summary sequencing of mate paired fragments can easily 
identify interchromosomal rearrangements at kilobase precision but 
identification of significant rearrangements relevant to disease patho -genesis still remains a bioinformatic and experimental challenge.
P11.065  cOmPARiNG HAPLOtYPEs iN tHE PREsENcE OF NOisE: APPLicA tiON FOR LiNKAGE stUDiEs
B. Markus , O. Agamy, O. Birk;  
The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute for 
Biotechnology in the Nege, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
The availability of high-throughput data enables detailed comparison 
of genomes between individuals. This holds great promise for genetic 
mapping, especially in isolated populations, where Identity By Descent 
(IBD) haplotypes are found in loci associated with autosomal recessive 
diseases. Implementing a simple framework for pair-wise IBD infer -
ence, we address the two main challenges in IBD mapping: unreliable 
estimates of allele frequency and marker errors. In this study we pro -
pose a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) for comparing haplotypes be -
tween pairs of individuals and demonstrate its efficacy in whole genome 
scans for linkage analysis. A comparison of haplotypes is mapped to a 
new marker space, {0, 1}, which represents the IBS (Identical by State) 
status for each marker between the individuals. The distribution of the 
new marker is less sensitive to allele frequencies and allows a direct 
assessment of mistyped markers in the candidate IBD regions.
P11.066  Blood transcriptome of childhood malaria
A. B. W. Boldt1,2, Y. Kalmbach1, M. P. Grobusch1,3, C. Tena-Tomás1, A. Dzeing4, 
M. Kombila4, M. Bonin5, I. J. T. Messias-Reason2, B. Mordmüller1,3, P. G. 
Kremsner1,3, J. F. J. Kun1;  
1Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 
2Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil, 3Medical 
Research Unit, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, 4Tropical 
Medicine and Mycology, University of Libreville, Libreville, Gabon, 5Institute for 
Human Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
We recently identified apoptosis as an important factor in generating 
lymphopenia during malaria. In this work, we pursue a deeper under -
standing on the genetic mechanisms underlying this disease process. 
To this end, we investigated the genomic transcriptional profiles of 
whole blood of healthy children and children with asymptomatic infec -
tion, uncomplicated malaria, malaria associated with severe anemia 
and cerebral malaria. We hybridized 5 U133A and 5 U133B Affymetrix 
microarrays for each condition. The profiles were confirmed by FACS 
(CD35, CD55 and CD71) and real-time PCR (24 genes) results and 
compared with GEO data from other authors. We also used Ingenu -
ity systems software to find immune pathways significantly affected 
by gene regulation. A set of immunoglobulin gene segments was 
repressed in asymptomatic infection, as well as genes involved in B 
cell receptor signaling and dendritic cell maturation. Genes and cor -
responding pathways become activated in uncomplicated malaria, 
as well as TLR signaling. Genes involved in lymphocyte ICOS-ICO -
SL signaling, IFN-signaling, HLA class II antigen presentation and in 
the cross-talk between dendritic and NK cells were repressed during 
severe malaria. Allergenic eosinophil and basophil genes were also 
repressed. Severe malarial anemia was specifically characterized by 
reticulocytosis and altered expression of complement regulatory pro -
teins, whereas only a few genes encoding inflammatory products were 
activated during cerebral malaria. The transcriptional profiles found in 
blood cells of children with severe malaria suggest an imbalance of 
key regulatory processes, the restoration of which by novel supportive 
therapies could prevent adverse outcomes.
P11.067  Analysis of association of the polymorphic locus Fnu4Hi in the gene for monoamine oxidase mAOA with 
indicators of nonverbal intelligence of human.
A. Maraleva , O. Gumerova, V. Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmully, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) - an enzyme that plays an important 
role in the metabolism of neuroactive and vasoactive amines in the 
central nervous system and peripheral tissues. The gene encoding 
MAOA, localized on the X chromosome (p11.4-p11.3). The analysis 
associations of polymorphic variants Fnu4HI the gene MAOA with the 
level of nonverbal intelligence of human.
Materials and methods. Analysis Fnu4HI polymorphism in the gene 
MAOA conducted in 200 unrelated individuals aged 18-35 by poly -
merase chain reaction (PCR) with subsequent processing amplifikons Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
appropriate restriction endonuclease. The level of intellectual develop -
ment (IQ) in the subjects was determined by the method of Cattell. In 
accordance with the index IQ study population were divided into two 
groups: high (above 110 points) and normal (90-110 points) level of 
intellectual development.
Results. Analysis of the association evidence of significant differences 
in the distribution of genotype frequencies between the study groups 
due to increased frequency of geterozygous genotypes MAOA + / - 
(36.84% vs 19.75%, P = 0.002) and reducing the frequency of geno -
type MAOA - / - (48.42% vs 65.43%, P = 0.035) in the group of individu -
als with high levels of intellectual development.
Thus, the association established polymorphic locus Fnu4HI in the 
gene MAOA with indicators of nonverbal intelligence.
This work was partially funded grant from the Ministry of Education of 
Russia „Thematic Plan 2008-2010“
P11.068  Gene expression changes after losartan treatment in 
patients with marfan syndrome
T. Radonic , P. de Witte, M. J. H. Baars, B. J. M. Mulder, M. Groenink, A. H. 
Zwinderman;  
Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a common genetic disorders with an inci -
dence of 2-3 in 10 000 live births. Aortic dilatation is the main cause of 
morbidity and mortality of Marfan patients. Losartan, an antihyperten -
sive drug inhibits the aortic dilatation in a mouse model of MFS.
Methods
We analyzed gene expression in snap frozen punch skin-biopsies of 
26 patients before and after 4 weeks of losartan therapy using Human 
Exon 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix). Whole Transcriptome Gene Expres -
sion (WTGE) analysis in 52 samples was analyzed using Significance 
Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) method for paired samples. Separate 
analyses of pathways involved in MFS and alternative splicing under 
losartan were performed. Results were validated using rtPCR.
Results
WTGE analysis revealed 79 differentially expressed genes (delta=0.54, 
q<5%). When analyzed for functional annotation using FatiGO, lipid 
metabolic process was the most significant term (p=7.1 E-10). From 
the WTGE and pathway analysis 7 most significant genes with highest 
fold change were validated using rtPCR (Table 1). Alternative splicing 
analysis revealed 2 significant genes, ACSM3 and ADCY6 (delta=0.3, 
q=0), known to be involved in left ventricular hypertrophy, blood pres -
sure regulation and obesity.
Conclusion
Clinical dosage of losartan seems to decrease TGF-β signaling path -
way by modulating the expression in CIDEA and ENG genes in Marfan 
patients. The exact role of genes involved in lipid metabolic process in 
MFS is yet to be defined.
Genes with prominent expression levels change under losartan therapy
Gene 
iDFold changeFunction
NRNPH2 1.22 Nuclear mRNA splicing
CPS1 2.22 Proteolysis , novel association with homocysteine levels
GAL 2.05Insulin secretion, adaptive responses to acute orthostatic stress 
preventing syncope in susceptible individuals
CIDEA 1.26 Negative regulation of TGFβ pathway
ENG 0.85Regulation of TGFβ signaling pathway, modulation of immune 
response
FADS2 1.81 Unsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic process , metabolic syndrome
FADS1 1.59 Unsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic process, metabolic syndrome
P11.069  K562 cells stably expressing hnRNP c1/c2 shRNAs 
have growth inhibition
M. Hosseini , S. Farashi, J. Gharasouran, M. Banan;  
Genetics Research Center; University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
MBD2 acts as a repressor on the human γ-globin gene. However the 
protein does not act by binding directly to CpG residues in the γ-globin 
promoter. In one model, MBD2 may act by binding indirectly to γ-globin 
regulatory regions through an associating complex. One such complex 
identified in K562 cells is the LCR-associated remodeling complex 
(LARC). Here we have set out to test this model. Previous results from 
our lab suggest that MBD2 siRNAs can augment γ-globin expression in K562 cells. However siRNAs directed at the DNA binding protein of 
LARC (i.e. hnRNP C1/C2) do not have the same effect. To further these 
findings, we have embarked on creating K562 cells stably expressing 
hnRNP C1/C2 shRNAs using lentiviruses. To this end, five hnRNP C1/
C2 shRNA-pLKO.1 vectors were screened in HEK 293T cells. Two 
gave ≥60% target transcript knockdown levels after normalization for 
transfection efficiency. These vectors were subsequently packaged 
and used to transduce K562 cells. Cells transduced with these vec -
tors grow very poorly relative to those infected with the pLKO.1 control 
vector_suggesting that hnRNP C1/C2 down-regulation causes growth 
inhibition. We are in the process of determining the hnRNP C1/C2 and 
γ-globin expression levels of these cells using qRT-PCR.
P11.070**  Relevance of the novel mecP2 target genes scG10 
and PN1 in the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome
J. Nectoux1,2, Y. Fichou1, T. Le Guen1, N. Bahi-Buisson1,3, J. Chelly1,2, T. 
Bienvenu1,2;  
1Université Paris-Descartes, Institut Cochin, Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 
2Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Laboratoire de 
Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique – 
Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Service de Neuropédiatrie, 
Paris, France.
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder 
that occurs almost exclusively in girls, with an incidence between 
1/10,000 and 1/15,000 births. Classical RTT is characterized by a pe -
riod of apparently normal development until 6-18 months of age, fol -
lowed by a period of regression, with deceleration of head growth, loss 
of speech and acquired motor skills. More than 90% typical RTT pa -
tients have heterozygous mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene that 
encodes the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2, a transcriptional modulator. 
In a previous study, we identified SCG10 and PN1 as potential novel 
MeCP2 target genes in human primary fibroblasts. Here, the signifi -
cant SCG10 down-regulation was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR 
and western-blot in the Mecp2308/y mouse model, either in adult ce -
rebral tissues or in a primary cortical neuron culture. Down-regulation 
of PN1 was also confirmed by shRNA experiments targeting MECP2 
in the human neuroblastoma-derived SH-SY5Y cell line. SCG10 is a 
neuron-specific protein that accumulates in the central domain of the 
axonal growth cone where it acts as a potent microtubule-destabilizing 
factor enhancing neurite outgrowth, while Protease-nexin 1 (PN1) is 
a protease inhibitor secreted by the astrocytes, with postulated roles 
in regeneration and regulation of neurite outgrowth. In the adult mam -
malian nervous system PN1 has been shown to be expressed in the 
olfactory system and by some glial cells in response to neuronal in -
jury. Deficit in both proteins may explain in part how MeCP2 deficiency 
affect neuronal function, leading to reduced dendritic branching and 
short dendritic spines observed in the RTT cortex.
P11.071  MeCP2_270 mutant protein is expressed in astrocytes 
as well as in neurons and localizes into the nucleus
C. Bodda1, L. A. Kifayathulla1, J. P. Arunachalam1, H. Y. Agbemenyah1, F. 
Laccone1, A. U. Mannan1,2;  
1Instiute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany, 
2DFG-Research Center Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Goettingen, 
Germany.
MECP2 gene encoding for methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) 
is a transcription factor that recognize methylated CpG dinucleotides 
and binds symmetrically to such target DNA sequence. Mutations in 
MECP2 gene is the main cause for Rett syndrome (RTT). RTT is a 
progressive neurodevelopmental disorder, which affects primarily girls 
during early childhood and it is one of the most common causes of 
mental retardation in females. The R270X is one of the most frequent 
recurrent MECP2 mutations among RTT cohorts. The R270X mutation 
resides within the TRD-NLS (Transcription Repression Domain-Nucle -
ar Localization Signal) region of MeCP2 and causes a more severe 
clinical phenotype with increased mortality as compared to other muta -
tions. To evaluate the functional role of R270X mutation, we generated 
a transgenic mouse model expressing MeCP2_270_EGFP (human 
mutation equivalent) by BAC recombineering. The expression pat -
tern of MeCP2_270_EGFP was similar to that of endogenous MeCP2. 
Strikingly, MeCP2_270_EGFP localizes in the nucleus, contrary to the 
conjecture that the R270X could cause disruption of the NLS. Quanti -
tative expression analysis of MeCP2 target genes revealed up-regula -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
tion in Mecp2_270_EGFP transgenic mice as compared to wild type 
mice. In primary hippocampal cells, we show that MeCP2_270_EGFP 
was expressed in astrocytes by co-localization with the astrocyte spe -
cific marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein. Our data showing expression 
of MeCP2_270_EGFP in the transgenic mice astrocytes further rein -
force the recent findings concerning the expression of MeCP2 in the 
glial cells.
P11.072  A New High-speed conversion Kit for the Direct 
Detection of methylated DNA Extracted from gDNA, cancer, 
Blood or cell Line t issues for Research Utilizing capillary 
Electrophoresis
S. R. Berosik , C. Liu, W. Liao, E. Schreiber, M. Wenz;  
Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States.
DNA methylation influences cellular differentiation and higher organism 
development. DNA methylation in the promoter region of genes plays a 
central role in epigenetics and is associated with transcriptional silenc -
ing. Controlling or regulating gene expression by DNA methylation is 
related to: cell cycle regulation, embryonic development, X-chromo -
some gene silencing, chromatin structure and Oncogenesis.
A methylation kit has been developed to provide a faster, more stream-
lined research protocol that allows direct bisulfite conversion from bio -
logical samples (cell lines, tissues, blood and purified DNA) with com -
parable or better performance than existing kits. Without pretreatment 
of DNA with bisulfite, methylation patterns are lost after PCR amplifi -
cation of DNA. Traditionally, the bisulfite conversion incubation step 
has been time consuming and labor intensive. Treatment of DNA with 
bisulfite reagent converts C-bases to uracil (U) without significant con -
version of the 5-methyl cytosine (5mC), subsequently resulting in PCR 
amplification of 5mC as C-bases and the U-bases are read as thymine 
(T-bases) on capillary electrophoresis platforms. Available bisulfite 
conversion methods require DNA extraction from paraffin, while this 
procedure is capable of direct bisulfite conversion from unprocessed 
FFPE specimens. Complete conversion is achieved within 2-3-hrs.
We describe a direct bisulfite conversion of gDNA samples within 2-3-
hours that has also been tested on cancer, blood, and FFPE samples. 
These research samples are run in parallel with an existing bisulfite kit 
and the results compared on the 3500 capillary electrophoresis plat -
form.
The 3500 series Genetic Analyzer is for research use only. Not in -
tended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use.
P11.073  the role of methylation status of 5‘ UtR end of ROR2 
gene in osteoblast differentiation of mscs.
M. Noruzinia , G. Tarfiei;  
Tarbiat Modares University, School of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Several transcription factors such as Runx2 and Osterix are involved 
in osteoblast differentiation. ROR2 is a orphan receptor tyrosine ki -
nase that acts as a co-receptore in Non-canonical Wnt signaling path -
way. It is shown that ROR2 expression increases during differentiation 
of MSCs to osteoblast and then decreases as cells progress toward 
osteocytes.
MSCs isolation and expansion: human bone marrow mesenchymal 
stem cells(hBMSCs) is isolated using combining Ficoll-mediated dis -
continuous density gradient centrifugation with plastic adherence. 
isolated mononuclear cell layers were then suspended in DMEM and 
plated in culture flasks and incubated for overnight and then the non-
adherent cells were washed away leaving behind the adherent cell 
population. Flow cytometric analysis was use to identify the isolated 
hBMSCs.
Osteoblast differentiation: for osteoblastic differentiation, the hBMSCs 
were incubated for 21 days by Bone Differentiation Medium(BDM) . 
Alizarin red staining and RT-PCR for ALP and osteocalcin confirm os -
teoblastic differentiation.
Methylation specific PCR(MSP): MSP is used for analyzing methyla -
tion status of 5‘ UTR end of ROR2 gene in MSCs and osteoblastic cells 
in different stages. Results:
5‘ UTR end of ROR2 gene in MSCs is hyper methylated and methyla -
tion is reduced as cells differentiate toward osteoblastic progenitors 
and finally this region is hypo methylated in mature osteoblasts.
Discussion:
This finding confirms previous studies, which showed that ROR2 ex -pression during osteoblastogenesis is increased as cells differentiate 
to osteoblasts. ROR2 as a non-cononical Wnt signaling regulates os -
teoblastogenesis.
P11.074  Quantitative and qualitative analysis of SNRPN  gene 
methylation for Prader-Willi syndrome by real-time PcR with 
methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis
C. C. Hung1,2, S. Y. Lin3,4, C. N. Lee4, Y. N. Su1,2;  
1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
Introduction Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome 
(AS) are caused by deletion at a common region of chromosomal 
15q11-13 or uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 (UPD15). Identi -
fication of CpG methylation status at the SNRPN gene locus can be 
used as a diagnostic test for PWS.
Methods Here we show that real-time PCR with methylation-sensitive 
melting analysis (MS-HRM) is a sensitive and specific assay detecting 
CpG methylation status as well as copy number aberrations in a single 
tube. We established this duplex assay for the analysis of 38 individu -
als with Prader-Willi syndrome, 2 individuals with Angelman syndrome, 
and 28 unaffected individuals.
Results By comparing the copy number, deletion type and non-deletion 
type resulting in real-time PCR with marked copy number changes. In 
MS-HRM, the peak at lower melting temperature (85 °C ) belonged to 
the paternal allele (unmethylated) while the peak at higher melting tem -
perature (89 °C) belonged to the maternal allele (methylated). The Tm 
of the two alleles demonstrates clearer distinction in a derivative plot. 
The genotyping results obtained were fully concordant with traditional 
methylation PCR and all 68 samples were identified successfully.
Conclusions Our results show that the real-time PCR with MS-HRM 
strategy is good alternative for molecular diagnosis of PWS and AS. 
The in-house protocol provides detailed information about deletion and 
UPD genotypes as a significant strategy in clinical applications for epi -
genetics in a routine laboratory.
P11.075  High-throughput genomic and tissue microarray 
expression profiling reveal the placental gene expression 
signature of early-onset HELLP syndrome similar to that of 
early-onset preeclampsia
T. Varkonyi1, B. Nagy1, T. Füle1, A. Tarca2, K. Karaszi1, J. Schönleber1, P. 
Hupuczi1, I. Kovalszky1, J. Rigo Jr1, H. Meiri3, Z. Papp1, R. Romero2, N. G. 
Than1;  
1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Perinatology Research Branch, 
Ditroit, MI, United States, 3Diagnostic Technologies, Yokneam, Israel.
Background: The involvement of the placenta in the pathogenesis of 
preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome is unquestionable. In this study 
we aimed to examine placental gene expression and reveal candidate 
biomarkers. 
Methods: Placental specimens were obtained from women with ear -
ly-onset preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome as well as from control 
women who delivered preterm or at term. After histopathological ex -
amination, fresh-frozen placental specimens were used for microarray 
expression profiling followed by pathway analyses. A linear model was 
used to fit -DCt values as a function of study groups while adjusting 
for gestational age. Data was further analyzed by qRT-PCR and by 
immunostainings on tissue microarrays constructed from paraffin-em -
bedded placental specimen. 
Results: Placental gene expression was gestational age-dependent 
among preterm and term controls. Out of the 350 differentially ex -
pressed genes in preeclampsia and 555 genes in HELLP syndrome, 
a large group of 226 genes had expression changes. Of these 226 
genes, many encode proteins that have already been implicated as 
putatitive biomarkers for preeclampsia. Enrichment analyses revealed 
that differentially expressed genes are mostly attributed to the same 
biological processes, expressed in similar cellular compartments and 
participate in the same pathways in early-onset preeclampsia and 
HELLP syndrome; however, there were some biological processes 
overrepresented in only one of these syndromes. 
Conclusion: High-throughput genomic and tissue microarray expres -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
sion profiling revealed that the placental gene expression signature in 
early-onset preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome largely overlaps. Ac -
cordingly, a common cause and pathophysiologic processes may lead 
to shared placental and clinical features in these severe syndromes.
P11.076  Dynamic miRNA profiles in human diseases
A. Keller1, A. Wendschlag1, P. Leidinger2, A. Bauer3, J. Hoheisel3, P. Staehler4, 
E. Meese2;  
1Biomarker Discovery Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Human 
Genetics, Medical School, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany, 3Division 
of Functional Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, 
Germany, 4febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have demonstrated their potential as biomark -
ers in a variety of studies. A particularly promising approach is the de -
termination of miRNA fingerprints in patients from body fluids rather 
than tissue biopsies.
We measured miRNA profiles in different body fluids (including blood 
and serum) of about 1,000 patients suffering from different diseases, 
including cancer (among others lung tumors, pancreatic cancer, pros -
tate cancer) and inflammatory diseases (multiple sclerosis, pancreati -
tis, COPD). Analyses were based on all known miRNAs as annotated 
in miRBase version 12.0 or higher. To extract relevant information from 
this large data set, we implemented a dynamic miRNA database. This 
database contains the miRNA profile and clinical information for each 
sample such as the TNM status of a cancer patient. miRNA profiles 
from different diseases and controls can be easily extracted and an -
alyzed. In addition, the profiles can be used for classifying patients 
based on the developed biomarker signatures. Besides the compari -
son of diseases and controls, the flexibility enables numerous relevant 
diagnostic tasks, for example distinguishing between lung cancer and 
COPD patients. Since the database content is steadily increasing, 
more specific questions can be approached, for example the identifi -
cation of putative differences between metastasizing and non-metas -
tasizing cancers.
Taken together, our database contains the largest collection of com -
plex miRNA profiles from patients’ body fluids and will help scientists 
and clinicians alike to address many questions of different nature.
P11.077**  miR-103 and miR-107 are involved in the regulation of 
cDK5R1/p35 expression.
S. Moncini1, A. Salvi2, M. Venturin1, P. Zuccotti1, A. Nicolin1, G. De Petro2, S. 
Barlati2, P. Riva1;  
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
CDK5R1 encodes for p35, an activator of CDK5, which is involved in 
neuronal migration and differentiation during CNS development. A lot 
of microRNAs (miRNAs) target sites for twenty different miRNAs have 
been predicted by PicTar in CDK5R1 3’UTR. A Real-Time PCR of 5 
selected miRNAs performed in human cell lines showed an inverse 
correlation between miR-103 and miR-107 levels and p35 expression, 
suggesting a negative effect of these miRNAs on CDK5R1 expres -
sion. We carried out transient transfection of SK-N-BE neuroblastoma 
cells with miR-107/103 precursors (pre-miR-107/103) and antagonists 
(anti-miR-107/103). 48h after pre-miR-107 transfection, a significant 
reduction of p35 levels was observed, by 38% with 50nM and 49% 
with 100nM of precursor. Otherwise, if anti-miR-107 (50-100nM) was 
transfected, an increase of 1.4-1.8 folds in p35 levels was observed, 
compared to the untransfected control. Similarly, the transfection of 
pre-miR-103 (50-100nM) or anti-miR-103 (50-100nM) caused a reduc -
tion (35-40%) or an increase (76-83%) of p35 levels, respectively. Lu -
ciferase assays on 3’UTR constructs cotransfected with miR-103/107 
showed that 4 out of 9 predicted target sites might be functional. De -
letion of the binding sites is in progress: at present deletion of site 
1 shows increasing of luciferase activity, while deletion of site 2 pro -
duces no effects. Finally, transfection of miR-103 or miR-107 reduces 
SK-N-BE migration ability by 47 and 45% respectively following in vitro  
scratch assays. The obtained findings indicate that miR-103 and miR-
107 regulate CDK5R1/p35 expression and allow us to hypothesize 
that a miRNA-mediated mechanism might influence CDK5 activity and 
its pathway.P11.078  Real-time quantitation of primary transcripts of 
microRNA genes
Y. Liang, F. Fan, E. Langit, J. Lu, P. Brzoska, C. Chen, L. Wong ;  
Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States.
Regulation of mature microRNA (miRNA) expression has been shown 
during the course of biogenesis under different contexts: from tran -
scription, processing of pri-miRNA to pre-miRNA by Drosha, to pro -
cessing of pre-miRNA to mature miRNA by Dicer. A mature miRNA 
can be processed from two or more stem-loop precursor loci, which 
are denoted with numeric suffixes such as -1, -2, etc. As of the 14th 
Release of the miRBase, there are 154 genes among the 750 miRNA 
genes that belong to this category. To interrogate regulation of miRNA 
expression at the transcriptional level for those that can be processed 
from multiple genomic locations, it requires assays to specifically 
quantitate the precise locus of interest. We have developed a pipe -
line to design and select real-time RT-PCR assays to quantitate pri -
mary transcripts of miRNA genes. These assays are designed against 
genomic DNA sequence so the genomic DNA needs to be removed 
by prior enzyme treatment. We showed that the TaqMan® Pri-miRNA 
Assays have minimally detectable or no background using either cell 
lysates or commercial tissue total RNA. Excellent linearity was seen 
using cDNA synthesized from total RNA, or using 1ng/ul or greater of 
genomic DNA. The specificity of the assays to distinguish loci that are 
processed into identical mature miRNA was demonstrated using sub -
cloned plasmids, as well as using breast cancer cell lines that showed 
concordant expression patterns among such loci with published data 
in human breast cancer.
P11.079  MicroRNAs with a potential influence on SERCA2 
protein expression in human myocardial infarction
E. Boštjančič , N. Zidar, D. Glavač;  
Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Cardiac sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium ATPase-2 (SERCA2) 
plays a central role in myocardial contractility. SERCA2 mRNA and 
protein reduction may contribute to various form of heart disease. 
SERCA2 is regulated at post-translational level by phospholamban, 
and since correlation between decreased SERCA2 mRNA and protein 
levels is not always observed, we purposed that it may be in addition 
regulated at post-transcription level. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), post-tran -
scription regulators of gene expression, have been reported to influ -
ence a wide variety of physiological as well as pathological conditions, 
including cardiovascular disease. Since correlation between SERCA2 
and miRNA expression was not previously reported, we focused on 
miRNAs that could potentially influence SERCA2  expression in human 
myocardial infarction (MI).
SERCA2 protein expression, analyzed by western blot, was decreased 
in infarcted tissue when compared to remote myocardium, and 21 miR -
NAs were up-regulated when analyzed by miRNA microarrays in the 
same tissue. MicroRNA binding prediction to SERCA2 mRNA, using 
several in silico  approaches (TargetScan, PicTar, miRBase, miRanda, 
microrna.org, miRDB, RNA22, mFold) identified 213 putative miRNAs. 
By combining miRNA microarray, target prediction and western blot 
results, we identified 8 miRNAs ( miR-34a , miR-214, let-7i, miR-100, 
miR-122, miR-199-3p, miR-199-5p and miR-497 ) with a potential influ -
ence on SERCA2. In a proportion of samples, up-regulation of miR-
122 was confirmed using real-time PCR, and miR-100  up-regulation 
and SERCA2 down-regulation is in accordance with other research 
performed on cardiomyopathies and neonatal cardiomyocytes. Our re -
sults indicate that some miRNAs, in addition to phospholamban, may 
be involved in the regulation of SERCA2 expression in MI.
P11.080  Real-time quantitation of custom-multiplexed TaqMan® microRNA Assays
L. Wong , T. Gulham, C. Chen;  
Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~22 nucleotide endogenous RNA molecules 
that play an important role in the regulation of developmental and 
physiological processes in animals and plants. Studies indicate that 
miRNAs are efficacious biomarkers for the classification of tumors, 
and are involved in the multilevel regulation of gene expression. Over 
10,000 mature miRNAs for hundreds of species are listed in miR -
Base and a growing number of novel miRNAs are being discovered. 
To determine the level of miRNA expression, Applied Biosystems de -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
veloped the stem-loop RT based TaqMan MicroRNA Assays, a robust 
method showing large dynamic range, high specificity and sensitivity. 
We have recently developed a protocol to allow custom-multiplexing 
of the stem-loop RT primers, for a faster, more flexible approach for 
miRNA validation. In combination with an optimized pre-amplification 
method, we evaluated randomly selected miRNA assays in multiplex 
pools of 12, 24, 48, and 96 primers. Expression correlation for the 
common assays in the various multiplex was >0.98. Average delta Ct 
between individual miRNA assays and custom pooled assays was 1.0. 
Seven 96-plex of randomly selected miRNA assays were also evalu -
ated with total RNA from brain and placenta. Results showed minimal 
background with only 0.7% of the assays, from a total of 672, with Ct 
< 35 for the no template reactions. In addition, comparable expression 
pattern was observed using the delta, delta, delta Ct approach in which 
>93% was <1.0 when normalized to an endogenous control, and the 
different methods and samples.
P11.081**  RNA expression profiles of Familial Hemiplegic 
migraine mouse models with relevance to migraine-associated 
cerebellar ataxia
B. de Vries , P. A. C. ‚t Hoen, L. A. M. Broos, S. C. Koelewijn, B. Todorov, R. R. 
Frants, M. D. Ferrari, J. M. Boer, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg;  
Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands.
The CACNA1A  gene encodes the α1 subunit of voltage-gated CaV2.1 
Ca2+ channels. Mutations in CACNA1A  are associated with familial 
hemiplegic migraine (FHM), a rare monogenic subtype of migraine 
with aura that can be accompanied by cerebellar ataxia and/or epilep -
sy. Two extremes of the FHM clinical spectrum are seen with missense 
mutations R192Q and S218L. Whereas R192Q mutation carriers suffer 
from pure FHM, S218L patients have a severe phenotype with FHM, 
cerebellar ataxia, seizures, and brain edema after mild head trauma. 
Recently, knock-in Cacna1a  mouse models were generated that carry 
either the R192Q or S218L mutation. Here we investigated their RNA 
expression profiles in the occipital cortex and cerebellum because of 
their relevance to aura and ataxia, respectively. Despite pronounced 
consequences at molecular and neurobiological level, only modest dif -
ferences in gene expression were observed in the cortex. This was 
not due to lack of power in our study since we observed extensive 
differential expression of genes in the chromosomal region surround -
ing the CACNA1A  gene mutation, which are probably not related to 
the phenotype of the mice. Expression differences were much more 
pronounced in the cerebellum of S218L mice and could be linked to 
their ataxic phenotype. Most strikingly, tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker 
of delayed cerebellar maturation, is strongly up-regulated in cerebel -
la of S218L mice. In addition, neuronal pathways, such as biogenic 
amine synthesis pathways show signs of up-regulation as well. Our 
findings indicate that migraine-associated phenotype cerebellar ataxia 
in CaV2.1 mutant mice is best reflected in the basal RNA expression 
profiles.
P11.082  Accurate distinction of pathogenic from benign CNVs in mental Retardation
J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, N. Wieskamp1, C. Webber2, R. Pfundt1, H. G. Brunner1, C. 
Gilissen1, B. B. A. de Vries1, C. P. Ponting2, J. A. Veltman1;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 
2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Copy number variants (CNVs) have recently been recognized as a 
common form of genomic variation in humans. Hundreds of CNVs 
can be detected in any individual genome using genomic microar -
rays or whole genome sequencing technology, but their phenotypic 
consequences are still poorly understood. Rare CNVs have been re -
ported as a frequent cause of neurological disorders such as mental 
retardation (MR), schizophrenia and autism, prompting widespread 
implementation of CNV screening in diagnostics. In previous stud -
ies we have shown that, in contrast to CNVs found in the general 
population, MR-associated CNVs are significantly enriched in genes 
whose mouse orthologues, when disrupted, result in a nervous system 
phenotype. We have developed and validated a novel computational 
method (GeCCO) that differentiates between benign and MR-associ -
ated CNVs using genomic features to annotate each CNV. This meth -
od is able to achieve a high accuracy when classifying a cohort of 
individuals with unexplained MR (~1,800). We demonstrate the benefit 
of applying such computational methods to the interpretation of CNVs, including those for which the inheritance cannot be determined, as 
well as rare inherited CNVs. These results indicate that our classifica -
tion method will be of value for objectively prioritizing CNVs in clinical 
research and diagnostics.
P11.083  Functional analysis of SNPs affecting mRNA splicing linked to genome-wide association study (GWAs) loci
E. J. Mucaki , T. Whitehead, P. K. Rogan;  
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
We have investigated alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms in genes 
whose abundance and structure are altered by allele-specific splic -
ing effects. We used information theory-based models of constitutive 
splicing to search for splicing mutations among all validated HapMap 
Phase II SNPs. We developed software (calculating ΔRi, in bits) to 
predict mRNA splicing effects associated these polymorphisms and 
annotate genomic sequences with information changes at natural and 
potential cryptic splice sites. 3097 SNPs produced ΔRi≥ 1 bit (≥ Δ2 
fold) splice site changes in natural splice sites (963 donors, 2134 ac -
ceptors). To support these predictions, exon microarray expression 
data from HapMap Phase II individuals (GEO Accession GSE7851) 
was used to determine which SNP-affected natural sites show allele-
specific changes in splicing index (the ratio of the exon to core probe -
set cDNA hybridization intensities). Public mRNA and EST libraries 
were also queried for supporting evidence of cryptic site activation, as 
well as diminished use of affected natural sites. Predictions were con -
firmed by analysis of the abundance of each predicted splice isoform 
for each SNP genotype. Using real time RT-PCR, 11 out of 12 (and one 
equivocal) SNPs tested with ΔRi > 1 bit exhibited significant changes 
in splicing consistent with levels predicted by information theory. Ge -
nome-wide, strengths of 16906 cryptic and natural splice sites (ΔRi 
> 0.9 bits) were found within 10kb of SNPs significantly associated 
with various phenotypes by GWAS. The most common phenotypes 
included 2799 SNPs proximate to GWAS SNPs associated with CNS-
related disease, 2004 with cardiac diseases, and 2110 with obesity-
related diseases.
P11.084  Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX-2) as a flexible multiplex PcR-based method for nucleic acid variation analysis
K. Krjutskov1, T. Viltrop1, P. Palta1, A. Metspalu2,3;  
1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia.
Mutation detection and SNP genotyping are basic techniques in hu -
man genetic- and molecular diagnostic laboratories. Currently numer -
ous commercial and custom assays are available, but none of them is 
prioritized due to diverse applications and therefore “one size doesn’t 
fit for all”. The key parameters for successful genotyping methods are 
accuracy, flexibility, high throughput, and inexpensive cost. We devel -
oped an up to 640-plex multiplex-PCR protocol and combined it with 
four-color arrayed primer extension (APEX) detection method, APEX-
2. In APEX-2, each studied locus is amplified in multiplex PCR and 
detected on a microarray. For multiplex PCR, two oligonucleotides are 
required for each locus. Primers in the multiplex reaction are mixed 
together and involved in the first phase of PCR, using a standard pro -
tocol. All formed products are then amplified in the second, universal 
primer phase of PCR. After purification and concentration of the mul -
tiplex-PCR products, single base extension on an oligomicroarray is 
performed and genotypes are called.
The principle of APEX-2 was published in 2008 and after that, many 
applications using various plex sizes and different DNA sources simul -
taneously (mitochondrial, autosomal, and Y chromosome DNA) have 
been carried out. Furthermore, we have studied DNA extraction meth -
ods from blood and saliva for multiplex PCR, scanned optimal primer 
design parameters and looked deeply into all reaction and cycling 
conditions. APEX-2, as a custom genotyping assay has high accuracy 
(99.86%), flexibility (50 - 1,000 plex) and throughput, and has a poten -
tial to become a reliable and user-friendly genotyping tool.
P11.085  Molecular neurocytogenetic, in silico and proteome 
(interactome/reactome) evaluations of brain-specific somatic 
genome variations in neurodegenerative diseases
I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, A. D. Kolotii2, I. A. Demidova2,1, 
A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets2, O. S. Kurinnaia2,1, M. K. Tagirova1, E. A. 
Saprina1,4, I. V. Soloviev1, Y. B. Yurov1,2;  Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, 
Jena, Germany, 4Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Chromosome instability (CIN) is associated with neurodegeneration in 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) (Iourov et al., 
2009). Here, we have attempted to determine cellular and molecular 
basis of this relationship. High-resolution interphase molecular cyto -
genetic and in silico analyses showed that CIN involves specific chro -
mosomal loci in the AT cerebellum: 14q12 (FOXG1B, NOVA1), 7p14, 
Xp22.1, Xp22.3 (FRA7C, FRAXB, FRAXC). The AD brain demonstrat -
ed a dramatic 10-fold increase in levels of chromosome 21-aneuploidy 
(6-15%). We further performed a proteomic (interactomic/reactomic) 
study analyzing either loci disrupted by CIN or crucial intracellular pro -
cesses in context of our data. Genes disrupted in the AT cerebellum in -
teract with SMAD pathway (SMAD2, SMAD4 at 18q21.1) of TGF-beta 
response, required for proper apoptosis and cell cycle progression. 
Additionally, these data implicate that neuronal-specific alternative 
splicing is likely to be affected in AT (NOVA1 disruption). Reactomic 
study suggested that G1/S DNA damage checkpoint p53-dependent 
pathway is altered by ATM mutations only without additional CIN ef -
fect. According to our and literature data, it is supposed that G2/M DNA 
replication checkpoint pathway should be primarily affected in the AD 
brain. However, neither interactome nor reactome evaluation has elu -
cidated elements playing a role in this pathway that have been found 
to be involved in AD brain-specific CIN. Therefore, we concluded that 
neurodegeneration in the AD brain is mediated by DNA-replication-
independent aneuploidization and chromosome specificity is achieved 
by natural selection during brain ontogeny. We conclude that bioinfor -
matic and proteomic analysis is a required addition to studies discover -
ing mechanisms of complex multisystem disease.
P11.086  Resequencing of the candidate region for 16q-ADCA 
and detection of an insertion polymorphism by fragment 
assembly data using massively parallel short-read sequencing.
T. Kaname1,2, M. Tsukahara3,2, K. Yanagi1, K. Fujimori2,4, I. Kikuzato2,5, M. 
Teruya2,6, Y. Imada7,2, M. Nezuo7,2, S. Yano7,2, Y. Sato2,5, Y. Miwa7,2, T. Hirano2,4, 
R. Hirano8, H. Takashima8, K. Yoshiura9, N. Niikawa10, K. Naritomi1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan, 2Okinawa 
Cutting-Edge Genome Project, Okinawa, Japan, 3TTC, Tropical Technology 
Center Ltd, Okinawa, Japan, 4Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 
Tsukuba, Japan, 5OSTC, Okinawa, Japan, 6Okinawa Industrial Technology 
Center, Okinawa, Japan, 7TTC, Tropical Technology Center Ltd., Okinawa, 
Japan, 8Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kagoshima, Japan, 9Human Genetics, Nagasaki University Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 10The Research Institute 
of Personalized Health Sciences, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
Next Generation Sequencing technologies have brought new ap -
proaches of genetic analyses for personal genome or human diseas -
es. The technologies can accurate giga-base order of sequence within 
a single run, allowing for complete resequencing of whole candidate 
region of a genetic disease in patients, whose responsible gene is not 
identified.
We picked one candidate region of a neurologenetic disorder, the au -
tosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia linked to chromosome 16q22 
(16q ADCA), as an example of the resequencing approach. The candi -
date region of 16q ADCA spanning 500kb was extracted and amplified 
in Japanese individuals by long-range PCR. Then, a fragment library 
from the region was constructed and sequenced to a depth >400-fold 
using the SOLiD 3 system. Comparison of each sequences and the 
genome database allowed us to find novel variations in Japanese indi -
viduals in addition to known SNPs.
Recently, an insertion polymorphism near the BEAN gene has been 
found. One type of insertion might be associated with 16q-ADCA.
We investigated whether the fragment analysis but not mate-paired 
analysis could detect the insertion. A survey for the depth of reads from 
fragment assembly could detect such insertion.
The resequencing approach of whole candidate region for a genetic 
disease might be a powerful tool to find not only SNPs but also in/del 
mutations in patients.P11.087  Next generation sequencing: setting a new stage for 
DNA diagnostics?
R. J. Sinke , A. Pósafalvi, J. J. E. Bergsma, L. G. Boven, F. van Dijk, G. te 
Meerman, J. P. van Tintelen, J. D. H. Jongbloed;  
Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands.
DNA diagnostic care suffers from laborious, time consuming proce -
dures and limited possibilities to screen all genes for a given disease. 
This results in incomplete, expensive diagnostic care and long report -
ing times. Here, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) provides a unique 
solution, enabling mutation analysis of all known disease-associated 
genes in one single experiment. Application of NGS would significant -
ly improve the diagnostic care for both patients, by maximizing their 
chances on a timely identified causal mutation, and family-members at 
risk, by enabling carriership-testing in many more cases.
To assess the applicability of NGS in routine diagnostics, we compared 
the performance and quality of NGS using an Illumina-GAII to currently 
used methods.
Mutation detection was performed in 10 patients diagnosed with Ar -
rhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy. For these patients 
the ARVC-associated genes DSC2, DSG2, PKP2, DSP, JUP, DES, 
PLEC1, and TMEM43 were analyzed. These eight genes were PCR-
amplified and subsequently analysed by NGS and CSCE/Sanger se -
quencing.
Our results indicate that NGS allows the readily detection of all mu -
tations when using in-house developed software tools and appropri -
ate parameters for data analysis. The variations detected included 2 
pathogenic mutations and 12 uncertain variants. There was a 100% 
concordance between the two methods. NGS could indeed provide 
a mutation detection method that performs better than currently used 
techniques. A considerable reduction of reporting times is feasible us -
ing NGS for the mutation analyses of disease genes. Further aspects 
dealing with data-quality, data-interpretation, detection of false-posi -
tive and false-negative results and implications for further implementa -
tion will be discussed.
P11.088   
targeted Next Generation sequencing Pipeline For Large-scale 
Genomic studies
P. Staehler1, A. Borries1, M. Scheffler1, Y. Chen1, A. Keller2;  
1febit biomed GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Biomarker Discovery Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
Massively parallel DNA sequencing technologies, combined with se -
quence capture methodologies, have accelerated the investigation 
of specific genomic regions while reducing the time, cost, and effort 
needed to interrogate multiple loci. Combining the SOLiD 3plus Sys -
tem with febit’s HybSelect Sequence Capture Solution in one stream -
lined targeted NGS pipeline, we established a powerful facility to re -
sequence large genomic regions in hundreds of clinical samples per 
study in a very economical way and within short time.
Demonstrating the power of this targeted re-sequencing pipeline, we 
present the results of a series of research studies that investigated 
clinically relevant genomic regions with an overall performance of 
resequencing several hundred thousand bases in over 400 clinical 
samples within 4 weeks. Multiplexed analysis of barcoded and pooled 
samples drastically enhanced throughput and reduced cost per sample 
in these studies, whose results will be further discussed in upcoming 
high-impact publications.
The presented facility will allow targeted sequencing of more than 
1,000 barcoded samples per week, serving large scale genomic stud -
ies and clinical research, thus taking next generation sequencing to 
the next level.
P11.089  Evaluation of the ABI SOLiD sequencing technology for 
routine genetic diagnosis: a pilot study on BRCA1  and BRCA2
C. Houdayer1,2, V. Moncoutier1, B. Zeitouni3,4, L. Castéra1, E. Barillot3,4, M. 
Stern1,5, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,5,2;  
1Institut Curie, Service de Génétique Oncologique, Paris, France, 2Université 
Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Institut Curie, service de bioinformatique, 
Paris, France, 4Inserm Unit 900, Paris, France, 5Inserm Unit 830, Paris, France.
Molecular diagnosis in the coming years might be based on high 
throughput technologies that would simultaneously explore a large 
number of genes for an impressive number of patients. Thus we have Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
designed a pilot study to determine if the SOLiD technology could fulfill 
the requirements of molecular diagnosis.
Twenty patients fully genotyped by reference methods and harboring 
various mutations on BRCA1  and BRCA2  (transitions, transversions, 
insertions and deletions from 1 to 20 bp) were included. DNAs were 
enriched for BRCA  exonic regions and flanking introns by in-house 
multiplex PCRs and the Multiplicon assay.
A targeted re-sequencing experiment was performed using the SOLiD 
v3 system and the molecular barcoding. Four among the 20 barcodes 
performed poorly but all patients were correctly identified.
By using BFAST , 60% of the 100Mb reads were uniquely mapped to 
the amplicon sequences with an average depth-of-coverage of 3500X. 
We called potential SNPs and small indels with SAMTools  and filtered 
out most of false positives using the minimum coverage, the minimum 
allele ratio and distribution of the heterozygosis frequency as main fil -
tering parameters. All specific point mutations were successively local -
ized and identified along with expected polymorphisms.
Few variations were found that were absent using our reference meth -
od, thus needing Sanger sequencing to decide between SOLiD false 
positives or diagnostic false negatives. Next steps are the detection of 
large rearrangements and inclusion of a larger number of genes and 
patients.
Overall this pilot study shows that the SOLiD system plus a dedicated 
bioinformatics pipeline fulfill the diagnostic requirements.
P11.090  multiplex target enrichment using DNA indexing for 
ultra-high throughput sNP and cNV detection.
E. M. Kenny , P. Cormican, W. P. Gilks, A. S. Gates, C. T. O’Dushlaine, C. 
Pinto, A. P. Corvin, M. Gill, D. W. Morris;  
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland.
Screening large numbers of target regions in multiple DNA samples for 
sequence and structural variation is an important application of next 
generation sequencing but an efficient method to enrich the samples 
in parallel has yet to be reported. We describe a method that combines 
DNA samples using indexes or barcodes prior to target enrichment 
to facilitate this type of experiment. Sequencing libraries for multiple 
individual DNA samples, each incorporating a unique 6bp index, are 
combined in equal quantities, enriched using a single in-solution tar -
get enrichment assay and sequenced in a single reaction. Sequence 
reads are parsed based on the index, thus allowing sequence data to 
be analyzed at the level of the individual DNA sample. We show that 
use of indexed samples does not impact on the efficiency of the enrich -
ment assay. Using sequencing libraries containing 3- and 9-indexed 
HapMap DNA samples, the method was found to be highly accurate for 
SNP identification. Even with sequence coverage as low as 8x, 98.8% 
of sequence SNP calls were concordant with known genotypes. Addi -
tionally, we observed a strong correlation between sequence coverage 
and copy number variant (CNV) genotype in the indexed samples at a 
known CNV region (rho=1, p<0.0005). This method introduces signifi -
cant flexibility into next generation sequencing study designs. Within 
a single sequencing experiment, it has the capacity to analyze the ex -
onic regions of hundreds of genes in tens of samples for sequence and 
structural variation using as little as 1μg of input DNA per sample.
P11.091  t ranscriptional hallmarks of Noonan syndrome in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells
G. Picco1, D. Cantarella1, G. Baldassarre2, C. Isella1, N. Crescenzo2, F. 
Timeus2, N. Chiesa2, G. Merla3, L. Mazzanti4, C. Rossi4, G. Zampino5, M. 
Tartaglia6, M. Silengo2, E. Medico1, G. Ferrero2;  
1University of Torino, Candiolo, Italy, 2University of Torino, Department of 
Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, 
Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Sant’ Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, 
Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics, Sacro Cuore Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 
6Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Roma, Italy.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome charac -
terized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects and skeletal 
abnormalities, rarely associated with mental retardation or juvenile my -
elomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Germline mutations responsible for 
NS affect genes of the RAS-MAPK pathway, which regulates cell pro -
liferation, differentiation and senescence by ultimately controlling gene 
expression. To investigate the transcriptional consequences of such 
mutations, we performed Global mRNA Expression Profiling (GEP) on Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs), a target tissue of 
the syndrome. We analyzed 28 samples from molecularly defined NS 
patients (17 with PTPN11, 6 with SOS1 and 5 with the recently identi -
fied SHOC2 mutation), and 21 samples from age- and sex-matched 
controls. We then selected genes differentially expressed between 
control samples and each of the three mutation subgroups. Interest -
ingly, the transcriptional signatures so obtained displayed remarkable 
gene-specificity: each mutational subgroup (PTPN11, SOS1, SHOC2) 
was well distinguished from control samples by its own signature and 
displayed limited transcriptional overlap with the other subgroups, 
which is not consistent with a homogeneous generic NS molecular 
profile. Systematic leave-one-out cross-validation confirmed that the 
transcriptional signatures are potentially useful not only to discriminate 
control from NS samples, but also to subdivide NS samples based on 
the mutated gene. In silico data mining revealed common features of 
PBMCs from NS patients, such as functional alteration of the JAK/
STAT and γ-Interferon pathways. These data provide evidence of a 
high potential for GEP analysis of PBMCs both as a diagnostic tool and 
to dissect the molecular complexity of Noonan syndrome.
P11.092  improved structural characterization of chromosomal breakpoints using high resolution custom array-cGH
A. Lindstrand1, J. Schoumans1, P. Gustavsson1, N. Hanemaaijer2, H. 
Malmgren1, E. Blennow1;  
1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands.
Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the rapid detection of genomic imbal -
ances. By customizing the array it is possible to increase the resolution 
in a targeted genomic region of interest and determine the structure 
of the breakpoints with high accuracy, as well as to detect very small 
imbalances. We have used targeted custom arrays to zoom in on 38 
chromosomal breakpoints from 12 different patients carrying both bal -
anced and unbalanced rearrangements.
We show that it is possible to characterize unbalanced breakpoints 
within 17 to 20 000 bp, depending on the structure of the genome. All 
of the deletion and duplication breakpoints were further refined and po -
tential underlying molecular mechanisms of formation is discussed. In 
one of seven carriers of apparently balanced reciprocal translocations 
we detected a small deletion of 200 bp within the previously FISH-de -
fined breakpoint, and in another patient, a large deletion of 11 Mb was 
identified on a chromosome not involved in the translocation.
Targeted custom oligonucleotide arrays makes it possible to perform 
fine mapping of breakpoints with a resolution within the breakpoint re -
gion much higher compared to commercially available array platforms. 
In addition, identification of small deletions or duplications in appar -
ently balanced rearrangements may contribute to the identification of 
new disease causing genes.
P11.093  the Opitz BBB/G syndrome protein complex regulates 
the translation efficiency of the ephrin B1 mRNA
S. Schweiger1, B. Aranda-Orgillés2, S. Krauss3, R. Zeller1, S. Roepcke3, S. 
Krause3, M. Fuchs3, J. Aigner3, R. Schneider4;  
1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Max-PLanck Institute for 
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Max-Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
The MID1 protein, mutations in which cause a hypertelorism / hypo -
spadias syndrome called Opitz BBB/G syndrome, assembles a ribonu -
cleoprotein (mRNP) complex that associates with mRNAs. The identity 
of these mRNAs and the potential implications of their interaction with 
the MID1 protein complex remain unclear. We show here that the eph -
rin B1 (EFNB1) mRNA associates with the MID1 protein complex. Eph -
rins are pathfinder molecules regulating embryonic patterning. Muta -
tions in EFNB1 have been identified in patients with craniofrontonasal 
dysplasia, another hypertelorism syndrome. We furthermore show that 
the MID1 protein complex regulates the translation of EFNB1, which is 
remarkably reduced in cells from OS patients leading to a compensa -
tory increase of EFNB1 transcription and an impaired responsiveness 
towards ephrin receptor stimuli in these cells. Our data not only bring 
further insight into the pathogenesis of OS and other hypertelorism 
syndromes, but also provide evidence for a novel and unexpected 
mechanism regulating EFNB1 function.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics20
P11.094  involvement of sOX9 and FGF23 in RUNX2 regulation in 
osteoarthritic chondrocytes
T. Orfanidou1, A. Tsezou2;  
1University of Thessaly, Medical School, Laboratory of Cytogenetics and 
Medical Genetics, Larissa, Greece, LARISSA, Greece, 2University of Thessaly, 
Medical School, Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics, Larissa, 
Greece, University of Thessaly, Medical School, Department of Biology, 
Larissa, Greece, Larissa, Greece.
Osteoarthritis is a metabolic disease, including altered expression 
pattern of several genes in articular chondrocytes.Chondrocytes‘ hy -
pertrophy includes matrix remodelling, proliferation and apoptosis, 
characteristics associated with the progression of osteoarthritis. We in -
vestigated possible associations between RUNX2, SOX9 and FGF23 
expressions in articular chondrocytes in order to elucidate their contri -
bution in the osteoarthritic cartilage. SOX9, FGF23, RUNX2 and MMP-
13 mRNA expressions were evaluated in osteoarthritic and normal 
chondrocytes by real-time PCR while MMP-13 protein expression by 
immunofluorescense. RUNX2, FGF23 and SOX9 were downregulated 
using small interfering RNA technology. The effect of human recombi -
nant FGF23 on SOX9 and RUNX2 expression was tested in normal 
chondrocytes. We found higher expression of RUNX2 and FGF23 and 
a decreased expression of SOX9 mRNA in osteoarthritic chondrocytes 
compared to normal (p<0.0001). RUNX2 downregulation resulted in 
reduced MMP-13 expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes and inhibi -
tion of SOX9 in increased RUNX2 and MMP-13 expression in normal 
chondrocytes, while inhibition of FGF23 resulted in reduced RUNX2 
expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes (p<0.0001). Silencing of 
RUNX2 or FGF23 did not affect SOX9 mRNA levels in osteoarthritic 
chondrocytes. Moreover simultaneous downregulation of SOX9 and 
upregulation of FGF23 in normal chondrocytes resulted in additive up -
regulation of RUNX2 mRNA expression. Treatment of normal chondro -
cytes with hrFGF23 resulted in increased RUNX2 mRNA expression, 
while it had no effect on SOX9 mRNA expression. We demonstrated 
convincing associations between RUNX2, SOX9 and FGF23 in rela -
tion to MMP-13 expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes, contributing 
to a better understanding of the abnormal gene expression and carti -
lage degeneration processes associated with osteoarthritis.
P11.095  the short isoform Of P75NtR As A major Player in 
Postnatal Hippocampal signal t ransduction
M. A. Sabry , F. Al- Rowaihi, M. Al-Ramadan, A. Baqer;  
Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Bahrain.
The pro-nerve growth factor p75 neurotrophin receptor (P75NTR) is a 
member of TNF receptor superfamily. Oligoheteromeric signaling of 
P75NTR, in association with the ligand-selective neurotrophin receptor, 
tyrosin kinase receptor (Trk) promotes cell survival. P75NTR signalling, 
in the absence of Trk association, has crucial functions in apoptosis, 
facilitation of hippocampal long-term depression (LTD) and regulation 
of axon growth/arborisation and Schwann cell migration.
In a quantitative RT-PCR approach, we studied the expression of 
the full-length isoform (L) and the short isoform (S) of P75NTR during 
postnatal development of the rat hippocampus and explored their dif -
ferential modulation by PTU- induced hypothyroidism initiated during 
prenatal development.
The most important result that stands out in this investigation is the high 
postnatal expression level of S isoform of P75NTR, which is comparable 
to that of the L isoform in control and hypothyroid rat hippocampus, 
both at ages 2 and 6 weeks, which would reflect important functional 
postnatal roles of the S form. In control hippocampus, the expression 
levels of the L isoform is comparable at ages 2 and 6 weeks, while the 
short isoform is down-regulated, but is still considerably expressed, 
at age six weeks compared to its expression level at age two weeks. 
In hypothyroid hippocampus, each of L and S isoforms is significantly 
down-regulated between ages 2 and 6 weeks. Hypothyroidism signifi -
cantly down-regulates the hippocampal expression of both L and S iso -
forms of P75NTR, only at age 2 weeks. The investigation highlights the 
potential functional significance of L-S partnership in postnatal murine 
P75NTR signalling.P11.096  Jörg D. Hoheisel1, Nathalia Giese2, markus Büchler2, 
Andreas Keller3, Andrea Bauer1
J. D. Hoheisel1, N. Giese2, M. Büchler2, A. Keller3, A. Bauer1;  
1Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of 
Surgery of the University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3febit biomed, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
Our research aims at the development and immediate application of 
new technologies for an analysis, assessment and description of both 
the realisation and regulation of cellular function from genetic informa -
tion.
Pancreatic cancer is at the centre of attention. Global studies are un -
der way on SNP- or mutational variations, the epigenetic modulation of 
gene promoters, differences in transcription factor binding, changes of 
transcript levels of coding and non-coding RNAs, on the actual protein 
expression and the intensity of protein interactions. We also pursue 
genome-wide knock-out studies for the identification of genes that are 
critical for tumour development and progression.
By combining the data, we aim at an understanding of cellular regula -
tion and its biological consequences. In combination with clinical facts, 
the knowledge is used for the creation of means of early diagnosis, 
accurate prognosis and the analysis of treatment results as well as the 
establishment of new therapeutic approaches.
As part of the above, we performed a comparison of variations in the 
abundance of miRs in blood and tissue of patients with pancreatic can -
cer or chronic pancreatitis and samples from healthy donors. Apart 
from identifying miRs, which are prognostic markers for survival, we 
also found miRs that discriminated clearly between tumour, pancreati -
tis and normal. In addition, we identified a dozen miRs that varied their 
transcript levels identically in both tumour tissue and blood, while only 
one would be expected by chance. Their functional roles within tumour 
cells as well as possible intercellular activities will be discussed.
http://www.dkfz.de/funct_genome/
P11.097  Positional integratomic approach in identification of 
genomic candidate regions for Parkinson disease
A. Maver , B. Peterlin;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenera -
tive disorder, characterized by progressive symptoms of tremor, rigidity, 
and bradykinesia. Genetic factors have been implicated in its etiology; 
however precise genetic basis of PD is unclear. Recently, abundance 
of data originating from studies employing high-throughput technolo -
gies to reveal alterations in PD on genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, 
and other levels, offer the possibility to integrate this information into a 
comprehensive picture of changes occurring in PD.
In our study, datasets from various types of studies in PD (linkage, 
genome-wide association, transcriptomic studies of brain and blood 
samples and proteomic studies) were obtained from online reposito -
ries or were extracted from available research papers. Subsequently, 
human genome assembly was subdivided into regions, and signals 
from aforementioned studies were sorted into corresponding regions 
according to their position in the genome. For each study type, regions 
were then prioritized according to signal significance and number of 
signals located in each region. Sum of ranks from different studies was 
used in final prioritization of genomic regions.
We have identified 5 genomic regions containing overlaps of signifi -
cant signals originating from 5 different study types and 98 regions 
containing overlaps from 4 different study types. Identified regions 
contain plausible candidate genes for PD, in addition to genes previ -
ously associated with PD.
We present a novel approach for identification of PD candidate genes, 
based on positional integration of data across various types of omic 
studies. Furthermore, this approach can easily be extended for identi -
fication of candidate genes in other complex diseases.
P11.098  Integrative microRNA and proteomic approaches in 
Parkinson’s Disease (PD)
M. Martins1,2, A. Rosa3,2, N. Charro4, B. V. Fonseca1,2, S. Violante2, L. C. 
Guedes1, T. Mestre1, M. Coelho1, M. M. Rosa1, D. Penque4, J. M. Vance5, J. J. 
Ferreira1, S. A. Oliveira1,2;  
1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de 
Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Universidade da Madeira, Madeira, Portugal, 
4Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 5University of Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics21
Miami, Miami, FL, United States.
PD is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder, affecting 
over one million individuals worldwide. The main pathological hallmark 
of PD is the loss of dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra, 
leading to insufficient formation and action of dopamine in the basal 
ganglia circuitry. The cardinal clinical signs are muscle rigidity, resting 
tremor, bradykinesia and, in more advanced cases, postural instabil -
ity.
This complex disease is governed by many genetic and non-genetic 
factors. To identify novel susceptibility genes for idiopathic PD, we 
are using the “genomic convergence” approach with microRNA and 
proteomic profiling. This strategy converges data from genetic studies 
with expression profiling experiments.
We conducted microRNA expression profiles in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells of 19 PD patients and 13 controls, using microar -
rays spotted with probes for 763 human microRNAs. 18 microRNAs 
were differentially expressed and pathway analysis of their predicted 
target genes revealed an over-represention of pathways recently 
linked to non-Mendelian forms of PD. We also carried out a proteomic 
analysis in pooled blood serum of 30 PD patients and 28 controls us -
ing a 2D-DIGE approach. 41 differentially expressed spots were ob -
tained and 23 proteins have already been identified. Isoforms and 
post-translational modifications are being evaluated and their type and 
contribution to the disease mechanisms will be further analysed. The 
microRNAs and respective target genes, as well as proteins differen -
tially expressed will be tested for association with PD. We believe that 
this approach will allow us to identify specific novel genes/transcripts 
playing a role in the etiopathogenesis of idiopathic PD.
P11.099  the slc26a4 loop mouse mutant, a model for Pendred 
syndrome, has defects in biomineralization, with unique calcium 
oxalate stone formation in the inner ear
A. Dror1, Y. Politi2, H. Shahin1, D. R. Lenz1, S. Dossena3, C. Nofziger3, H. 
Fuchs4, M. Hrabé de Angelis4, M. Paulmichl3, S. Weiner2, K. B. Avraham1;  
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Department of 
Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 3Institut 
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 
Austria, 4Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg, Germany.
Human mutations in SLC26A4  lead to a non-syndromic and syndromic 
form of deafness, DFNB4 and Pendred syndrome, respectively. Here 
we show inner ear mineralization defects in a new mouse mutant iden -
tified in an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) screen, named loop, that car -
ries a recessive missense mutation in a highly conserved region of 
Slc26a4 , rendering this mouse a model for human deafness. Defects 
were identified in biomineralization, the formation of minerals, which 
is part of the process that produces skeletons, shells, and teeth. Im -
paired halide transport activity resulted in the formation of giant calci -
um oxalate mineral bodies not found in the body under normal circum -
stances and described here in the inner ear for the first time. Infrared 
and Raman spectroscopy, together with high resolution scanning elec -
tron microscopy and immunohistochemistry of otoconia components, 
demonstrated drastic changes in crystal morphology and composition. 
Detailed histological analysis revealed that the giant minerals are ec -
topically distributed within the vestibular apparatus, mimicking imbal -
ance conditions in human as a result of displaced otoconia.
P11.100  Whole genome pharmacogenomic analysis of bipolar 
disease patients under lithium treatment
A. Squassina1, J. Borg2, M. Manchia1, C. Chillotti3, R. Ardau3, G. Severino3, M. 
Georgitsi4, K. Mitropoulos5, M. Del Zompo3, G. P. Patrinos4,5;  
1University of Cagliari, Department of Neuroscience, Cagliari, Italy, 2University 
of Malta, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Molecular 
Genetics, Msida, Malta, 3University of Cagliari, Department of Neuroscience 
„B.B. Brodie“, Section of Clinical Pharmacology, Laboratory of Molecular 
Genetics, Cagliari, Italy, 4University of Patras, Department of Pharmacy, Patras, 
Greece, 5Erasmus MC, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, MGC-
Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a lifelong psychiatric disease characterized by 
manic and depressive episodes affecting 1-5% of the general popu -
lation. Among the most effective mood-stabilizing treatments, lithium 
(Li) represents the mainstay in the therapeutic management of acute-mania and depression in BD and is still to date, the first choice pro -
phylactic treatment. Besides the high rate of excellent Li responders 
(~30-40%), a significant fraction of patients present patterns of partial 
or non response to prophylactic treatment with Li. It has been shown 
that the variability in Li response is strongly influenced by genetic de -
terminants. A large number of studies have investigated the role of 
genes in modulating the response to Li reporting contrasting findings. 
In our study, we have genotyped 50 individuals divided in two groups, 
according to their degree of Li response. The eleven-point treatment 
response scale we employed (full response cut-off ≥7) allowed us to 
classify 25 BD patients as non-responders (scored with 0) and 25 as 
full responders (scored with 8 or higher). These patients were geno -
typed using the Affymetrix Array 6.0 SNP microarrays (Santa Clara, 
CA, USA). Data were statistically evaluated using the Genespring  
software using a p-value cutoff of 0.01. We have identified 38 SNPs 
significantly associated with Li response, with p-values ranging from 
1x10-5 to 4x10-6. The genomic loci hold genes encoding for elements 
of G-proteins coupled receptors, LIM-domain binding proteins, sodium 
channels and GABA receptors. This study enriches the battery of ge -
netic biomarkers that would personalize Li treatment of BD patients.
P11.101  Epigenetics changes for the diagnosis of malignant 
pleural effusions
L. De Chiara1, I. Pereiro1, M. Botana2, V. Leiro2, A. Fernandez-Villar2, D. 
Valverde1;  
1Universidad de Vigo, Spain, 2Dept. Pneumology. Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Vigo, Spain.
DNA hypermethylation in promoter regions of a gene is recognized 
as an important epigenetic mechanism of transcriptional silencing of 
tumor regulatory genes during cancer development. This study could 
provide valuable information for diagnostic purposes.
We collected 60 patients with pleural effusion with diverse etiology: 
tuberculosis, para-pneumonia, or cancer.
DNA was extracted with a Qiagen Kit and after bisulfite treatment, a 
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was performed. We analyzed the fol -
lowing genes: p16/INK4a, BRCA1 and RARβ.
The study population included 37 men (61.7%), with a mean age of 
56.98±21 years. Thirty-three patients (55%) were former or current 
smokers. Malignant pleural effusion was diagnosed in 28 patients, 
while benign pleural effusion due to tuberculosis or para-pneumonia 
was present in 18 and 14 patients, respectively.
The promoter hypermethylation frequencies of benign and malig -
nant pleural effusion, respectively were: p16/INK4a (9.4% vs 17.9%), 
BRCA1 (46.9% vs 35.7%) and RARβ (12.5% vs 17.9%), therefore no 
significant differences were detected. Promoter methylation of at least 
one gene was detected in 64.3% of the patients with malignant pleural 
effusion, while hypermethylation of at least two genes was observed 
in 14.3% of them.
Our preliminary results show that the methylation status of the pro -
moter region of p16/INK4a, BRCA1 and RARβ has no diagnostic utility 
for malignant pleural effusion. The methylated condition of some of the 
benign pleural effusions could be related, as previously reported, with 
inflammation and infection, besides certain lifestyle factors such as 
smoking and high-fat diet, that are related with an increased likelihood 
of cancer risk.
P11.102  A study of angiotensin converting enzyme gene 
polymorphism in children with pulmonary hypertension
C. Banescu1, R. Toganel2, C. Duicu3, K. Csep1, C. Suteu4, I. Pascanu5;  
1Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, 
Romania, 2Cardiology Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Pediatric Department No 2, University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, 4Pediatric Cardiology 
Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, 
5Endocrinology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, 
Romania.
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) plays an important role in the 
pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension. The ACE gene has been 
considered a candidate gene for contributing to the development of 
hypertension and cardiovascular diseases. The ACE gene contains a 
polymorphism based on the presence (insertion I) or absence (dele -
tion D) within an intron of a 287-bp nonsense DNA domain, resulting in 
three genotypes (DD and II homozygotes, and DI heterozygotes).Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics22
In this study we determined whether the deletion (D)/ insertion (I) 
polymorphism in the ACE gene may be associated with pulmonary hy -
pertension. We performed a case-control study with 26 patients with 
pulmonary hypertension and 20 healthy controls. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by standard methods. The 
ACE genotypes of the patients were determined through restriction 
enzyme digestion of a PCR fragment (PCR-RFLP).There were identi -
fied 34,61% (9) DD homozygotes, 53,84% (14) DI heterozygotes and 
11,53% (3) II homozygotes. No statistical significance differences in 
allelic distribution were detected between groups.
Acknowledgements: The study was realized in the research program 
project Mami no 41-042/2007 financed by the Romanian Ministery of 
Education, Research and Youth.
P11.103  Novel variation c.1-219G>A in PRKN promoter converts 
sp1 binding site to mZF1 binding site
Z. Fazlali , F. Ghazavi, E. Elahi;  
School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We have observed five variations in the promoter region of the PRKN 
gene by direct sequencing. Three of the variations are novel. The influ -
ence of the five variations on the binding sites of transcription factors 
was studied using “TFSEARCH ver.1.3 “on the http://www.cbrc.jp/re -
search/db/TFSEARCH.html. The analysis showed that variations c.1-
324A>G, c.1-65C>T, c.1-42T>C have no significant effects on binding 
sites of transcription factors, but c.1-355T>G and c.1-219G>A, respec -
tively, affect binding sites of the Cp2 and Sp1 transcription factors. 
C.1-355T>G causes the deletion of a binding site for Cp2; based on 
reported data, frequencies of the relevant alleles at this position were 
not significantly different between PD patient and control groups. The 
novel variation c.1-219G>A converts a binding site of Sp1 transcrip -
tion factor to a binging site of MZF1 transcription factor. Sp1 regulates 
the expression of a large number of genes involved in a variety of 
processes such as cell growth, apoptosis, differentiation and immune 
responses. MZF1 is expressed in totipotent hemopoietic cells as well 
as in myeloid progenitors. Some findings suggest that Mzf1 can act 
as a tumor/growth suppressor factor. The frequencies of the G and 
A nucleotides at position c.1-219 in PRKN in PD patient and control 
groups are not known. The possible relation of c.1-219G>A in the pro -
moter of PRKN needs to be investigated. Genetic variations in pro -
moter sequences have been shown to affect susceptibility to various 
complex diseases.
P11.104  QKI-7 regulates expression of interferon-related genes 
in human astrocyte glioma cells
E. M. Lindholm Carlström1, L. Jiang1, P. Saetre2, E. Jazin1;  
1Physiology and developmental biology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Clinical 
neuroscience, Karolinska institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
The human QKI gene, called quaking homolog, KH domain RNA 
binding (mouse), is a candidate gene for schizophrenia encoding an 
RNA-binding protein. This gene was recently shown to be essential 
for myelination in oligodendrocytes. QKI is also expressed in astro -
cytes, but its function in these cells is not known. We studied the effect 
of small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated QKI depletion on global 
gene expression in human astrocyte glioma cells. The most significant 
alteration after QKI silencing was the decreased expression of genes 
involved in interferon (IFN) induction (P = 6.3×10-10), including IFIT1, 
IFIT2, MX1, MX2, G1P2, G1P3, GBP1 and IFIH1. All eight genes were 
down-regulated after silencing of the splice variant QKI-7, but were 
not affected by QKI-5 silencing. Interestingly, four of them were up-
regulated after treatment with the antipsychotic agent haloperidol that 
also resulted in increased QKI-7 mRNA levels. These results show 
that QKI-7 levels and IFN-related gene levels are co-regulated in as -
trocytes. Furthermore, our findings suggest a novel role for QKI-7 as a 
regulator of IFN production in astrocytes.
P11.105  Recurrent rearrangements and fixations form the structure of low copy repeat RccX
A. Szilagyi1, A. Patocs2, Z. Prohaszka3, G. Fust3, M. Doleschall1;  
1Inflammation Biology and Immungenomics Research Group, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences - Semmelweis U., Budapest, Hungary, 22nd Department 
of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 33rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Low copy repeat RCCX in major histocompatibility complex region on 
human chromosome 6 consists of four duplicated genes, C4, CYP21, 
STK19 and TNX. One active gene and one pseudogene belong to ev -
ery duplicated gene pair except for C4, which has two active copies. 
RCCX is prone to rearrangement that generates additional duplica -
tions, conversions and deletions resulting in monomodular, trimodular 
chromosome structures and the complete lack of active CYP21 (CY -
P21A2), the most common cause of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. A 
series of allele-specific long PCR covering the whole region of RCCX 
has been developed in order to investigate the structure of RCCX. 
This technique has been enables to sequence three copies of identical 
gene from a diploid genome and the haplotypes of CYP21A2 gene in 
many cases. Unique CYP21A2 haplotypes determined a few specific 
chromosome variants with two CYP21A2 copies in Caucasians. Phylo -
genetic analysis was performed on CYP21A2 haplotypes derived from 
mono-, bi- and trimodular RCCX to trace the derivation of chromo -
some variant with duplicated CYP21A2. It was shown that recurrent 
rearrangements generated these chromosome variants, and the newly 
arisen chromosomes underwent independent fixation processes. The 
structure of chromosomes variants with duplicated CYP21A2 implies 
distinct recombination mechanism, and their recurrent generation shed 
light on some evolutional aspects of human low copy repeats.
P11.106  Next Generation sequencing for Extended Applications in Basic and clinical Research
L. K. Joe , J. C. Briggs, R. N. Fish, N. Fong, B. A. Gigliotti, N. M. Hoag, A. C. 
Kivett, R. C. Nutter, R. A. Padilla, N. Patel, L. L. Xu, J. S. Ziegle;  
Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States.
Advances in Next Generation Sequencing are rapidly taking place. 
As a result, a broader range of scientists may apply the technology 
to their basic or clinical research. Scientists conducting basic or clini -
cal research often design and utilize assays for tagging and counting 
applications (Whole Transcriptome and Small RNA) or targeted rese -
quencing analysis. In order to perform such assays in these research 
settings, the sequencing system must include an end-to-end workflow 
that is accurate, faster, and easier-to-use. We report on improvements 
to the hardware, software, and chemistry components of a Next Gen -
eration Sequencing platform that provide such solutions for sample 
preparation, sequencing and analysis.
P11.107  investigation of RNA-seq as a tool for sNP detection.
E. M. Quinn , E. M. Kenny, P. Cormican, A. S. Gates, M. Gill, A. P. Corvin, D. 
W. Morris;  
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Dept. of Psychiatry, Trinity College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
The development of Next Generation Sequencing offers the potential 
of new methods for mapping and quantifying transcriptomes. In par -
ticular, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has been used for measurement 
of transcript abundance, studying the diversity of splice isoforms and 
testing allelic influence on gene expression. Given that the majority 
of disease related SNPs are likely to be located in coding regions, 
we investigated RNA-seq as a method of identifying sequence vari -
ants (SNPs) in the transcribed regions of the genome. We performed 
RNA-seq on lymphoblast cell line RNA samples from a trio of HapMap 
samples that have been whole-genome sequenced. The sequencing 
method per sample was 40bp single reads in 2 lanes of an Illumina 
flow cell. Genes were categorised based on their coverage levels and 
RNA-seq data was compared to the existing ‘positive control’ DNA 
sequence data. For genes (n=5077) where sequence coverage was 
greater than 20X, 92% of SNPs identified in the data were true se -
quence variants. For the same set of genes, 82% of expected vari -
ants were successfully identified. We also detected a number of novel 
SNPs that Mendelised within the trio, but were not reported from the 
published whole-genome sequencing data. Whole-genome rese -
quencing is the most comprehensive method of variation detection but 
it is costly. We demonstrate that in addition to transcriptome analysis, 
RNA-seq can detect a very high proportion of sequence variation in 
expressed genes. It is potentially a very useful technique for detecting 
coding SNPs in disease tissue samples.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
P11.108**  Key steps in finding pathogenic variants for 
monogenic diseases using targeted and exome resequencing 
data
C. Gilissen , A. Hoischen, K. Nikopoulos, B. van Bon, N. Wieskamp, P. Arts, 
B. van Lier, M. Steehouwer, P. de Vries, R. Collin, B. B. A. de Vries, F. C. S. 
Cremers, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
With the development of efficient enrichment strategies for next-gen -
eration sequencing it is now possible to either screen specific genomic 
loci (e.g. linkage regions) or even the entire human exome for genomic 
variations causing disease. We will discuss our approach and high -
light key criteria to successfully identify disease-genes from such large 
data sets. For this we used two datasets, one using the NimbleGen 
array enrichment approach in combination with Roche 454 Titanium 
sequencing for analysis of all coding sequence in a 40Mb linkage re -
gion in two families with Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). 
In addition, we applied exome sequencing using the ABI SOLiD 3.5 
system in patients with Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome. A key criteria for 
reliably calling sequence variants is sequence coverage. We found 
that at least 15-fold coverage is required for reliably detecting variants. 
This criterion was reached for more than 80% of the targeted exome 
using the Agilent SureSelect enrichment method and identified approx -
imately 20,000 variants per exome. Up to 95% of these variants has 
previously been reported in SNP databases. Further prioritization of 
variants is based on functional consequences of variants, evolutionary 
conservation, and on combining data from multiple patients. This has 
allowed us to rapidly identify TSPAN12  as the causative gene for FEVR 
and SETBP1  as the causative gene for Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome. 
These examples demonstrate the possibilities of next-generation se -
quencing when combined with robust enrichment systems, highlight 
the importance of control SNP datasets and show that bioinformatic 
pipelines are crucial to the rapid identification of disease genes.
P11.109  NBs-NGs: an ultra-throughput selective next-
generation sequencing method for clinical diagnostics
A. ElSharawy1, N. Schracke2, A. Keller2, M. Forster1, I. Thomsen1, M. 
Schilhabel1, P. Rosenstiel1, S. Schreiber1, P. F. Stähler2, R. Güimil Garcia2, A. 
Franke1;  
1Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology (ICMB), Kiel, Germany, 2febit biomed 
GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
Translating the impact of next-generation sequencing (NGS) at the 
basic research level into molecular diagnostics is a current technical 
challenge, to enable analysis of specific sets of candidate genes in 
multiple clinical samples. The coupling of NGS with front-end technol -
ogy offers a promising solution if multiplexing can be built-in to ramp-
up the whole process. To allow assigning of individual samples and 
pinpointing variant carriers in each sequenced pool, multiplexing using 
molecular barcodes represents a logic extension of sample pooling 
schemes. Indeed, we were in advance to tackle this challenge and 
developed a New Barcoded Selective NGS  (NBS-NGS) approach that 
combines two technology platforms, which both have in-built multi -
plexing capability and allow accurate SNP detection. Briefly, barcodes 
are ligated to individual samples during library preparation, pooled, 
enriched via microfluidic DNA microarrays, and subsequently rese -
quenced using NGS. The ability of retracting the barcoded targets of 
individual samples not only reinforces traditional LIMS (Laboratory 
Information Management Systems) in regulating data production, but 
also eliminates the need for special experimental and logarithmic de -
signs of overlapping pooling approaches. The performance of NBS-
NGS was tested in three different stages and multiplexing levels. The 
results reflect a compromise of obtaining reasonable key enrichment 
measures on one hand and ultra-cost reduction on the other. We be -
lieve that NBS-NGS opens up new avenues for comprehensive large 
scale genomic studies, and its inherent flexibility may render routine 
deep resequencing for diverse clinical settings feasible. The current 
state of benchmarking of other technology platforms will also be pre -
sented at the conference.P11.110  seq + PA: combining sequencing (seq) and individual 
Peak Analysis (PA) for Quantification of DNA Methylation and 
minor sequence Variation Detection
E. Schreiber , A. Tobler, C. Davidson;  
Life Technologies - Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
Fluorescent DNA sequence traces generated by Sanger sequencing 
on automated capillary electrophoresis (CE) instruments primarily re -
veal the composition and exact sequence of nucleotide bases. How -
ever, an additional layer of information may be present in the peak 
height of a given base reflecting a measure of abundance.
Here we report a novel method, Seq+PA, that allows the separation 
of the four dye traces used in BigDye® Terminator 3.1 sequencing 
chemistry and inclusion of a 5th LIZ® dye-labeled size standard. This 
enables alignment by size of multiple samples and subsequent data 
analysis of each individual peak characteristics, such as size, height 
and area by GeneMapper® software. We have used the Seq+PA 
method for direct bisulfite PCR sequencing and were able to detect 
methylated cytosines in CpG pairs to a level of 5%. We have also ap -
plied the method for sensitive detection of somatic mutations. To that 
end, DNAs with a normal or mutant genotype at codon 12 in the KRAS 
gene were mixed in various ratios and processed for PCR and Seq+PA 
analysis. The mutant allele was noticeable at a 5% level. Taken to -
gether, the method described here has the potential to enable a more 
quantitative analysis of DNA sequence traces for sensitive detection of 
minor sequence variations.
Disclaimer: For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or 
human therapeutic or diagnostic use.
P11.111  Development of sureselecttm target Enrichment system 
Human All Exon Kit and indexing Kit for the sOLiDtm system
M. Visitacion , B. Novak, C. Pabón-Peña, A. Giuffre, J. Ong, S. Joshi, S. 
Happe, D. Roberts, E. Leproust;  
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
The identification of genetic variants and mutations associated with 
human disease requires the development of a robust and cost-effec -
tive approach for systematic resequencing of candidate regions in 
the human genome. Agilent Technologies has further developed the 
SureSelect Target Enrichment System to allow for the capture of larger 
genomic regions of interest as well as the multiplexing of numerous 
samples and sequencing on the SOLiD System. The inherent deep 
sequencing of the SureSelect Target Enrichment System in combina -
tion with the SOLiD System has easily facilitated sufficient read depth 
and on-target performance for Agilent’s Human All Exon Kit, a kit that 
covers roughly 38 megabases (or 1.22%) of human genomic regions 
corresponding to the non-overlapping exons from the NCBI Consen -
sus SDS database (CCDS), including > 700 miRNAs from the Sanger 
v13 database, and > 300 additional human non-coding RNAs. In ad -
dition, the high read depth generated by the SOLiD System not only 
allows for deep coverage of a large target region such as the human 
exome, but also for multiplexing numerous samples. With the advent 
of multiplexing, the ability to achieve targeted enrichment on multiple 
samples on a single quad is maximized, saving researchers time and 
money without sacrificing performance. In summary, the SureSelect 
Target Enrichment System paired with the SOLiD System, provides 
easy to use in-solution protocols that are automatable and cost-effec -
tive approaches to analyze discrete genomic regions with unprece -
dented depth and accuracy
P11.112  t owards fully streamlined, quality-assured, automated 
next-generation gene tests
S. Chen1, L. Vliegen1, T. De Staercke1, Y. Moreau2, H. Cuppens1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2ESAT, Leuven, Belgium.
Using highly parallel pyrosequencing, we developed a CFTR  genetic 
test format in which the complete coding region and exon/intron junc -
tions of the CFTR  gene are sequenced in an amplicon sequencing 
approach. Since that pyrosequencing may not correctly call homo-
polymeric nucleotide stretches, we included tagged ARMS primers at 
such positions, so that the number of nucleotides can also be called 
through their tag, besides counting the number of nucleotides that are 
obtained in homo-polymeric nucleotide stretches in reads. To increase 
robustness, 2 amplicons are generated for each region, in which one 
test result can be used for quality-assurance of the other test result.
Quality-assurance of the complete genetic test process and automat -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
ic processing was realized by spiking samples with DNA molecules. 
These molecular bar codes can be processed simultaneously with the 
DNA fragments under investigation. The test will be quality-assured 
from the moment that the sample is spiked. The test will be only valid 
when the correct spiked sample tag is associated with the molecular 
bar code at the end of process. Not only can sequencing reveal a mu -
tation, it will also identify the sample carrying the mutation. This allows 
automatic generation of a report, thereby excluding potential errors 
compared to reports generated by human intervention when test result 
and patient information are combined in a genetic report.
This format can be transferred to genetic analysis of any gene.
P11.113  Post-Light sequencing with semiconductor chips
J. M. Rothberg ;  
Ion Torrent, Guilford, CT, United States.
Ion Torrent Systems has developed a DNA sequencing system that 
directly translates chemical signals into digital information on a semi -
conductor chip. This approach leverages a trillion dollars of investment 
from the semiconductor industry taking advantage of existing state-
of-the-art chip fabrication technology, and the entire semiconductor 
design and supply chain. Unprecedented scalability and cost reduc -
tion result from decades of Moore‘s Law advances in semiconductor 
technologies that are brought to bear within a few years for DNA se -
quencing.
Ion Torrent sequencing takes place in semiconductor microchips that 
contain sensors which have been fabricated as individual electronic 
detectors, allowing one sequence read per sensor. Current configura -
tions have 1.5 million sensors in a 1 cm2 chip, with proof of principle to 
enable densities over 100 million sensors per chip.
The sequencing chemistry itself is remarkably simple. Native nucle -
otides are incorporated into the growing strand by native DNA poly -
merase. As a base is incorporated, a direct electrical measurement of 
the incorporation event is made and the sequence is read out directly 
into the digital domain. Thus, sequencing is direct, efficient, and mas -
sively parallel, requiring no specialized reagents and no optical sys -
tems. Using native DNA chemistry with real time detection enables run 
times to be very short, on the order of an hour with a throughput on the 
order of 100 Megabases per hour. We will present data and describe 
metrics from the adenovirus and E. coli  genomes.
P11.114  integration of a novel and intuitive user interface for a 
new next-generation sequencing platform expands usability in 
basic and clinical research laboratory settings
R. C. Nutter , D. Leon, S. Chang, S. Yerramalli, L. Jones, M. Mariano, M. 
Storm, L. Xu;  
Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States.
The introduction of high-throughput next-generation sequencing sys -
tems is revolutionizing the use of sequencing data for a wide range of 
genetic analyses. Once limited to ultra-high throughput, large geno -
typing centers, new instrumentation has been developed that is more 
amenable to basic and clinical laboratories. Combined with the depth 
and accuracy of large amounts of sequencing data generated, it is 
clear this technology has tremendous potential for integration in dis -
ease and clinical research. To support this potential for research ad -
vancement in personalized medicine, it is important for a sequencing 
instrument’s user interface to be intuitive, reliable and easy to use. A 
new high throughput sequencing system being developed has a newly 
designed user interface to guide a researcher from the initial setup to 
real time monitoring, final data validation and export. With a spike-in 
process control, the instrument will automatically perform a pre-run 
sample assessment and provide real time performance reports during 
the sequencing run. The guided workflow interface streamlines sample 
setup, provides flexibility for a user to disable individual sample or in -
dividual tags of a sample to save time and reagents based on experi -
mental needs. The real time reporting at the instrument or on a com -
patible mobile device provides the user assurance of optimized data 
quality and quantity. We will show examples of user interfaces that will 
enable a broad range of laboratories to use high throughput sequenc -
ing for applications such as targeted resequencing or RNA-Seq. For 
research use only. Not intended for any animal or human therapeutic 
or diagnostic use.P11.115  Frequency of serotonin transporter promoter gene 
polymorphism in opium addict people
N. Ghasemi1, M. Shiekhha1, S. Yasini2;  
1Research and Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd SS medical sciences 
university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Yazd SS medical sciences university, 
Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
A disturbance in brain serotonergic transmission has been repeatedly 
reported in association with behavioral disorders. The responses to 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors appear to be impaired in substance use 
disorders with co-morbid depression, which reflecting genetic polymor -
phisms involved in the control of serotonergic activity. The frequency 
of short (‘‘S’’) allele 5-HTT promoter polymorphism, that appear to 
influence gene function by reducing transcription efficiency. The as -
sociation of polymorphism with substance abuse disorder and major 
depression (MD) was confirmed.
Thirty one opium dependent subjects, males, aged 20-50 years, en -
tered the study, after informed consent. They were consecutive admis -
sions to the treatment program of the public health service for outpa -
tients‘ addiction treatment. They were not paid for their participation 
and accepted to enter the study as volunteers. Thirty one normal vol -
unteer were chosen for control, which were matched in age , sex and 
socioeconomic situation with cases.
The 5-HTT promoter region was amplified by polymerase chain reac -
tion (PCR ). The PCR products were resolved in 2.5% agarose gel 
containing 50 mg/ml ethidium bromide in TAE buffer (40 mM Tris-ac -
etate, 1mMEDTA pH 8.0). Each gel contained one lane of 50 bp ladder 
to identify the 450 pb fragment designed as L and the 406 bp fragment 
designated as S.
The frequency of alleles and genotypes was not different in cases and 
controls. However, the odd ratio was 1.8 and 1.7 respectively. In con -
clusion, this study did not showed strong association between 5-HTT 
gene and opium addiction.
P11.116  From rare cell phenotype to rare variant genotype: 
Analyzing heterogeneous samples with single cell resolution 
using microdroplet technology
S. E. Kellett , M. Samuels, M. Medkova, E. Brouzes, E. Dahan, J. Larson, D. 
Link;  
RainDance Technologies, Lexington, MA, United States.
There is a growing need to examine heterogeneous samples (tumor 
cells, stem cells, antibody producing cells, or the human microbiome) 
with single cell resolution.  Combining single cell isolation methods with 
sequencing efforts will advance the understanding of tumorigenesis by 
elucidating “driver” vs. “passenger” mutations in tumor cell populations 
and circulating tumor cells, and inform the design of “personalized” 
tumor-specific therapies.
We are developing a novel microdroplet and microfluidic platform that 
enables a variety of single cell analyses. Uniform picoliter-nanoliter vol -
ume aqueous droplets suspended in an immiscible oil stream provide 
unique opportunities for fluorescence-based analytical techniques, 
including novel phenotype-based sorting at rates of several hundred 
cells per second, and false positive rates of 2-5% and false negative 
rates of <1%. The encapsulated droplet microenvironment also en -
ables unique sorting modalities beyond current fluorescence-activated 
cell sorting, including selection based on cell secreted molecules, and 
highly sensitive sorting based on enzyme amplified signals.
We demonstrate the use of microfluidic-generated single cell droplets 
in workflows that include phenotype-based capture of desired individ -
ual cells from a heterogeneous sample coupled directly to single cell 
genomic characterization. For example, whole genome amplification 
within the encapsulated single cell microdroplets can be followed by 
droplet PCR-based targeted amplification of many thousands of se -
lected genomic loci from each cell, for analysis using any Next Gen -
eration Sequencing platform.
P11.117  Potentially functional single nucleotide polymorhphisms (pfsNP) in the human genome
C. G. Lee1,2,3, J. Wang2, M. Ronaghi4,5, S. Chong2,6;  
1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore, Singapore, 4Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States, 5Stanford 
Genome Technology Center, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 6National University Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
With >14,000,000 non-redundant single-nucleotide-polymorphisms 
(SNPs) that have thus far been deposited in dbSNP, identifying pheno -
type-causing SNPs poses significant challenges. Here, we integrated 
>40 different algorithms/resources to identify ~1,000,000 SNPs from 
dbSNP with potential functional significance (pfSNPs) based on pre -
vious published reports, inferred potential functionality from popula -
tion-genetics approaches, as well as predicted potential functionality. 
These pfSNPs are reasonably well-distributed across the entire hu -
man genome and are enriched in the promoter and genic regions. We 
have also developed a customizable, well-annotated pfSNP-web-re -
source that is aimed at facilitating knowledge-discovery and hypoth -
esis-generation through better data-integration and a biologist-friendly 
web-interface. For all HapMap-genotyped SNPs, information regard -
ing the distance as well as the r2-LD of a nearby HapMap-genotyped 
pfSNP is given. The pfSNP-resource addresses all ambiguity in SNP 
information, providing complete information about a particular SNP 
that will facilitate better hypothesis generation. The query interface is 
not only user-friendly but highly customizable such that different com -
binations of queries are possible, using Boolean-logic to facilitate the 
identification of pfSNPs at a user-specified frequency in a specified-
population that is expressed in user-specified tissues and/or belong(s) 
to a user-specified pathway(s) and/or is associated with user-specified 
disease/drug pathway(s). Furthermore, to facilitate better hypothesis 
generation, gene/pathway information is also integrated into the query 
result. Additionally, detailed related information regarding the function -
al consequences of the pfSNPs are also provided in the query result to 
facilitate better understanding of the results and aid in the generation 
of hypotheses. This web-resource will thus be useful to researchers 
focusing on SNPs/association studies.
P11.118  Allele-specific copy number measurements on CGH 
microarrays
B. Curry , N. Sampas, B. Peter, P. Anderson, P. Costa, A. deWitte, J. Ghosh, L. 
Bruhn;  
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,, CA, United States.
Accurate measurements of genomic copy number are important for 
understanding developmental disorders, oncogenesis and normal 
genetic variation. In addition to variation in total copy number, there 
has been increasing interest in assessing the effects of variation in 
the number of copies of individual alleles, as estimated from the copy 
numbers of variant alleles at SNP sites.
We have developed an assay on Agilent SurePrint G3 microarrays that 
allows concurrent measurement of precise total copy number (CN) and 
allele-specific copy number (AsCN). Depending on the array design, 
10 to 30% of probes are allocated to measure SNPs in parallel to total 
CN on the same array. By digesting with a restriction enzyme that se -
lectively cuts one variant allele, we can measure the copy number of 
the uncut variant along with the total copy number of the surrounding 
genomic region. We have measured genotypes at up to 80,000 SNP 
sites across the human genome, and typically obtain greater than 99% 
concordance with published genotypes.
We are able to make reliable SNP calls from single probes, by using a 
genotyped internal reference to correct for labeling and hybridization 
bias. The normalized response is linear in copy number and highly re -
producible. Log ratio distributions are nearly Gaussian, with well-sepa -
rated distributions corresponding to different copy numbers.
We describe the novel algorithms we use for measuring CN and 
AsCN and for estimating our confidence in the genotype calls, and 
show examples of cytogenetic abnormalities associated with known 
syndromes.
P11.119  A Balanced, Error-correcting Barcoding system for 
Multiplexed SOLiD™ Sequencing
J. Vanhatalo ;  
Life Technologies, Helsinki, Finland.
A set of 96 barcoded adaptors designed for the SOLiD(TM) System 
have been validated for use with paired end libraries. During library 
preparation, the P2 adaptor is replaced with a multiplex adaptor con -
sisting of three segments: a primer binding site, a barcode decamer and 
a P2 PCR priming site. The barcode and target DNA are sequenced as 
two separate reads from the same strand to identify the libraries of ori -
gin of multiplexed samples. Libraries may be pooled at any step after barcodes have been added and then used in a multiplexed emulsion 
PCR and deposited into a single spot for sequencing.
The barcode design requires only 5bp of sequencing to distinguish 
20-plex samples and 10bp for 96-plex samples. The barcodes are col -
orbalanced at every position in sets of four. Importantly, clear discrimi -
nation between barcode samples is achieved by a minimum Hamming 
distance of 3 colorspace calls.
The barcoded adaptors were validated by SOLiD(TM) sequencing of 
E. coli  fragment libraries. Error rates and quality value (QV) scores for 
the barcode reads were found to be consistent across the final set. 
Mapping rates and QV scores were consistent for the E. coli  reads, 
indicating minimal effects of the barcode decamers on bead templat -
ing and sequencing efficiency. Ongoing development studies include 
integration of the barcoding system with PCR, array and in-solution 
based methods of target enrichment for enhanced multiplex process -
ing capability. The SOLiD(TM) barcode adaptors will enable the high 
levels of library multiplexing afforded by the increasing throughput of 
the SOLiD(TM) System.
P11.120  Paired end sequencing on the solid platform
E. T. Dimalanta1, L. Zhang1, L. Sun1, K. S. Eusko1, D. M. Dhingra1, D. S. 
Perez1, M. R. Lyons1, A. E. Sannicandro2, J. M. Manning1, H. E. Peckham1, E. 
Tsung1, S. M. Menchen2, A. P. Blanchard1, K. J. McKernan1;  
1Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Foster City, 
CA, United States.
The SOLiD™ platform is a revolutionary sequencing system that utiliz -
es sequential ligation of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes, 
enabling high fidelity and ultra-high throughput sequencing. Previous 
sequencing protocols for the SOLiD™ system have only been avail -
able in the forward direction (3’ to 5’). Sequencing in the reverse direc -
tion (5’ to 3’) is ideal as it enables fragment library paired end sequenc -
ing. To this end, novel ligation chemistries were developed to support 
5’ to 3’ read lengths of up to 35 bases. This paired end sequencing 
technology will be incorporated into the SOLiD V4 platform, increas -
ing effective read length, maximizing throughput per run, and meeting 
special research interests, such as whole transcriptome studies.
P11.121  Genetic interaction between sox10 and Zfhx1b during 
enteric nervous system development
L. Stanchina1, T. Van de Putte2, D. Huylebroeck2, M. Goossens1, N. 
Bondurand1;  
1IMRB INSERMU955, Creteil, France, 2Laboratory of Molecular Biology 
(Celgen), Center of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.
The involvement of SOX10 and ZEB2 in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung 
disease (hypopigmentation, deafness, and absence of enteric ganglia) 
and Mowat-Wilson syndrome (mental retardation, facial dysmorphy 
and variable congenital malformations including Hirschsprung dis -
ease) respectively, highlighted the importance of both transcription 
factors during enteric nervous system (ENS) development. The ex -
pression and function of SOX10 are now well established, but those of 
ZEB2 remain elusive. Here we describe the expression profile of Zeb2 
and its genetic interactions with Sox10 during mouse ENS develop -
ment. Through phenotype analysis of Sox10;Zeb2 double mutants, we 
show that a coordinated and balanced interaction between these two 
genes is required for normal ENS development. Double mutants pres -
ent with more severe ENS defects due to decreased proliferation of 
enteric progenitors and increased neuronal differentiation from E11.5 
onwards. Thus, joint activity between these two transcription factors is 
crucial for proper ENS development and our results contribute to the 
understanding of the molecular basis of ENS defects observed both 
in mutant mouse models and in patients carrying SOX10 and ZEB2 
mutations.
P11.122  microarrays study of valproic acid treatment effect on 
gene expression in spinal muscular atrophy derived human 
fibroblast cultures.
M. Hlavna1, L. Fajkusova2, B. Tichy3;  
1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Kamenice 5, CZ-62500, Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital 
Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Cernopolni 9, CZ-62500, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 3Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, 
Department of Internal Medicine – Hematooncology, University Hospital Brno 
and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Cernopolni 9, CZ-625 00, Brno, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
Czech Republic.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) in patients is caused by loss of the sur -
vival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, in the presence of the SMN2 gene. 
As a result of point mutation in exon 7 almost all of SMN2 pre-mRNA 
is spliced improperly and exon 7 is excluded. Valproic acid (VPA) is 
an inhibitor of histondeacetylases (iHDAC) and one of most potent 
experimentally tested drug in SMA treatment. It is believed that VPA 
could increase production of functional SMN protein by two possible 
ways: (1) increasing SMN2 transcription alone, or/and (2) modulation 
of SMN2 splicing by increasing transcription of splicing factors such as 
Htra2-β1 and hnRNP-G. In our in vitro experiments on SMA derived 
fibroblast cultures treated with VPA, we observed no VPA effect on 
SMN2, Htra2-β1 or hnRNP-G expression or on increasing protein lev -
els as well. It has been published, but not in association with SMA, that 
VPA exhibit neuroprotective effect by increasing expression of Bcl-2 in 
CNS. Based on these facts we decided to investigate general effect of 
VPA treatment on gene expression and also to investigate differenc -
es in gene expression between SMA patients and healthy one’s. For 
that purpose we perform 20 separate cDNA microarray analyses. 141 
genes show more then 2-fold up-regulation and 51 down-regulation 
after VPA treatment and 221/124 genes show different gene expres -
sion between patients and healthy control. These sets of genes have 
been further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Software to 
predict new possible VPA treatment target genes and genes implicated 
in SMA disease.
P11.123  investigation of splicing noise in human aged 
peripheral blood cells
K. Mellert, D. Kaufmann ;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany.
Splicing in human is regulated by the interaction of more than 300 
proteins and 5 snRNAs with hnRNA sequences. Errors in this process 
emerge as aberrant splice products. To ensure a high splicing fidelity, 
the aberrant splice products are degraded by RNA surveillance mech -
anisms as the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Misspliced in 
frame exons are e.g. not recognised by the RNA surveillance mecha -
nisms and occur in low frequencies in mRNA populations. We sug -
gested that the frequency of these errors (splicing noise) increases 
with age. To test this, missplicing of 2 in frame and 2 out of frame NF1 
exons was investigated by qPCR of wildtype and misspliced mRNA. 
As described, splicing noise increases in vitro e.g. by cold shock. We 
found differences in splicing noise between untreated cultured human 
fibroblast and after treatment with cold shock or puromycin inhibiting 
NMD. Though, no correlation to the age of the donors or the population 
doublings of the fibroblasts in the investigated NF1 exons was found. 
In peripheral blood cells of 11 healthy donors, no correlation of splic -
ing noise to the age (15y - 85y) could be observed, too. However, the 
splicing noise increased with the length of the upstream intron. Our 
studies show, that splicing is a process with a high fidelity during age -
ing in the investigated peripheral blood cells indicating the significance 
of correct splicing in proliferating cells.
P11.124  Effect of intronic variants in BmP receptor genes 
involved in hereditary angiopathies. comparison of splice site 
prediction softwares and mRNA genetic testing.
M. Eyries1,2, Y. Lahely1, F. Coulet1,2, M. Carette3, B. Girerd4, F. Chabot5, F. 
Soubrier1,2;  
1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et d’Angiogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-
Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 
3Centre de compétence pour la maladie de Rendu-Osler en Ile-de-France, 
Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, 4Service de Pneumologie et Réanimation 
Respiratoire, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France, 5Service des maladies 
respiratoires et réanimation respiratoire, Hôpital de Brabois, Nancy, France.
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) and Hereditary Haemorrhagic 
Telangiectasia (HHT) are two hereditary vascular diseases in which 
mutations were described in genes involved in TGF-β signalling. Mu -
tations in BMPR2 are present in more than 70% of familial PAH and 
in 10-30% of patients with idiopathic PAH. About 70-80 % of HHT 
patients have mutations in ACVRL1 or Endoglin (ENG) genes. An in -
creasing number of detected variants cannot be classified as either 
disease-associated mutations or neutral variants. These so-called un -
classified variants (UVs) include variants that are located in intronic 
sequences. The purpose of this study was to test a panel of UVs in vitro for possible splicing aberrations and compared the accuracy of a 
variety of bioinformatics approaches for predicting the observed splic -
ing aberrations associated with each UV. We performed in vitro  mo-
lecular characterization of RNAs corresponding to 8 intronic variants 
in BMPR2, ACVRL1 and ENG. In seven cases, a deleterious effect on 
RNA splicing was seen. Five splice-site prediction softwares (SSPPs) 
were used to predict whether an effect on RNA splicing was expected 
for these variants. 70% of the predictions were informative. No false 
positive prediction was seen. However we observed 5% of false nega -
tive predictions. In particular, no splicing anomaly was predicted for the 
c.625+10G>A variant in ACVRL1 whereas a deletion in the exon5 was 
detected by mRNA analysis.
For molecular genetics laboratories, bioinformatics tools for prediction 
of splicing aberrations are useful but need improvement before be -
ing used without supporting molecular studies to assess the functional 
consequences of a variant.
P11.125  subtle discrepancies of AsF/sF2 EsE sequence motif 
among human tissues: a computational approach
O. Siala1, F. Baklouti2, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, SFAX, Tunisia, 2Centre de 
génétique moléculaire et cellulaire, LYON, France.
The intron removal during the pre-mRNA splicing in higher eukaryotes 
requires the accurate identification of the two splice sites at the ends 
of the exons, or exon definition. However, the consensus sequences 
at the splice sites provide insufficient information to distinguish true 
splice sites from the large number of the false ones that populate the 
primary transcripts. Additional information is provided by cis-acting 
regulatory sequences that serve to enhance or repress splicing, and 
that may be exonic or intronic in nature: the splicing enhancers and 
the splicing silencers, respectively. In our study, we tested by com -
putational approach if the exonic splicing enhancer motif binding to 
the SF2/ASF SR protein is conserved among several groups of hu -
man genes. The results showed that the SF2/ASF ESE consensus 
was conserved between genes within the same chromosome, within 
different chromosomes and between different levels of muscular cells 
differentiation. However, this motif displays subtle variations within the 
consensus sequence between genes expressed in different tissues. 
These results can emphasize the presence of different translational 
isoforms of the SFRS1  gene encoding for the SF2/ASF, or different 
post-translational protein maturations in different tissues. This tissular 
discrepancy can also account for the alternative splicing of several 
genes between tissues.
P11.126  mosaic uniparental disomies and aneuploidies as large 
structural variants of the human genome.
B. Rodríguez-Santiago1, N. Malats2, N. Rothman3, L. Armengol4, M. Garcia-
Closas3, M. Kogevinas5,6, O. Villa1, A. Hutchinson7, J. Earl8, M. Gaëlle2, K. 
Jacobs7, D. Rico2, D. G. Pisano2, A. Tardón9,10, C. Alfredo11, G. Thomas7, A. 
Valencia2, D. Silverman3, F. X. Real2, S. J. Chanock3,7, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,12;  
1Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, CIBERER U735, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Investigaciones 
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain, 3Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4QGenomics, 
Barcelona, Spain, 5IMIM, Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, 
CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain, 6National School 
of Public Health, Athens, Greece, 7Core Genotyping Facility, National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, MD, United States, 8Centro Nacional de Investigaciones 
Oncológicas,, Madrid, Spain, 9Centre for Research in Environmental 
Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 10Departamento de Epidemiología y Medicina 
Preventiva, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain, 11Grupo de Oncología 
Molecular, Hospital General Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain, 12Programa 
de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain.
Mosaicism is defined as the co-existence of cells with different genetic 
composition within an individual, caused by post-zygotic somatic mu -
tation. Although somatic mosaicism for chromosomal rearrangements 
have been well described in disease, their frequency in normal indi -
viduals is poorly defined. We analyzed signal intensity log R ratios 
and B-allele frequency data from high density Illumina 1M SNP-ar -
ray applied to blood or buccal DNA samples of 1,991 adult individuals 
included in the Spanish Bladder Cancer/EPICURO study. We have 
found mosaic abnormalities in autosomes in 1.7% samples, including Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics27
21 segmental uniparental disomies, 8 complete trisomies and 11 large 
(1.5-37 Mb) copy number variants. Alterations were observed across 
the different autosomes with recurrent events in chromosomes 9 and 
20. The high cellular frequency of most mosaic anomalies detected 
and their presence in normal adult individuals suggests that this phe -
nomenon is a more common source of genomic variation than previ -
ously recognized. Somatic mosaicism represents a new addition to 
the expanding repertoire of inter- and intra-individual genetic variation, 
some of which causes somatic human diseases but also modifies pen -
etrance and/or expressivity of inherited disorders and might influence 
late onset of multifactorial traits. Capturing and classifying all relevant 
genomic variation features in cells from different tissues, and at differ -
ent developmental stages, constitutional or acquired, should lead to a 
better understanding of our complex and evolving human genome and 
its relation to both diseases and traits.
P11.127**  3Dm: determining undertemined variants in genetic 
disorders using protein super-family data
H. J. Joosten1, R. Kuipers1,2, P. Schaap2, V. Martin dos Santos2;  
1Wageningen University - Bio-Prodict, Wageningen, Netherlands, 2Microbiology, 
Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands.
3DM, a tool initially designed for protein engineering, is a system that 
makes use of protein super-family data to predict effects of mutations. 
This tool can automatically generate super-family databases that con -
tain many different types of protein related information, such as a high -
ly accurate structure based multiple sequence alignment, mutational 
information automatically scanned from literature, amino acid contact 
information, solvent accessibility, etc. All data is connected to each 
other via the multiple sequence alignment making the protein super-
family systems powerful tools for prediction of effects of mutations. 
These systems have been used to predict specific mutations that im -
proved enzyme features such as catalytic activity, enzyme specificity 
and thermostability. These result have been published in peer review 
articles.
Recently, the 3DM tool has been applied to predict the effects of under -
mined variants (UV’s) in genetic disorders. For many genetic disorders 
there is an increasing amount of publications describing phenotype 
associated mutations in disorder-related genes. 3DM’s literature scan -
ner can automatically collect published disease related mutations and 
stores these in a protein super-family system. To retrieve, visualize, 
and analyze stored and new mutation data for their (potential) effect 
we have developed Validator, a web-based tool specifically designed 
for DNA-diagnostics. Validator uses all data from a 3DM database to 
link a genetic disorder to UV’s.
P11.128  Development of SureSelecttm paired end sequencing 
Kit and sureselecttm indexing Kit
A. A. Giuffre1, J. Ong1, S. Joshi1, C. Pabon2, M. Visitacion1, B. Novak2, E. 
LeProust2, D. Roberts2, S. Happe2;  
1Agilent Technologies, Cedar Creek, TX, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, 
Santa Clara, CA, United States.
The dramatic increase in throughput of sequencing data from next-
generation sequencing platforms has enabled scientists to study 
the genome with unprecedented depth and accuracy. However, the 
expense of large cohort studies using a whole genome approach is 
substantial. Agilent’s SureSelect Target Enrichment Kit for Paired-
End Illumina sequencing analysis allows in-solution selection of a 
researcher’s specific genes of interest with improved sequencing cov -
erage, enhanced ability to assess structural variation, and increased 
confidence in SNP calls compared to the single-end protocol. Improve -
ments to the Version 2.0 SureSelect Paired-End Kit have made it fast -
er and easier, while increasing performance. The improvements to the 
Version 2.0 SureSelect Paired-End Kit have also been applied to the 
SureSelect Indexing Kit. The SureSelect Indexing Kit, in combination 
with Illumina’s Multiplexing Kit, allows researchers to take advantage 
of targeted enrichment and the increasing capacity of the Illumina GA. 
The SureSelect Indexing Kit enables up to 12 gDNA libraries to be 
uniquely “tagged” and then combined on one flow cell lane, with the 
advantage of enriching for only those specific genes of interest. The 
ability to combine targeted enrichment and indexing together maxi -
mizes the number of samples that can be sequenced at one time, pro -
viding optimum time and cost savings without sacrificing performance. 
In summary, the SureSelect Target Enrichment Paired-End Version 2.0 Kit and the SureSelect Targeted Enrichment Indexing Kit, with the Il -
lumina system, provide in-solution protocols that are automatable and 
easy to use. This creates a cost-effective approach to analyze specific 
genomic regions with unprecedented depth and accuracy.
P11.129  the Agilent t echnologies’ sureselecttm Platform: 
Flexible High Performance t arget Enrichment system for Next 
Generation sequencing Applications
C. Pabon1, S. Happe2, A. Giuffre2, B. Novak1, M. Visitacion1, S. Joshi2, J. Ong2, 
A. Wong1, J. Eberle1, S. Hunt1, R. Kanemoto1, D. Roberts1, E. Leproust1;  
1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, 
Cedar Creek, TX, United States.
Next-generation sequencing technology has dramatically increased 
the ability to sequence DNA in a massively parallel manner. This im -
provement in throughput is currently enabling scientists to discover 
rare polymorphisms, structural variants, and novel transcripts at an 
unprecedented rate. Nevertheless, routine genetic screens in large co -
horts of individuals remain cost-prohibitive through whole genome se -
quencing approaches. To this end, Agilent Technologies has leveraged 
its ability to efficiently manufacture high fidelity long oligonucleotides 
to develop the SureSelect platform, a portfolio of sample-preparation 
products that enables next-generation sequencing users to focus their 
analysis on particular genomic loci with substantial cost savings. We 
hereby demonstrate the flexibility and functionality of the SureSelect 
in-solution method through the targeted sequence analysis of: (i) ge -
nomes of multiple species, (ii) subsets of the human genome such 
as the exome and disease-focused designs, and (iii) custom content 
ranging in size, complexity, and chromosomal location. We discuss 
performance with respect to capture efficiency, uniformity, reproduc -
ibility of enrichment, and ability to detect SNPs. The high specificity 
and excellent sequence coverage across multiple designs demon -
strates the utility of SureSelect for a wide variety of applications. More 
importantly, several of the capture libraries are now incorporated into 
standardized catalog products for ease of ordering, consistency of per -
formance, and reliability of comparison across multiple laboratories. 
We also introduce an improved desktop version of Agilent’s eArray 
software module that streamlines custom content design for human, 
model organisms and any other genome available privately or through 
the UCSC Genome Browser.
P11.130  High coverage targeted resequencing of matched tumor 
normal samples and FFPE samples using selector t echnology
O. Ericsson1, H. Johansson2, M. Isaksson2, E. Falk2, F. Roos1, L. Moens2, M. 
Nilsson2;  
1Olink Genomics, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
With the advent of novel techniques increasing the DNA sequencing 
throughput by orders of magnitude compared to traditional Sanger 
sequencing, a need for improved sample preparation techniques that 
enrich for multiple genomic loci in parallel has emerged. We present 
a simple and scalable technique for highly specific amplification of a 
large number of target sequences based on a dramatically improved 
selector probe protocol. We applied the technique for deep sequenc -
ing of all coding exons of 28 genes known to be mutated in cancer in 
breast cancer cell lines and matched normal and cancer lung cancer 
tissues, including formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue. At 20% of 
the mean amplicon sequencing depth 98% of the targeted exon bps 
were covered at mean sequencing depth with a 95% on target speci -
ficity. Copy number variations could readily be identified and validated 
using microarray data. Matched fresh frozen and FFPE samples were 
used to validate analysis of FFPE material and concordance with Hap -
Map genotype controls was 99%. The selector technology provides 
a powerful approach for single tube amplification and high coverage 
targeted, scalable resequencing without dedicated instrumentation.
P11.131  Diabetes-associated loci are significantly over-represented among genes bound by tcF7L2 
in vivo
J. Zhao1, J. Schug2, M. Li3, K. H. Kaestner2, S. F. A. Grant1,4;  
1Division of Human Genetics, The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Department of Genetics and Institute of 
Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Department of Biostatistics and 
Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
4Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been implicated in type 2 di -
abetes and cancer. To uncover its downstream targets in vivo , we per -
formed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel 
sequencing (ChIP-seq) in the colorectal carcinoma cell-line, HCT116, 
where TCF7L2 is abundantly expressed. In three independent chro -
matin samples we found 1,357 discrete binding sites within 500kb of 
1,352 annotated genes i.e. approximately 6% of all RefSeqs. Pathway 
analysis of this gene list with the software package, Ingenuity, ranked 
“Diabetes” as the most significant annotation ( P-value = 2.62×10-9). 
We found TCF7L2 binding sites co-localized with seven of the twenty 
one (33.3%) type 2 diabetes loci detected by genome wide associa -
tion (GWAS) to date, namely CDKN2A/B, ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, FTO, 
PPARG, TCF7L2 and WFS1 . Interestingly, we observed four TCF7L2 
binding sites within the TCF7L2  gene itself, with one in the classical 
promoter region and three within intron 3. The intron 3 observation 
is highly notable as this is the precise region of TCF7L2  previously 
reported to be very strongly associated with type 2 diabetes. These 
findings suggest that TCF7L2 may be a central node in the regulation 
of human diabetes-associated genes.
P11.132  A high-resolution anatomical atlas of the transcriptome 
in the mouse embryo
G. Diez Roux1, &. EURExpress Consortium2;  
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2FP6: Grant 
Agreement Number: 512003.
During fetal development organs and tissues acquire specialized 
physiological functions. This process is dependent on an orchestrated, 
cell type specific expression of genes. We generated the first genome-
wide transcriptome atlas by RNA in situ hybridization of an entire mam -
malian organism, the developing mouse at embryonic stage E14.5. 
This public resource consists of a searchable database of annotated 
images that can be interactively viewed. We generated anatomy based 
expression profiles for nearly 16,000 coding genes and over 400 mi -
croRNAs. We identified 990 tissue specific genes that are a source 
of novel tissue-specific markers for 37 different anatomical structures. 
The quality and the resolution of the data revealed novel molecular 
domains for several developing structures, such as the telencephalon, 
and a novel organization for the hypothalamus. The digital transcrip -
tome atlas is a powerful resource to determine co-expression of genes, 
to identify cell populations and lineages and to identify functional as -
sociations between genes relevant to development and disease.
P11.133  High Coverage Gene Expression Profiling on the 
Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer
A. Pradhan1, C. J. Davidson1, M. Kondo2, A. Felton1, R. Araki3, S. Ando3, M. 
Abe3;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems 
Japan, Tokyo, Japan, 3National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, 
Japan.
Whole transcriptome expression profiling is typically performed using 
hybridization-based microarray methodologies. However, there are a 
number of limitations to microarray-based approaches such as low 
sensitivity and specificity, poor dynamic range, and, importantly, micro -
array expression profiling results are restricted to specific sequence 
annotations and content. The HiCEP ( High Coverage gene Expression 
Profiling) method was developed to address the above shortcomings 
in gene expression profiling and provide a sensitive method for de -
tecting a large proportion of transcripts in both known and unknown 
genes, with low false positive rate. Here we demonstrate the use of 
the new Applied Biosystems 3500xL Genetic Analyzer for the detection 
of transcripts unregulated by ionizing radiation (IR). mRNA samples 
were prepared from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) at 0, 3, 6 
and 24 hours after IR exposure. The expression of p21, CyclinG1 , 
Gadd45a  was assessed to demonstrate the capabilities of the 3500xL 
system for gene expression analysis. The optional normalization re -
agent (GeneScan™ 600 LIZ® Size Standard v2.0) and compatible 
run module enable increased precision and accuracy in relative peak 
area or height determinations, which are particularly important for the 
detection of slight expression changes. In addition, flexible GeneMap -
per® Software v4.1 was used to create reports and calculations to give 
user-configured tools for reporting HiCEP results. Further, the expres -sion changes detected by capillary electrophoresis were compared 
to TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays for the above transcripts. For 
Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human therapeutic 
or diagnostic use.
P11.134  Werfarin resistance genotype assessment on 
patients with acute coronary syndromes and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy
N. Marziliano1, F. Orsini1, P. Merlini1, C. Lauricella1, A. Colosimo1, S. Veronese1, 
M. Gambacorta1, R. Petraroli2, L. Egry3, F. Mauri1;  
1Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy, 2Applied 
Biosystems, MILANO, Italy, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United 
States.
Warfarin is the most frequently prescribed oral anticoagulant used for 
the prevention and treatment of thromboembolic problems. However, 
the drug has severe side effects of bleeding with an estimate of events 
occurring at a rate of 1.3 to 2.7 per 100 patient-years. The influence 
of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes on warfarin dose has been con -
sistently demonstrated in diverse racial/ethnic patient groups in obser -
vational studies and randomized clinical trails suggesting that patients 
of Asian, European and African ancestry require, on average, lower, 
intermediate and higher dose of warfarin respectively.
In this research study we made use of the TaqMan® Drug Metabolism 
Genotyping Assays and the ABI PRISM 7900HT Real Time platform 
to genotype known variants in the CYP2C9*2 and *3, CYP4F2, and 
VKORC1 genes in 50 patients with Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) 
and 50 patients with genotyped Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM). 
The genotyping workflow has been also tested on the Applied Biosys -
tems Next Generation Real Time Instrument.
In the ACS patients the following polymorphisms were not in the Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium: rs2108622, rs1799853 and rs1057910 (p<0.005) 
whilst in the HCM patients the following polymorphisms were not in the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium: rs1799853 and rs1057910 (p<0.010). In 
both cases the frequency of the “adverse” allele was more represented 
in the patients’ population than in the controls’ population. This might 
due to a selection bias being patients with difficulties in stabilizing 
an optimal anti-coagulant therapy. Moreover, the results on the ABI 
PRISM 7900HT were perfectly reproducible on the Next generation 
Real Time PCR platform.
P11.135  Whole genome and transcriptome amplification in large 
biobanks
N. Klopp1, T. Illig1, C. Korfharge2, H. Wichmann1;  
1Helmholtz Center München German Reseach Center for Environmental 
Health, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany.
Biobanks are a key resource in unravelling the molecular basis of dis -
eases, identification of new targets for therapy and improvement of 
attribution in drug discovery and development. The scientific trend in 
biobanking shows the need for stable techniques for amplification of 
biomaterials, which can be used for samples stored under very dif -
ferent conditions. The focus of the project is the standardisation and 
validation of the innovative techniques of whole genome amplification 
(WGA) and whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) in the context of 
biobanks. A general standardized protocol for WGA and WTA proce -
dures that use Phi29-DNA-polymerase in biobanking will be devel -
oped.The major aims of our project are:
1. To establish standardized WGA protocols for large biobanks
2. To develop standardized WGA tools to recover genomic DNA, which 
is in plasma or
serum samples and from FFPE- tissue or blood spots
3. To optimize the WGA procedure by extensive quality control mea -
sures of WGA
products
4. To develop and establish WTA of large biobank samples
5. To optimize WTA procedures by extensive quality control of WTA 
products
Furthermore, the concept of the project is to transfer the results of 
WGA and WTA solution to national and international organisations in 
the field of biobanking. The development of the proposed, innovative 
and specialized tools and customized solutions will help to expand and 
secure biobanks.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics2
P11.136  characterizing Human Diversity by Whole Human 
Genome sequencing of southern African Genomes
T. Harkins1, S. Schuster2, W. Miller2, V. hayes3;  
1Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Pennsylvania State University, 
PA, United States, 3Children‘s Cancer Institute Australia, y, Australia.
By using a combination of next generation sequencing technologies 
and exome enrichment, we have sequenced two complete and named 
individual genomes from South Africa. These individuals are !Gubi, a 
Kalaharian Bushmen, and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, representing an 
admixture comprised of two of the largest African Bantu groups. By 
focusing on genomes from the southern African, we help establish the 
extent of diversity within the human genome. For example, we are 
able to show that the diversity between two bushmen that live less 
than 1500 km from each other is greater than the diversity observed 
between a Caucasian compared to an Asian. By using a combination 
of sequencing technologies, we are able to generate a high quality ref -
erence genome that can be used as a comparative tool for the broader 
community. Initial analysis of !Gubi’s genome identified at least 1.3 
million SNP’s that were novel when comparing to the public reference 
databases. We used high density genetic arrays to both validate these 
SNP’s and determine what percent are shared verse private. As all 
participants in this project are believed to be near 80 years in age 
and in good health, we believe that their genomes can provide a tool 
to identify alleles that provide protection against disease and in some 
instances demonstrate that previously indentified disease causing al -
leles appear to not cause disease in this population. These findings will 
ultimately help the community understand rare variants across popula -
tions that may contribute to disease and potential drug treatment.
P11.137  Ancient DNA research without PcR: the power of true single molecule sequencing.
E. Altena1, M. van Galen2, M. Hestand2, J. T. den Dunnen2, P. de Knijff1;  
1Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands, 2Leiden Genome Technology Center (LGTC), Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
DNA extracts from archaeological samples tend to contain low quanti -
ties of DNA that is highly fragmented and chemically damaged. In addi -
tion the samples are highly contaminated with microbial DNA after being 
embedded in soil for hundreds or thousands of years. Analysis of this 
DNA using shotgun sequencing approaches therefore usually yields 
only low amounts of DNA of interest (a few percent). We reasoned that 
a major effect was the methodology used, enriching the higher qual -
ity contaminating DNA. We tested this hypothesis by analysing five 
ancient DNA samples of human origin using Helicos‘ true Single Mol -
ecule Sequencing technology (tSMS). The samples were from skeletal 
remains of five individuals buried between 1225 and 1850 AD in the 
city of Eindhoven (The Netherlands). The samples were also analysed 
using Sanger (mtDNA HVR1 and autosomal STRs) and Roche/454 
shotgun sequencing. While the methods involving DNA amplification 
yielded only <5% human sequences, singe molecule sequencing gave 
yields of up to 40% and more. tSMS sequencing allowed us to deter -
mine the gender of all samples and for three the entire mtDNA was 
covered (average coverage of 30x, some regions >100x). Based on 
these initial results we foresee a whole range of new studies that can 
be performed using low quality DNA samples, incl. archaeological, fo -
rensic, and archived (FFPE) samples. For our study on the ancient 
remains, we now suddenly have a range of new possibilities, incl. full 
genome sequencing, we could not have envisaged before.
P11.138**  Exploring the role of miR-590 in Williams Beuren 
syndrome
C. Fusco1, L. Micale1, V. A. Gennarino2, B. Augello1, M. G. Turturo1, E. V. 
D’Addetta1, S. Banfi2, G. Merla1;  
1Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni 
Rotondo, Italy, 2TIGEM, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, 
Italy.
Williams Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a recurrent genomic disorder 
caused by hemyzygosity of 28 contiguous genes at 7q11.23. Patients 
with WBS have a characteristic constellation of medical and cognitive 
findings. Despite a significant advance in the last years still much has 
to be learnt in order to further translate the knowledge into a better 
care of patients.
We investigated the role of miR-590, the only miRNA located within the WBS deleted region. Preliminary results showed that both miR-
590-5p and miR-590-3p miRNA strands are downregulated in cell lines 
of WBS patients. Because individual miRNAs regulate the expression 
of multiple target genes, we speculated that the downexpression of 
miR-590 in WBS has strong influences on the generation of the large 
spectrum of phenotypes because of the wide altered control of its tar -
get genes. This project moved from the idea that if we can modulate 
the action of such miRNA, we will find a possible “large spectrum” 
therapeutic target for WBS.
In order to asses the biological pathways controlled by miR-590, and 
to identify the set of its putative target (PTs) genes, we exploited global 
transcriptome analysis in cells following overexpression and inactiva -
tion of miR-590.
Preliminary, by qPCR, luciferase assays, and western blot analysis, 
we have validated a set of predicted miR-590 PTs identified by query -
ing HOCTAR a recently developed software for miRNA target predic -
tion. We are now performing functional assays on some selected PTs 
to assess their biological relevance on WBS. The results of these com -
prehensive analyses on miR-590 will be presented.
P11.139  Using transcription modules to identify pathways 
perturbed in Williams-Beuren syndrome
C. N. Henrichsen1, G. Csárdi1,2, M. Zabot3, C. Fusco4, S. Bergmann1,2, G. 
Merla4, A. Reymond1;  
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 
4IRCCS „Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza“, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
No global assessment of the dysregulations caused by the Williams-
Beuren Syndrome (WBS) deletion exists to date. We profiled the tran -
scriptomes of skin fibroblast cell lines from WBS patients and compared 
them to matched controls. We identified 366 differentially expressed 
genes that were significantly enriched in extracellular matrix genes, 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes, as well as genes the 
products of which localise to the actin cytoskeleton, microsome and 
vesicular fractions. We then used public expression datasets from hu -
man fibroblasts and the Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) to establish 
“transcription modules”, i.e. subsets of genes that exhibit a coher -
ent expression profile over a subset of microarray experiments. The 
majority of these modules are highly enriched in genes with common 
functional annotation, but they have the added advantage of including 
genes that have no or fragmented annotation. Hence, this modular 
approach increases the power to identify pathways dysregulated in 
WBS patients, thus providing additional candidates for genes and their 
interactions modulating the WBS phenotypes. Dysregulated modules 
are often interconnected and share multiple common genes, suggest -
ing that intricate regulatory networks controlled by a few key regulators 
are disturbed in WBS. Our results emphasize the role of the extracel -
lular space in the pathophysiology of WBS and provide novel clues 
about other affected processes. We identified, for example, variations 
in the expression of GABA receptor components that could have con -
sequences at the cellular and synaptic level and common features with 
other syndromes, such as dysregulation of the Di George Syndrome 
critical region 2 gene ( DGCR2 ).
P11.140**  An epigenetic profile of active and inactive X 
chromosomes correlates gene methylation with inactivation 
status
E. Stathaki1, E. Migliavacca1,2, Y. Dupre1, P. Jacobs3, S. Antonarakis1, A. 
Sharp1;  
1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Switzerland, 3Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury 
District Hospital and Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, 
UK, United Kingdom.
X chromosome inactivation is a dosage compensation process that 
silences most genes on one X chromosome in each female cell. In or -
der to characterise epigenetic changes that accompany this process, 
we generated comparative DNA methylation profiles in both Turner 
syndrome (45,X), and normal females (46,XX). Methylated DNA was 
immunoprecipitated and hybridized to tiling oligonucleotide arrays, 
generating epigenetic profiles of active and inactive X chromosomes.
We observed that X-inactivation is accompanied by increased DNA 
methylation of the inactive X specifically at CpG islands. While both 
intra- and inter-genic CpG islands are influenced, the biggest increase Genomics, technology, bioinformatics methods, gene structure, epigenetics00
in methylation occurs at the promoters of genes silenced by X-inactiva -
tion. In contrast, genes escaping X-inactivation have low methylation 
levels that are similar between active and inactive X chromosomes, 
while genes that undergo unstable/polymorphic X-inactivation show 
intermediate increases in methylation proportionate to their frequency 
of inactivation. Thus promoter methylation and susceptibility to X-inac -
tivation are directly correlated. We utilised this fact to predict nine ad -
ditional Refseq genes that escape X-inactivation, and performed com -
parative sequence analysis of differentially methylated CpG islands 
on the inactive X to identify sequence features that may contribute 
to the X inactivation process. As our study included Turner syndrome 
patients with single X chromosomes of both maternal and paternal ori -
gin, we searched for parent-of-origin specific methylation indicative of 
imprinting (Skuse, Nature 387:705), but were unable to find any.
Our study provides the first complete epigenetic profile of X-inactiva -
tion, giving novel insights into the phenomenon of dosage compensa -
tion.
P11.141  ZNF397, an interphase specific novel mammalian 
centromere SCAN-zinc finger protein.
S. L. Bailey1,2, A. N. Graham1,2, D. F. Hudson1,2, K. H. A. Choo1,2, P. Kalitsis1,2;  
1Chromosome and Chromatin Research Laboratory, Murdoch Childrens 
Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Department of paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
Our laboratory has previously identified a novel centromere protein, 
ZNF397, using a centromere-positive autoimmune serum from a pa -
tient with watermelon stomach disease. ZNF397 protein belongs to the 
classical Cys2His2 group of the zinc-finger protein superfamily, which 
is one of the largest families in the human proteome. It contains two 
conserved domains; a leucine-rich SCAN domain and nine Cys2His2 
zinc fingers. Bioinformatic analysis shows that ZNF397 is conserved in 
placental mammals. To date, only a few proteins containing zinc-finger 
domains have been identified at the centromeric or pericentric loci in 
various eukaryotic organisms.
Stable GFP-ZNF397 human cell lines demonstrated that ZNF397 is 
centromeric and it co-localises with constitutive centromere protein 
CENP-A during interphase to early prophase of human cells. Dele -
tion and domain-swap constructs indicate that the SCAN domain is 
necessary, but not sufficient, for centromere localisation. ZNF397 also 
localises to an active neocentromere, not the inactive α-satellite cen -
tromere on a pseudo-dicentric neocentromere chromosome. Knockout 
studies in mice have revealed that ZNF397 is not essential for chromo -
some segregation or development.
The presence of ZNF397 in interphase cells but not on mitotic chromo -
somes suggests that it is not a constitutive structural protein and that it 
is unlikely to be directly involved in microtubule capture, mitotic segre -
gation, or cytokinesis. An attractive hypothesis is that ZNF397 plays a 
role in the regulation of transcription at the centromere.
P11.142  microRNA analysis using RNA extracted from matched 
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and fresh frozen 
samples on sOLiDtm system
J. Gu , K. Lea, E. Zeringer, S. Heater, J. Schageman, K. Bramlett;  
Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States.
Archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens repre -
sent excellent resources for biomarker discovery, but it has been a 
major challenge to study gene expression in these samples due to 
mRNA degradation and modification during fixation and processing. 
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional 
level and are considered as important regulators of cancer progres -
sion. Next generation sequencing technologies such as SOLiD™ pro -
vide an ideal method for measuring the abundance of miRNA mol -
ecules in different cancer stages and provide insightful information on 
tumorigenesis. However, currently there is no good method to system -
atically study miRNA expression in FFPE samples on next generation 
sequencing platforms.
We have designed and developed a ligation-based miRNA detec -
tion method to capture small RNA sequences in FFPE samples and 
convert them into templates suitable for sequencing on the SOLiD™ 
System. Total RNA was isolated from matched lung cancer and breast 
cancer FFPE and snap frozen tissues using Ambion RecoverAll™ kit. 
Enriched small RNA from these samples was used for library prepara -
tion, followed by sequencing on SOLiD™ system. Our results show that small RNA extracted from FFPE samples was successfully con -
verted to small RNA libraries. The expression profiles from FFPE and 
fresh frozen samples were in good correlation, suggesting that miRNA 
molecules are less affected by sample degradation and RNA-protein 
crosslink. This study provides a foundation for miRNA expression 
analysis on SOLiD™ system using FFPE samples in cancer and other 
diseases.
P12 molecular basis of mendelian 
disorders
P12.001  Whole mitochondrial genome screening in two families with hearing loss: detection of a novel mutation in the 12s rRNA 
gene
E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, N. Fendri-Kriaa1, N. Louhichi1, A. Tlili1, C. Triki2, A. 
Ghorbel3, S. Masmoudi4, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Human Molecular Genetic Laboratory. Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, Tunisia, 
2Service de Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service 
d’O.R.L., C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tunisia, 4Unité Cible pour le 
Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Tunisia.
Sensorineural hearing loss has been described in association with 
different mitochondrial multisystemic syndromes, often characterized 
by an important neuromuscular involvement. Until now, mutations in 
mitochondrial DNA, specially in the 12S rRNA, the tRNASer(UCN) and 
the tRNALeu(UUR) genes were implicated in syndromic or non-syndromic 
hearing loss either as a primary cause or as predisposing factors. In 
this study, we performed a whole mitochondrial genome screening in 
two unrelated Tunisian families with inherited hearing loss in which we 
did not find nuclear mutations in the GJB2 , GJB3  and GJB6  genes. 
Results showed the presence of a novel homoplasmic mutation in 
the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene in the two probands of these two 
families who belong to two differents haplogroups: L3 and H6a1. The 
m.735A>G mutation affects a conserved nucleotide of the mitochondrial 
12S rRNA gene in primates and other species and had a conservation 
index of 78.5 % (11/14). We also detected known polymorphisms and 
6 novel mitochondrial variants (m.4313T>C (MT-TI), m.8649A>G (MT-
ATP6), m.9329G>A (MT-CO3), m.9467T>C (MT-CO3), m.10308C>T 
(MT-ND3), m.11926A>G (MT-ND4). This study described a new mito -
chondrial mutation associated to hearing loss and confirmed that the 
mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene is a hot spot for mutations associated 
with hearing impairment.
P12.002**  characterization of the genetic defect underlying an 
autosomal recessive leukodystrophy 
J. Zolotushko1, H. Flusser1, B. Markus1, M. Heverin2, I. Björkhem2, S. Sivan1, 
O. Birk1,3;  
1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute of 
Biotechnology, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Division of Clinical 
Chemistry, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Genetics 
Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
An Israeli-Bedouin kindred presented with an autosomal recessive 
phenotype of convulsions near birth, mental retardation and cerebral 
palsy. Brain MRI demonstrated significant reduction in white matter 
and agenesis of corpus callosum. Linkage analysis ruled out asso -
ciation with twelve genes known to be associated with inherited de -
fects of white matter or agenesis of corpus callosum. Using 250K SNP 
microarrays, a region of homozygosity on chromosome 1p33-1p32.3 
was identified and further narrowed down using polymorphic markers 
to 7.5 cM (7 Mb) between D1S2824  and D1S200 , with a maximum 
two-point LOD score of [Zmax] = 4.39, recombination fraction [θ] = 
0.0 at D1S2748 . Six candidates of the 62 genes in the linkage inter -
val were sequenced, identifying a novel missense mutation, C307T, in 
DHCR24 , resulting in substitution of arginine to cysteine at amino acid 
103 (conserved exposed residue) within the flavin adenine dinucleo -
tide (FAD) binding domain.
DHCR24 (24-dehydrocholesterol reductase) encodes an FAD-depen -
dent oxidoreductase expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum mem -
brane, which catalyzes the reduction of the delta-24 double bond of 
sterol intermediates during cholesterol biosynthesis. Missense muta -
tions in this gene have been associated with desmosterolosis. Plasma 
sterol quantification in two affected individuals demonstrated a normal Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders01
cholesterol level, but ~300-fold increased levels of desmosterol prov -
ing deficient activity of 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase.
The novel DHCR24  mutation we describe leads to excessive desmo -
sterol accumulation much beyond that previously described, and a 
unique severe novel clinical phenotype.
P12.003  A recurrent homozygous deletion in ADAMTSL  in 
isolated ectopia lentis
T. M. Neuhann1, J. Artelt1, T. F. Neuhann2, S. Tinschert1, A. Rump1;  
1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Private Practice, Munich, 
Germany.
To date, only two different homozygous mutations in ADAMTSL4  have 
been reported in patients with isolated ectopia lentis, each mutation in 
one consanguineous family.
We report five individuals from four non-consanguineous and non-re -
lated families with isolated ectopia lentis. All of them have the identical 
homozygous ADAMTSL4 mutation not reported so far: 20 bp of coding 
sequence are deleted within exon 6 (NM_019032.4:c.759_778del20). 
In a screen of 360 ethnically matched unaffected individuals, we found 
two further heterozygous mutation carriers.
This deletion is flanked by a perfectly matching 8 bp direct repeat as 
well as two perfect DNA polymerase α frameshift hotspots, suggest -
ing a repeat mediated recurrent mutation event. However, the deletion 
always comes along with the same SNP-haplotype in all individuals 
(affected as well as carriers), suggesting a single founder. These find -
ings might best be explained by a “mixture” of both scenarios: a repeat 
mediated mutation due to the local DNA sequence environment oc -
curred in a small number of individuals, i.e. there is a small group of 
different founders for the very same mutation.
Our results further support the association of ADAMTSL4  null-muta -
tions to isolated ectopia lentis. Screening of ADAMTSL4  should be 
considered in all patients with isolated ectopia lentis, with or without 
family history. In patients from non-consanguineous families, we pro -
pose a two-step diagnostic approach starting with an examination of 
exon 6 before sequencing the entire coding region of ADAMTSL4.
P12.004  mutation analysis in families with autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) in czech Republic
J. Štekrová1, V. Elišáková1, J. Reiterová2, S. Svobodová1, V. Kebrdlová1, M. 
Merta1, V. Tesař2, M. Kohoutová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,1-st Faculty of Medicine and General 
Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dept. of 
Nephrology,1-st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
ADPKD is the most common hereditary renal disease. The progres -
sive formation and enlargement of renal cysts causes the decline in 
renal function.
The disease is caused by mutations of PKD1 (in 85 %) and PKD2 (in 
14 %) genes. Protein products of these two genes polycystin-1 and 
polycystin-2 may interact with each other forming a large membrane-
associated komplex which has a crucial role in the regulation of cell 
proliferation, differentiation and normal renal tubulogenesis. The iden -
tification of mutations in genes could help to find the functional impor -
tant areas of polycystins  and thus reveal the molecular mechanism of 
pathogenesis of this disease. Both PKD genes are high variable; in 
the PKD database ( http://pkdb.mayo.edu ) 846 different variants of the 
PKD1 gene and 139 different variants of the PKD2 gene have been 
reported.
The mutation analysis of PKD1  gene in our laboratory  has so far de -
tected mutations in 37 families. Only the mutation p.Arg4021X was 
detected in two families; other mutations are unique for individual 
families; 29 mutations are unique for Czech population. The mutation 
analysis of PKD2 gene has so far detected mutations in 30 families. 
The mutation p.Pro68fsX23 was identified in 9 families and mutation 
p.Gln160X in 5 families; 12 mutations are unique for Czech population. 
Determination of localization and type of mutations within the PKD 
genes and their genotype-phenotype correlation in ADPKD families 
improves DNA diagnostics together with the assessment of the clinical 
prognosis of patients.
Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NR/9427-3 and VZ 
MSM0021620806P12.005  comprehensive approach to the diagnosis of Alpha thalassemia in iran
N. Bayat , S. Ebrahimkhani, M. Parvin, S. Jalilnejad, L. Yektamaram, H. 
Imanian, V. Hadavi, A. Azarkeivan, N. Almadani, F. Afroozan, R. Kariminejad, A. 
Kariminejad, H. Najmabadi;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Iran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Thalassemias are a group of anemia-like blood disorders that oc -
cur most commonly in people with Mediterranean, African American 
and Asian backgrounds. These conditions can range from mild to life 
threatening. Over the last 18 years more than 3000 families with a his -
tory of affected individuals with thalassemia have been referred to our 
center. Most of them were Beta-thalassemia patients and significant 
numbers of them had normal hemoglobin A2 level indicating they were 
either Beta silent or Alpha thalassemia carriers.
Since 7 years ago that alpha thalassemia investigations were estab -
lished in our laboratory, variety of approaches and methods have been 
set up to analyze these individuals such as Gap PCR, hybridization 
assay, Alpha1 and Alpha2 globin gene direct sequencing.
The most common alpha thalassemia deletion among our patients 
was -alpha3.7 (44.9%). The next four most frequent deletion/mutation(s) 
were poly A2, -alpha4.2, alphaIVS-I, 5 nt and --MED with frequencies of 18.2, 
9.1, 6.5, and 4.3%, respectively. Five other mutations, alphacd19(GCG-GC) 
(4.0%), alphaCS (3.3%), -(alpha)20.5 (2.1%), Hb Adana (1.8%), and poly 
A1 were seen in frequencies above 1%, while the remaining 11 muta -
tions comprised 0.4% each. Other novel mutations for alpha thalas -
semia such as alphacd99, and 3’UTR nt46 have also been identified. We 
have also identified few individuals with beta silent mutations. At pres -
ent we are able to perform carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis for 
over 99 percent of referral cases.
P12.006  Alpha-thalassemia deletions found in Romanian 
patients with alpha-thalassemia
C. Tecuceanu1, R. Talmaci2, L. Dan1, M. Dogaru3, D. Coriu2;  
1Genetics Institute of Bucharest University, Bucharest, Romania, 2University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy „Carol Davila“, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Fundeni“ 
Clinical Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
Alpha-thalassemia is a hereditary hemoglobin disorder caused by de -
fects in the alpha-globin genes. The majority of the mutations involved 
in alpha-thalassemia are extended alpha globin gene deletions.
The purpose of our work was to implement a molecular diagnosis ap -
proach for patients with suspicious diagnosis of alpha-thalassemia. Pa -
tients with modified levels of cell blood count (RBC, MCV, MCH), levels 
of HbA2 1-2,9% and excluding other causes of hypochromic anemia 
were tested for the most common alpha-thalassemia deletions. DNA 
samples extracted from peripheral blood of all 43 subjects included in 
the study were genotyped using the GAP-PCR molecular method.
Our results showed ten patients with modifications in the alpha-globin 
genes, as following: three patients are carriers of the 3.7kb deletion 
and in four patients was identified the MED I deletion. An interest -
ing finding was the identification of alpha triplicated status (ααα=anti 
3.7kb) in 3 patients. In one of these, alpha triplicated status is associ -
ated with cd 8 (-AA) β-thalassemia mutation resulting in a thalassemia 
intermedia phenotype.
In conclusion, our study shows that Mediterranean alpha-thalassemia 
deletions -3.7 kb and MED I are quite frequently found in alpha-thalas -
semia cases from our country and it is the first report about alpha-thal -
assemia in Romania. This approach could be a very efficient applica -
tion in prenatal diagnosis for a thalassemia prevention programme in 
our country.
This work was supported by the grant PN II 41-045 from the Romanian 
Ministry of Education and Research.
P12.007  the genetic aspects of hereditary angioedema in 
Russia
A. V. Dmitrieva1, E. N. Medunitsyna1, E. A. Bliznetz2, T. V. Latysheva1;  
1State Institution State Scientific Center “Institute of Immunology of the Federal 
Medicobiolog, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Medical 
Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) types I and II are the chronic disease 
concerning group of primary immunodeficiencies, connected with the 
qualitative or quantitative genetically determined defect of the genes 
coding synthesis esterase inhibitor of a complement component C1 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders02
(C1- inhibitor), are shown in recurrent angioedema of a skin and mu -
cous membranes. The HAE prevalence is 1/10,000-150,000. The ge -
netic aspects studying of hereditary angioedema will allow to carry out 
differential diagnostics angioedema, including pre-symptomatic diag -
nostics, and to optimize the treatment in Russia. In present work for 
the first time in Russia the mutation analysis in SERPING1 (C1NH) 
gene, coding C1- inhibitor, at the patients with recurrent angioedema, 
was performed.
A pilot sample included 6 patients. DNA sequencing of the entire cod -
ing region and exon-intron junctions in SERPING1 gene was carried 
out in all patients. The mutations were found in 5 patients: three mu -
tations at patients with HAE type I (c.623_624insA, c.706T>G and 
c.1249+2T>G) were novel, two mutations at patients with HAE type 
I and II (c.578T>C and c.614G>A) were found earlier among patients 
from Spain and USA. The first results indicate high efficiency of SERP -
ING1 gene sequencing for HAE types I and II molecular genetic diag -
nostics. In one patient with HAE types I a mutation in coding region of 
SERPING1 gene was not found. In publications the rare mutations in 
regulatory gene areas and long deletions, not revealed by sequencing, 
are described. To increase efficiency of molecular genetic diagnostics 
we schedule to design analyzing systems for those mutations.
P12.008  Apoptosis resistance following DNA damage in Ataxia 
telangiectasia and Nijmegen Breakage syndrome cells is 
conferred by a novel defect in mitochondrial p53 accumulation
V. Turinetto, L. Orlando, E. Lantelme, L. Accomasso, V. Minieri, A. Amoroso, M. 
De Marchi, D. Delia, C. Giachino ;  
University of Turin, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Orbassano 
(Turin), Italy.
We have previously shown that whereas T-cells from normal individu -
als accumulate high amounts of total p53 and undergo apoptosis when 
treated with the genotoxic agent Actinomycin D (ActD), those from 
Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) and Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) 
patients resist ActD-induced apoptosis. We have now found similar re -
sistance on the part of the p53-null Jurkat T-cell line, a further evidence 
indicating that ActD initiates a p53-dependent, non-redundant apop -
totic pathway. This prompted us to look for defective p53 accumulation 
by AT and NBS cells following ActD treatment. Surprisingly their total 
p53 level was only slightly less than that of normal T cells, though 
immunofluorescence and protein fractionation experiments revealed 
that this accumulation was highly defective in the cytosol and nearly 
undetectable in their mitochondria. Specific inhibition of mitochondrial 
p53 translocation with μ pifithrin (μ-PFT) in control T-cells reduced 
the apoptotic response by 86%, whereas treatment with α-PFT, which 
blocks p53-mediated transcription, had no effect. These data con -
firmed that ActD-induced apoptosis depends on a mitochondrial p53 
function. Export blockade experiments showed that nuclear export is 
not required for mitochondrial p53 translocation.
Our results disclose an undescribed defect in mitochondrial p53 accu -
mulation in AT and NBS T-cells that makes them resistant to apoptosis 
following DNA damage.
P12.009  molecular Genetics of Autosomal Recessive mental Retardation (ARmR) in consanguineous Pakistani families.
S. Rehman1, L. Hansen2, S. Bakhtiar1, M. Farooq1, M. Tariq1, I. Ahmad1, N. 
Tommerup2, S. Baig1;  
1National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), 
Faisalabad, Pakistan, 2Wilhelm Johansen Centre for Functional Genome 
Research ICMM, PANUM Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Mental retardation (MR) is a complex phenotype characterized by sub 
average general intellectual functioning and deficiency in at least two 
of self-survival skills which appear during childhood. Incidence of MR 
is relatively high in Pakistan because of high consanguinity. Autosomal 
recessive form of MR (ARMR) is genetically heterogeneous with eight 
loci and six genes reported. In the present study, we identified seven 
large consanguineous Pakistani families with autosomal recessive 
mode of inheritance having multiple affected births with MR. Purpose 
of the study was to improve the understanding on protective measure -
ments for ARMR.
Nucleic acid (DNA) was extracted and subjected to STS marker anal -
yses for mapping of homozygosity in known genes and known loci 
regions. All families were excluded for all known regions except MR6 
(consists of three loops), which seems to be linked with PRSS12 gene. Sequencing was performed for PRSS12 but no mutation was found. 
Further its two loops were subjected to the Genome wide scanning by 
using SNP6.0 array for detection of homozygous regions. No common 
homozygous region was found for both loops while five homozygous 
regions were found for a single loop. By checking genotypes for these 
two loops, no match was found. It made the molecular genetics of MR6 
very complicated and we have to consider several aspects for MR6 
including compound heterozygosity, more than a single gene and its 
clinical features. One probability for MR6 can be the novel syndromic 
ARMR with several genes. All these observations for MR6 shows the 
complexity of ARMR.
P12.010  Genetic linkage analysis in a cohort of iranian families 
with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment
M. A. Tabatabaiefar1,2,3, F. Alasti3,4, L. Shariati2, E. Farrokhi2, M. R. Nooridaloii1, 
M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2, G. Van Camp3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular 
Research Center, School of Medicine, Shahrekord University of Medical 
Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Center, 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, 
Belgium, 4National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hearing impairment (HI) is the most frequent sensory birth defect in 
human. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic HI (ARNSHI) is the most 
common type of hereditary HI. Over 70 loci are known, in which more 
than half of the corresponding genes have been identified. Consan -
guinity is a highly accepted custom in Iran and therefore the Iranian 
population offers an opportunity to study different AR disorders, includ -
ing ARNSHI. In 31 ARNSHI families  GJB2 , the most common cause 
of HI, was excluded. Fifteen known ARNSHI loci were analyzed by 
homozygosity mapping. Later, families with S-Link values ≥ 3.3, ex -
cluded for the 15 known AR loci, were analyzed by Illumina 6K chips 
(Linkage IVb panel).
Ten families were found to be linked to 6 known loci by homozygosity 
mapping: DFNB4 (4 families), DFNB63 (2 families), DFNB7/11 (1 fam -
ily), DFNB9 (1 family), DFNB2 (1 family) and DFNB21 (1 family). Five 
out of the 31 families studied were qualified for a whole genome scan, 
3 of which showed significant linkage based on the SNP array out -
comes. The linked regions in the first and second families overlap with 
2 known deafness loci, with no gene identification yet, while the third 
family presents linkage to a new genomic region. Further analyses 
were performed for the fine mapping of the linked regions to narrow 
down the boundaries of the loci and increase the chance of finding the 
corresponding disease-causing genes. DNA sequencing of candidate 
genes in all 3 families is going on.
P12.011**  the power of array-cGH in diagnosing rare autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation. the example of TUSC
.
C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, C. Bonnet3, M. Béri3, P. Callier4, B. Aral5, M. Payet4, 
C. Ragon4, A. Mosca-Boidron4, N. Marle4, A. Masurel-Paulet1, F. Mugneret4, L. 
Faivre1, P. Jonveaux3;  
1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Rares 
«Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs» de l’interrégion 
Grand-Est, Dijon, France, 3Département de Génétique, CHU Brabois, Nancy, 
France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, PTB, CHU, Dijon, France, 5Laboratoire 
de Génétique Moléculaire, PTB, CHU, Dijon, France.
Mental retardation (MR) is the most frequent handicap in children, af -
fecting 2% of the general population. Despite recent advances, the 
causes of nearly 40% of MR remain unclear. Although more than 60 
X-linked MR genes have been identified, only six genes ( PRSS12 , 
CRBN , CC2D1A , GRIK2, TRAPPC9  and TUSC3 ) have been impli -
cated in nonsyndromic autosomal recessive MR (NS-ARMR). These 
genes are involved in different pathways, namely synaptic proteolysis, 
regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism, regulation of I-kappaB 
kinase/NF-kappaB cascade, induction of long-term potentiation and 
N-glycosylation, underlying the extreme heterogeneity of pathological 
mechanism involved in NS-ARMR. TUSC3  encodes a subunit of the 
ER-bound oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex that catalyzes a 
pivotal step in the protein N-glycosylation process. Only one frameshift 
mutation and a large 120-150 Kbp deletion have been previously re -
ported in two consanguineous families. By high resolution 105K CGH-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
array, we identified a homozygous 177-238 Kb duplication, including 
exons 2-6 in TUSC3 , in two sibs with severe MR from consanguine -
ous parents. Affected patients presented with normal mensurations, 
dysmorphic features similar to previously reported cases, moderate to 
severe MR with insuffisant speech and normal walk, epilepsy in the fe -
male patient, behavioural disturbances in the male patient, and without 
any malformation. This observation confirms the implication of TUSC3  
in NS-ARMR, the expanding clinical spectrum of CDG syndromes to 
NSMR and the importance of the high resolution of CGH-array in the 
identification of intragenic rearrangements of genes implicated in MR 
and rare diseases.
P12.012  congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by a novel 
homozygous mutation in the scN5A gene 
Z. N. Al-Hassnan1,2, S. Tulbah1, S. Majid1, N. Dzimiri1, W. Al-Manea1, M. Al-
Fayyadh1;  
1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 
2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Sick sinus syndrome (SSS), caused by sinus node dysfunction, is 
characterized by inappropriate sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, or 
chronotropic incompetence. The disorder, which presents with synco -
pe, presyncope and dizziness, often requires cardiac pacing. Familial 
SSS is known to be inherited in either autosomal dominant; caused by 
mutation in the HCN4 gene, or autosomal recessive; caused by muta -
tion in the SCN5A gene.
Here we present the molecular finding in a large inbred family with 
SSS. The index case, a 1 year old boy, presented with a history of 
frequent attacks of syncope. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus 
bradycardia and 2nd degree atrioventricual block. Four of his siblings 
had a similar presentation and all of them underwent cardiac pacing. 
The ECG in their consanguineous parents was unremarkable. Se -
quencing the entire coding region for SCN5A revealed a novel homo -
zygous substitution (c.5548T>C) leading to replacement of cysteine 
by arginine at position 1850, which was not detected in 100 ethnically 
matched controls.
In this work, we report a novel homozygous SCN5A mutation in con -
genital SSS. The in vitro biophysical characterization of the mutant, 
which is in progress, may provide insight into the molecular pathogen -
esis of the recessive form of SSS.
P12.013  molecular investigation of TBX1  gene in individuals 
with Asperger syndrome
M. Simioni1, C. E. Steiner1, A. C. Fett-Conte2, A. Barbosa-Gonçalves3, V. L. 
Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (Unicamp), 
Campinas, Brazil, 2Faculdade de Medicina de S.J. do Rio Preto, São José 
do Rio Preto, Brazil, 3Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho 
(UNESP), São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.
Asperger syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder from the 
Autism Spectrum Disorders. It is characterized by impairments in so -
cialization and ritualistic and stereotypic behaviors. Despite of the de -
scription of mutations in several genes, the etiology remains unknown. 
Genetic and early developmental factors are considered important for 
its occurrence. Behavioral and psychiatric disorders are a prominent 
part of the 22q11 deletion syndrome. Furthermore, there is a description 
of one individual with AS and mutation in TBX1  gene that is mapped in 
22q11.2 region. Therefore, the objective of this study was to perform 
a mutation screening of TBX1  gene in individuals with AS. We ana -
lyzed 14 subjects. Mutation screening of TBX1  by direct sequencing 
detected several synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 
already reported in NCBI database. The sequence variant 1189A → C 
was identified in one patient. This Asn397His transversion was geno -
typed in a sample of 100 control individuals and it was found in 20% of 
them. This kind of mutation in TBX1 gene may be more common than 
expected, however it’s relevance in pathogenesis of AS still remains to 
be determined considering the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of the 
disease and the restricted number of individuals studied.P12.014  Ataxia-telangiectasia as model for study of heightened 
radiosensitivity and premature aging
I. M. Spivak , E. A. Polubotko;  
Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Diseases with distinct progeroid features may serve as models for 
natural aging. Neurodegenerative syndrome ataxia-telangiectasia 
(AT) show progeroid features on both the level of the entire organism 
and isolated cells. Heightened radiosensitivity by AT correlates with 
diminished DNA repair potential, and inability to form cell cycle blocks 
after irradiation. AT heterozygote carriage tends to be quite high, 4 to 
11% in various populations. Thus it is really important to detect the 
levels of radiosensitivity and premature aging by AT-heterozygotes. In 
our study, the following makers of aging were studied in 2 different 
AT families: activity of SA-β-gal, presence of γ-H2AX foci, diminished 
amount of HP-1-γ and of methylated forms of histone H3 (3MeH3K9 
and 3MeH3K27), SAHF (senescence associated heterochromatin fo -
cus) formation, structural disturbances of nuclear lamina and actine 
cytoskeleton in intact cells. In order to define the level of radiosen -
sitivity, dynamics of the appearance and elimination was measured: 
in case of DNA breaks, by means of comet assay; in case of 53BP1 
and γ-H2AX foci and p21, by method of indirect immunofluorescence; 
checkpoint formation by flow cytometry. Cells of AT patients and their 
blood relatives (heterozygote carriers of disease) were demonstrat -
ed to reveal features of both premature aging, and radiosensitivity. It 
should be noted that in cases of AT-heterozygotes, the level of expres -
sion of features of aging and radiosensitivity tended to be intermediate 
between AT patients, and healthy donors. The study was supported by 
Program of Basic Research of the Presidium of Russian Academy of 
Sciences ‘Fundamental Sciences for Medicine’.
P12.015  Bak proapoptotic gene alteration in iranian patients 
with Ataxia telangiectasia
A. Isaian1, M. Sanati2, T. Dork3, N. Bogdanova4, M. Houshmand2;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Pediatrics Center of ExcellenceTehran University 
of Medical SciencesNational Institute of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Gynaecology Research Unit, Medical School of Hannover,, 
Hannover, Germany, 4Gynaecology Research Unit, Medical School of 
Hannover,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction:
Ataxia telangiectasia(AT) is an autosomal recessive multisystem dis -
order characterized by variable immunodeficiency, progressive neuro -
degeneration, occulocutaneoustelangiectasia, and an increased sus -
ceptibilityto malignancies. This study was designed to studythe role 
of proapoptotic BAK gene in a group of patients with AT to elucidate 
the possiblerole of these genes in progression of malignancies in this 
disease.
Materials and Methods:
Fifty Iranian patients with AT were investigated in this study. The entire 
coding regions of the BAK gene (exons 2-6 )were amplified using poly -
merase chain reaction (PCR). The PCR products were separated by 
2% agarose gel electrophoresis, and all positive samples were verified 
by direct sequencing of PCR products using the same primers used for 
PCR amplification, Big Dye chemistry, and Avent 3100 Genetic Ana -
lyzer following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems).
Results :Eight of fifty Iranian AT patients (16%) exhibited a C>T transi -
tion in exon 2 (c342C>T) of the BAK gene, while none of the healthy 
controls had such alteration (P=0.0001).Frequency of this alteration 
inother population(NCBI SNP Database rs2227925) was3.9% which in 
our pateints were higher .
Discussion:
Alteration in the proapoptotic BAK gene was found in our study, which 
could elucidate involvement of the mitochondrial pathway mediated 
apoptosis in accelerating and developing ofcancers and in immuno -
pathogenesis of AT. Such altered apoptosis in AT could play some 
roles in developing cancers in this group of patients.
P12.016  A new missense mutation in the transmembrane domains constitutively activates the human ca2+ receptor
C. Airault1, A. Nizou1, C. Magdelaine2, A. Liendhard3, F. Sturtz2, A. Lia-Baldini1;  
1EA4021 – Biomolécules et thérapies antitumorales, Université de Limoges, 
Limoges, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
de Limoges, Limoges, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalo-
Universitaire de Limoges, Limoges, France.
Gain-of-function mutations of the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) 
have been identified in patients with familial and sporadic hypercalciu -
ric hypocalcaemia. We described here a new heterozygous missense 
mutation localized in the transmembrane domains of CaSR, carrying 
by a subject with autosomal dominant hypocalcaemia. Analysis of in vi -
tro functional properties of the mutant receptor to react to extracellular 
calcium did not reveal the expected leftward shift in the concentration-
response curve for the mutant compared to wild-type receptor, but a 
constitutive effect of this mutant which exhibits 100% of the wild-type 
receptor activity even in the absence of extracellular calcium. This find -
ing, which has never been described to our knowledge, suggests the 
importance of this new mutation or of the surrounding region on the 
activation of the CaSR protein.
P12.017  Genetic testing for Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: one 
year experience.
K. R. Smith1, T. Antoniadi1, M. Williams1, A. Churchill2, J. Carter2;  
1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Eye Hospital, 
Bristol, United Kingdom.
Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome (ARS) describes a group of genetically 
and phenotypically heterogeneous disorders that primarily affect the 
anterior segment of the eye. Individuals with ARS present with a char -
acteristic spectrum of ocular anomalies and to a lesser extent systemic 
malformations. One of the most debilitating features of this disorder 
is the increased risk of glaucoma with approximately 50% of affected 
individuals acquiring this progressively blinding disease. Identifying an 
“at risk” group allows glaucoma development/progression to be moni -
tored and treated appropriately.
ARS is an autosomal dominant disorder with an incidence in the UK 
estimated at 1/250,000. There are 5 known genetic loci for ARS, situat -
ed at 4q25 ( PITX2 ), 6q25 ( FOXC1 ), 11q13 ( PAX6 ), 13q14 and 16q24.
We have recently implemented a UK Genetics Testing Network service 
for the detection of mutations in PITX2  and FOXC1 . The two stage 
screening procedure involves quantitative analysis using an “in house” 
designed MLPA kit and subsequent point mutation analysis by DNA 
sequencing in dosage negative cases.To date 41 patients with a clini -
cal phenotype of ARS have been screened; four had a FOXC1 dele-
tion and one had a deletion of PITX2 . A total of eight point sequence 
changes were identified in both genes, including 5 novel variants. In 
silico  investigation was also performed for the novel findings. Here we 
present our results and discuss our conclusions regarding testing and 
the significance of the genetic testing for this syndrome.
P12.018  MLPA analysis for molecular diagnosis of Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome
M. Lukova1,2, T. Todorov1,2, L. Angelova3, E. Simeonov4, A. Todorova1,2, V. 
Mitev1;  
1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical Unversity, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “St. Marina” Hospital, Varna, Bulgaria, 
4Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder, 
characterized by tissue and organ hyperplasia, macroglossia, devel -
opmental abnormalities and an increased risk of embryonal tumours 
(mostly Wilms tumour). The disease is multigenic, due to dysregulation 
of the expression of imprinted genes in the 11p15 chromosomal re -
gion. BWS is mainly caused by genetic and epigenetic abnormalities. 
Abnormal demethylation of the maternally methylated KvDMR1 region 
(DMR-differentially methylated region), as well as hypermethylation of 
the normally unmethylated maternal H19 gene have been described 
in BWS patients. The molecular diagnosis of BWS is currently very 
difficult and sofisticated. Here we present the successful application of 
methylation sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 
(MS-MLPA) protocol for molecular diagnosis of BWS. The method is 
divided in two steps - copy number test, which permits deletions/dupli -
cations assessment and methylation test, which gives the possibility to 
analyze methylation status of KvDMR1 and H19 gene.
Four families were referred to our laboratory with clinical diagnosis of 
BWS. The MS-MLPA analysis showed demethylation in KvDMR1 re -
gion in one family, loss of methylation in KvDMR1 region in the second 
family and H19 gene hypermethylation in the third family. One family did not show abnormal methylation in KvDMR1 region and H19 gene. 
The molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of BWS in 3 out of 
4 families tested. The MS-MLPA proved to be a powerful method in 
detection abnormal methylation profile, which is essential in clarifying 
the diagnosis of BWS.
P12.019  A recessive form of Best’s vitelliform macular 
dystrophy caused by a novel mutation in VMD2  gene
T. Piñeiro-Gallego1, M. Álvarez2, I. Pereiro1, S. Campos2, D. Valverde1;  
1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology. Faculty of Biology, 
Universidade de Vigo, Spain, 2Department of Ophthalmology. Complexo 
Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo, Spain.
Vitelliform macular dystrophy ( VMD2 , OMIM#153700) or Best disease 
is an early-onset autosomal dominant retinal dystrophy, associated 
with a reduced or absent electro-oculogram (EOG) and large depos -
its of lipofuscin-like material in the subretinal space. This disorder is 
progressive and loss of vision may occur. Mutations in VMD2, which 
encodes the protein bestrophin, have been associated with  Best dis -
ease. Clinical features in patients with mutations in VMD2  seem to 
cluster into at least four major categories that include a recently de -
scribed autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB, OMIM#611809). 
We characterized the phenotype in a consanguineous family with ARB 
and a novel mutation in VMD2 gene.
Four family members were examined clinically regarding age, best 
corrected visual acuity test, fundoscopy, electro-oculogram (EOG), 
electroretinogram (ERG), fluorescein angiography (AGF), optical co -
herence tomography (OCT) and fundus autofluorescence. All 11 exons 
of VMD2  were amplified by PCR and mutation analysis was carried out 
sequencing these PCR products.
The siblings showed a novel homozygous VMD2  gene missense mu -
tation p.R130S, (c.388C>A) in exon 4, and the parents were hetero -
zygous for the same mutation. The siblings had multifocal vitelliform 
lesions, both presented reduced ERG and preserved good visual acu -
ity. The girl suffered vitelliform material reorganization with the right 
eye showing a pseudohypopion type, and left a retractile-atrophic type. 
The boy suffered vitelliform disc regression and also had abnormal 
EOG.
Our study demonstrates the uselfulness of VMD2  mutational analysis 
in the diagnosis of bestrinopathies. A novel homozygous mutation in 
VMD2  is associated with ARB.
P12.020  Further evidence of genetic heterogeneity of 
cAcD disease associated with inherited drusen in a large consanguineous t unisian family
F. Ouechtati1,2, O. Belhadj Tahar3, A. Mhenni3, S. Chakroun1, I. Chouchene1, S. 
Oueslati4, A. Rebai5, A. Jeddi Blouza3, S. Abdelhak1;  
1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, UR04/SP03 Pasteur 
Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Oculogenetics Unit UR17/04, Hedi Rais 
Institute of Ophthalmology, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of Ophthalmology, La 
Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Child Neurological Diseases, U05/UR08-02, 
Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Unit of Bioinformatics, Center of 
biotechnology of Sfax, Tunisia.
Central areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD) is a rare inherited disease 
which causes progressive profound loss of vision in patients during 
their 4th decade. It is characterized by atrophy of retinal pigment epi -
thelium, photoreceptors and choriocapillaris. As the locus responsible 
for CACD disease is PRPH2 gene or CACD locus, we checked if both 
loci are involved in a large Tunisian family.
A multiplex consanguineous family originating from the North of Tuni -
sia was studied. The family included twenty one affected individuals 
in three living generations, six of whom presented with drusen. A link -
age analysis was performed using microsatellite markers flanking the 
PRPH2 gene and encompassing the CACD locus in 17p13.3 locus. 
Peripherin gene was screened by direct sequencing.
The parents were unaffected in this family and both sexes were af -
fected in the siblings suggesting an autosomal recessive inheritance 
of CACD. Linkage analysis and mutational screening showed an ex -
clusion of linkage to both PRPH2/RDS gene and CACD locus in this 
family.
This first molecular study of CACD in Tunisian families gives further 
evidence for genetic heterogeneity of central areolar choroidal dys -
trophy.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
P12.021  the age of mutation c.550delA in cAPN3 gene.
O. P. Ryzhkova , E. Dadali, O. Scagina, G. Rudenskaya, A. Polyakov;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, type 2A (LGMD2A, MIM 253600) is 
considered the most frequent autosomal recessive MD almost every -
where in the world. The causative gene is CAPN3 located in chro -
mosomal region 15q15.1-q21.1 and encoding a muscle-specific pro -
tease, calpain 3. Sixty nine unrelated Russian patients of LGMD were 
screened for CAPN3 mutations by direct sequencing and SSCP. In 28 
patients (40.5%), eighteen already known end five earlier not described 
(c.106delG, c.1000delC, c.1128G>A, c.1557delCT, c.1915+10C>T) 
mutations were detected. In 3 patients mutation was detected only in 
one allele. Mutation c.550delA was found in 20 of 28 patients (71.4%) 
in homozygous (4 cases), compound heterozygous (14) or heterozy -
gous (2) state, thereby in 42.9% (24/56) of affected alleles. In this work 
to estimate the age of the c.550delA mutation we were analyze seven 
microsatellite markers (D15S994, D15S968, D15S514, D15S778, 
D15S779, D15S780 and D15S659) flanking the CAPN3 gene in 19 
chromosomes bearing the mutation and in populations chromosomes 
(96). In all families cases equal haplotype was found for D15S514, 
D15S779, D15S780 markers. The equal haplotype for more mark -
ers (D15S968-D15S514-D15S779-D15S780-D15S778) was found 
on six chromosomes bearing the mutation. The frequencies of vari -
ous “founder haplotype” decay derivatives were used to estimate the 
original time of the spreading of the c.550delA mutation. The mean 
age was equal to 64 generations for Russian population. Assuming 
a mean generation length of 30 years, the time since origin would be 
about 1900 ± 300 years.
P12.022  mitochondrial DNA tRNAcys mutation in a family with 
Frontotemporal Dementia and Parkinson’s disease
G. Provenzano1,2, F. Annesi1, E. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, P. Tarantino1,2, 
F. Rocca1, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, I. Manna1, M. D’Amelio3, A. 
Gambardella1,4, A. Quattrone1,4, G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of 
Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, 
Italy, 3Dipartimento Universitario di Neuroscienze Cliniche (DiNeC), University 
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Graecia, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of some neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease 
(PD) and Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), because of the essential 
role of mitochondria in energy metabolism and apoptosis. FTD is the 
second most common type of primary degenerative dementia. Some 
patients present an overlap between PD and FTD both in neuropatho -
logical and clinical aspects. This may suggest a similar physiopathol -
ogy and an involvement of mitochondrial DNA in FTD, as it has been 
associated to PD. In order to explore whether mitochondrial mutations 
contribute to the susceptibility of these diseases, we analysed an ital -
ian family with parkinsonism and FTD.
Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood and the entire mitochon -
drial gene was amplified by PCR and sequenced. We also screened 
the proband of the family for PINK1, DJ-1, LRRK2, PGRN  and TAU 
genes  and we excluded mutations in these genes.
From the sequencing of the entire mitochondrial genome, we identi -
fied a G5783A homoplasmic mutation, already reported in literature. 
This mutation was identified in the proband (FTD + PD), in his brother 
(FTD), in his maternal uncle (PD), in his mother, in his sister but not 
in his father. Restriction enzyme digestion revealed absence of the 
mutation in 50 controls. This mutation occurs at the T arm of tRNAcys, 
resulting in the disruption of the stem structure, which may reduce the 
stability of the tRNA. In conclusion, we provided further evidence of the 
involvement of mitochondrial DNA variation in PD and FTD.
P12.023  Mutation screening of RyR2 gene for confirming 
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in cases 
of sudden unexpected deaths.
I. Valášková1,2, J. Kadlecová1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2, T. Novotný3, T. Pexa4, M. Sepši3;  
1Dpt. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty 
of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Dpt. of Internal 
Cardiology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Forensic Medicine, St. Anne´s University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Significant percentage of sudden cardiac death (SCD) 
below the age of 40 years has a genetic background, mainly due to the 
long QT syndrome (LQTS) and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventric -
ular tachycardia (CPVT). CPVT is an arrhythmogenic disease charac -
terized by stress- or exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmia, syncope, 
or early sudden death. The cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gene 
(chromosome 1q42-q43) has been identified as a gene responsible for 
CPVT inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. The RyR2 gene, which 
encodes the cardiac Ca2+ release channel, is localized across the sar -
coplasmic reticulum (SR) of cardiomyocytes. RyR2 plays a crucial role 
in the excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac muscles. There are 
over 70 human RyR2 mutation discovered so far that are clustered in 
several discrete regions of the polypeptide, which are important for the 
modulation of channel function. This work aims to discover the occur -
rence of CPVT among low-age deaths by examination on DNA level.
Method: Mutation screening of RyR2 gene is performed on genomic 
DNA samples extracted from both myocardium of death subjects and 
peripheral blood of the relatives. PCR amplified fragments covering 
areas with known mutations were analyzed by sequencing. For map -
ping of the deletions RYR2 exons, we use probes for multiplex ligation-
dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis.
Conclusion: This methodical approach enable us to identify CPVT 
causal RyR2 mutations. The cause of death determination and exami -
nation of relatives enable the recognition of CPVT, and to the relatives, 
it will offer the chance of appropriate sudden cardiac death preven -
tion.
Supported by grant IGA MZ NR/1044-3
P12.024  Genetic analysis of CCBE1  in Generalised Lymphatic 
Dysplasia
K. Kalidas1, P. Ostergaard1, F. Connell1, G. Brice2, S. Mansour2, P. Mortimer1, 
S. Jeffery1;  
1St George‘s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2South West 
Thames Regional Genetics Unit, London, United Kingdom.
Generalised lymphatic dysplasia is a congenital disorder characterised 
by extensive peripheral lymphoedema with visceral involvement. In 
some cases it presents in utero with hydrops fetalis. Autosomal domi -
nant and recessive inheritance has been reported. We have recently 
reported a pathogenic homozygous mutation in the CCBE1 gene in a 
patient with extensive, autosomal recesive, generalised lymphatic dys -
plasia and clinical features consistent with Hennekam syndrome. Al -
ders et al reported CCBE1  mutations in 5/22 patients with Hennekam 
syndrome; a syndrome characterised by widespread lymphoedema. 
Recent studies of ccbe1  in zebrafish have shown this gene to be re -
quired for lymphangiogenesis and venous sprouting. The zebrafish 
mutant, full of fluid (fof), showed very severe oedema.
Mutation screening of the  CCBE1  gene was carried out in
1. Twenty four patients with various presentations of generalised lym -
phatic dysplasia (this included patients with visceral involvement such 
as intestinal lymphangiectasia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, pleural 
effusions and pericardial effusions). 
2. Twenty patients or fetuses with non immune hydrops fetalis. 
No novel variants were identified in patients of either group. These re -
sults indicate that CCBE1  is responsible for causing generalised lym -
phatic dysplasia in only a small proportion of patients. Further studies 
elucidating the pathway in which CCBE1  has a role and its interactions 
with other genes, will possibly enable the identification of other candi -
date genes contributing to the pathogenesis of generalised lymphatic 
dysplasias
P12.025  the importance of PHOX2B  sequence analysis and 
family studies in congenital central Hypoventilation syndrome; 
primarily a polyalanine repeat disorder
S. Burton-Jones1, D. E. Fransen van de Putte2, C. Faulkner1, J. C. Evans1, T. 
Patrick1, P. Lunt3, P. Fleming4, E. K. Bijlsma5, M. Williams1;  
1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical 
Genetics, University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Clinical Genetics 
Department, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child 
Life & Health, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS) is a rare, life 
threatening condition, resulting from abnormal autonomic control of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
breathing. Other autonomic nervous system abnormalities, includ -
ing Hirschsprung disease and neuroblastoma, may feature in severe 
cases.
The paired-like homeobox gene PHOX2B  is disease-defining in CCHS. 
Approximately 90% of individuals are heterozygous for expansions of 
a 20-residue polyalanine repeat tract, with affected alleles containing 
24 to 33 alanines. Most expansions occur de novo , but mildly affected 
or asymptomatic parents mosaic for the mutation or fully heterozy -
gous, are not rare. The remaining cases have missense, nonsense or 
frameshift mutations.
Bristol has provided a specialist CCHS UKGTN service since 2005, 
supported by local clinical expertise in genetics, paediatrics and respi -
ratory medicine, and has identified 54 cases in total. 48 probands have 
polyalanine expansions, including affected non-identical twins. In 30 
families with expansion mutations where both parents were available 
for testing, 4 parents (13%) were somatic mosaics and 2 (7%) were 
fully heterozygous for the expansion, one showing non-penetrance. 
13-20% UK cases are therefore not de novo  and potentially recurrent.
Six probands have non-polyalanine-repeat mutations. Five have 
frameshift mutations (two novel, c.721_739del and c.861dupT); where 
detailed clinical information was provided, all these patients had a se -
vere neonatal onset with intestinal aganglionosis. We present a Dutch 
pedigree in which father and son are both symptomatic with variable 
severity; both have the point mutation c.419C>A (p.Ala140Glu). This 
and other cases from the Bristol cohort illustrate the importance of 
family studies in this intriguing disease, and further establish genotype/
phenotype correlations.
P12.026  A new alternative, evolutionarily conserved exon within 
the cDKL5 gene
Y. Fichou1,2, J. Nectoux1,2, T. Le Guen1,2, N. Bahi-Buisson2,3, J. Chelly1,2, T. 
Bienvenu1,2;  
1Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 2Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, 
CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
The cyclin dependent kinase-like 5 gene (CDKL5, MIM 300203) is 
composed by 20 coding exons and encodes a serine/threonine kinase 
that has been associated with the early-onset seizure variant of Rett 
syndrome (RTT, MIM 312750) and X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX, 
MIM 308350). So far more than 50 mutations, including nonsense, 
missense, splice, frameshift and microdeletions, have been reported 
in patients with CDKL5-related encephalopathy, affecting quasi-
exclusively girls. We report the coincidental finding of an additional 
123-base pair exon within the CDKL5 gene by transcript analysis in 
a human fibroblast primary culture. Bioinformatic study indicated an 
extremely conserved sequence in vertebrates both at the nucleotide 
and amino acid levels (>95% similarity in mammals), suggesting a po -
tential functional relevance. Curiously, and unexpectedly considering 
the sequence conservation, no sequence homology was found with 
other regions of the human genome. We further constructed a plasmid 
DNA including the supplemental exon to investigate the cellular pattern 
of the protein in COS-7 transfected cells and studied the expression 
of the CDKL5 transcript including this new exon in mouse tissues. Al -
though no evident difference in terms of cellular localization between 
the “wild-type” CDKL5 protein and the 41-aminoacid longer protein 
has been observed, additional experiments will be required to inves -
tigate the functional relevance of this novel, evolutionarily conserved 
domain. Most importantly, considering that all mutations have not been 
detected in atypical RTT patients, variants in this exon may contribute 
to the genetic basis of the remaining cases and are currently being 
considered for genetic screening in our laboratory.
P12.027  syndromic charcot-marie-t ooth, a neglected entity?
G. J. Braathen1,2, D. K. Bergsaker3,4, M. B. Russell1,5;  
1Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University 
Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine, Genetic 
section, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 3Department of Paediatrics, 
Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 4Frambu, Resource Centre 
for Rare Disorders, Oslo, Norway, 5Faculty Division Akershus University 
Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway.
Background. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a peripheral neu -
ropathy usually characterized by slow and progressive weakness in 
legs. The symptoms often progresses to the hands. Pes cavus is a frequent deformity. CMT is the most common inherited disorder of the 
peripheral nervous system with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 2,500. 
CMT is a heterogeneous disorder making classification a challenge. 
Clinical classification is based on distribution of muscle weakness, age 
at onset and mode of inheritance. Later neurophysiology subdivided 
CMT into type 1 and 2, depending on whether the median motor con -
duction velocity (MCV) is less or above 38 m/s. A third form has inter -
mediate MCV (25-45 m/s). CMT is also classified due to molecular 
genetic mutations. At present 43 genes are identified causing inherited 
peripheral neuropathies. The duplication of peripheral myelin protein 
22 (PMP22)  is the most common cause of CMT. Other copy number 
variants (CNV) have not yet been assigned to the phenotype.
Methods. A girl with a CMT phenotype and some additional clinical 
features was referred for investigation.
Findings. Mutation analyses for the most common CMT genes were 
negative. Further analyses revealed the cause of her de novo  phe-
notype.
Interpretation.  The involved genes explain different aspects of her phe -
notype.
P12.028  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and novel 
mutations in GJB1  and LITAF
H. Høyer1, A. K. Eek1, M. B. Russell2, G. J. Braathen1,2;  
1Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Head and 
Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.
Background: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common 
inherited disorder of the peripheral nervous system with an estimated 
prevalence of 1 in 2,500. CMT is a heterogenous disorder making clas -
sification a challenge. Neurophysiology subdivided CMT into type 1 
and 2, depending on whether the median motor conduction velocity 
(MCV) is less or above 38 m/s. A third form has intermediate MCV (25-
45 m/s). Up to date 43 genes causing CMT have been identified.
Mutations in  Gap Junction Protein, beta-1 (GJB1) / Connexin 32 (Cx32)  
on Xq13.1. is the second most common cause of CMT. Connexin pro -
teins are arranged in hexameric arrays and form gap junctions which 
facilitate the transport of ions and small molecules between cells.
Mutations in the transcription factor  Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF 
factor (LITAF) / Small Integral Protein of Lysosome/Late Endosome 
(SIMPLE)  on 16p13.3-p12 causes CMT1C.
Patients and families with CMT are regularly referred to Telemark Hos -
pital for diagnostics and genetic counselling
Methods: Novel mutations in GJB1  and LITAF  discovered during the 
last year will be presented. Pedigrees and symptomatology will be de -
scribed.
Results: Our results will be presented at the conference.
P12.029  Four novel connexin32 mutations in patients with X-linked charcot-marie-t ooth disease
T. Asadchuk , K. Mosse, N. Rumyantseva;  
National Center of Research and Applied Medicine «Mother and Child», Minsk, 
Belarus.
The CMT 1X is X-linked type of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, an in -
herited demyelinating neuropathy, associated with mutations in Cx32 
gene (GJB1) coding for the gap junction protein, connexin 32.
We identified GJB1 gene mutations in 7 of 33 (21%) male probands 
with CMT where X-linked type inheritance cannot be excluded. These 
nucleotide changes were also found in 13 of their 17 relatives including 
all the six mothers available for testing.
Four of the seven mutations are novel and associated with the severe 
phenotype. Two of these four missense mutations are c.149C>G in E1 
domain resulted in a serine at codon 50 being replaced by cysteine 
(Ser50Cys) and c.268C>A in TM2 domain (Leu90Ile). One substitution 
is nonsense - c.398G>A in TM3 domain which changes tryptophan 133 
into stop codon (Trp133Stop). One sequence variation is a rare type 
of nonstop mutation c.851G>T in C-end resulted in a stop codon being 
replaced by leucine (Stop284Leu). New missense mutations were not 
detected in normal subjects. Three known mutations Y135C, V181M 
and E208K were also identified in this group.
CMT1X caused by GJB1 mutations is the second most common type 
of CMT in Belarus. Now GJB1 is routinely screened in all CMT1 fami -
lies negative for 17p11.2 duplication and with no male to male trans -
mission.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders07
P12.030  t wo splice-site mutations in the NtRK1 gene in a 
patient with congenital insensitivity to pain an anhidrosis: a 
novel mutation in intron 16
E. Sarasola-Díez1, M. J. Garcia-Barcina1, J. A. Rodríguez2, E. Garrote3, J. 
Arístegui3;  
1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA 
/ Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Departamento de Genética, 
Antrología Física y Fisiología Animal de la UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain, 3Servicio de 
Pediatría del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco 
de Salud), Bilbao, Spain.
Congenital insensitivity to pain and anhidrosis (CIPA, #256800) is a 
rare genetic disease characterized by the lack of reaction to noxious 
stimuli and anhidrosis. It is caused by mutations in the NTRK1 gene 
(OMIM *191315), which encodes the high affinity tyrosine kinase re -
ceptor I for Neurotrophic Growth Factor (NGF).
We present the case of a female patient referred to our Hospital in or -
der to study her prolonged fever of unknown origin associated with oral 
leukokeratosis. The clinical diagnosis of CIPA was made at the age of 
8-months, and was confirmed by the detection of two splice-site muta -
tions in NTRK1. The first mutation, c.574+1G>A, already described, is 
located at the splice donnor site of intron 5. We also found a second 
mutation, c.2206-2 A>G, not previously reported in the literature, which 
is located at the splice acceptor site of intron 16. Each parent was 
confirmed to be a carrier for one of the mutations by DNA sequencing 
analysis. It has been proposed that the c.574+1G>A mutation would 
cause exon 5 skipping during NTRK1 mRNA splicing. By analysing 
mRNA from the patient, her parents, and several other relatives, we 
confirm this prediction and, more importantly, we provide evidence that 
the novel c.2206-2 A>G mutation also disrupts normal NTRK1 splicing, 
leading to the use of an alternative splice acceptor site within exon 17. 
Currently, the patient is 6 years old and her psychomotor development 
conforms to her age (RMN, SPECT and psychological study are in the 
range of normality).
P12.031  cOL7A1 mutation database
K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, C. Kowalewski2, K. 
Woźniak2, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, J. Bal1;  
1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 
2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
COL7A1 encodes collagen VII, protein responsible for epidermis-der -
mis integration. Mutations in COL7A1 cause Dystrophic Epidermolysis 
Bullosa (DEB) - genodermatose characterized by spontaneous or me -
chanically induced bullous formation. There are about 520 COL7A1 
mutations known, which result in either disturbance of protein forma -
tion, interaction and function or complete lack of collagen VII. Thus 
disease can be inherited in either dominant or recessive mode. In this 
paper we present the first COL7A1 locus specific database. The db 
project is in agreement with HGVS guidelines (den Dunnen JT, Hum 
Mutat. 2009 30:493-5). Using of the system is free of charge as well 
as logging in, which is required for submitting data. The db is aimed 
to gather all COL7A1 gene, protein and variants-related information, 
including e.g.: traditional and HGVS’s nomenclature mutation name, 
graphic view of mutations and SNPs (DNA, RNA and protein level). 
Each mutation is linked to the page comprising details as: identification 
method, pattern of inheritance, consequence of mutation on molecular 
and clinical level. Data can be easily submitted by logged in users 
after completing detailed submission form (including both molecular 
and phenotypic details). The majority of information gathered in the 
system is based on YES/NO answers thus searching and statistic tools 
are expanded. COL7A1 mutation database was designed in order to 
unify and simplify molecular diagnostics and to collect multicenter 
genotype-phenotype data, which will, as we hope, serve in the future 
to find correlation between them. Supported by NN407171134 and NN 
402233137
P12.032  mapping of an autosomal recessive cone dystrophy to 
2p12-2q12.1 in a family of five affected individuals from Oman
A. H. Alkhayat AlShehi1, A. Ganish1, F. AlMamari1, A. H. Crosby2, J. A. 
Raeburn1;  
1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 2St Goerge‘s University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
A family of five affected children age ranging from 19 to 7 years have 
been diagnosed with cone dystrophy in the ophthalmology department at Sultan Qaboos University hospital, Sultanate of Oman. The parents 
are first cousins and the disease fits the autosomal recessive pattern 
of inheritance. Linkage analysis was initiated using 10K SNP chip mi -
croarray on Affymetrix platform. Analyzing the genotypes in the affect -
ed individuals and by looking at the regions of homozygosity shared 
by the affecteds and comparing them to the parents have revealed 
mainly two regions of homozygosity. The first was 44 consecutive ho -
mozygous markers on chromosome 2 between markers rs953222; 
rs2310401 corresponding to the following cytogenetic band 2p12-
2q12.1 and the second was 12 consecutive markers in chromosome 9 
between rs888225; rs756777 corresponding to band 9q33.3-9q34.2.
Microsattelite analysis of both homozugous regions confirmed linkage 
to the region in chromosome 2 and excluded the region on chromo -
some 9. The region on chromosome 2 overlaps with region mapped for 
Jalili syndrome, 2q11. Hence we undertook sequencing of the CNNM4 
gene which is involved in Jalili syndrome that is described as auto -
somal-recessive cone-rod dystrophy and amelogenesis Imperfecta. 
However, the family that we identified has the cone dystrophy but not 
the amelogenesis imperfect.
Sequencing of the CNNM4 gene did not reveal any sequence variation 
from the normal sequence published in gene bank.
P12.033  A diagnostic approach to children with congenital 
ataxia and cerebellar atrophy
G. Zanni1, A. D‘amico1, A. Terracciano1, S. Barresi1, F. Renaldo2, M. Muglia3, F. 
Piemonte1, G. Tozzi1, R. Carrozzo1, S. Boldrini4, F. Santorelli1,5, E. Bertini1;  
1Unit of Molecular Medicine, Dept of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Childrens 
Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 
Paris, France, 3Institute of Molecular Biology CNR, Mangone, Cosenza, Italy, 
4Unit of Pathology, Bambino Gesù Childrens Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5IRCCS-
Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy.
Congenital cerebellar ataxias are heterogeneous and poorly classified 
conditions caracterized by severe neonatal hypotonia, psychomotor 
delay, followed by the appearance of ataxia within the first years of 
life. We performed muscle biopsy in a series of patients with early-
onset ataxia and neuroradiological evidence of cerebellar atrophy. Re -
duced levels of Coq10 were found in the skeletal muscle of 10 out of 
60 patients that were screened. A novel mutation in the ADCK3/Coq8 
gene (R347X) was identified in a female patient with ataxia, seizures 
and markedly reduced Coq10 content. In a 2.5 years old male patient 
with normal Coq10 levels and apparently non syndromic congenital 
ataxia with early strabismus, muscle morphology showed myopathic 
changes with autophagic vacuoles that prompted us to screen for SIL1 
gene mutations. A recurrent nonsense mutation (R111X) was identified 
in this patient, leading to early diagnosis of Marinesco-Sjogren syn -
drome. Following these studies, we think that muscle biopsy is a valu -
able diagnostic approach to this subgroup of genetic conditions and 
should be implemented in children with congenital cerebellar atrophy.
P12.034  cRYGc analysis in a family with primary congenital 
cataract
L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, O. Messina-Baas2, J. Toral-Lopez3, S. Cuevas-
Covarrubias4;  
1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Oftalmologia, 
Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, ISSEMYM, 
Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 4Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico; Facultad de 
Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
Cataract is the leading cause of reversible blindness in childhood with 
an occurrence of 1-6/10,000 live new born. Cataracts are character -
ized by the location and structure of opacities, i.e. shape, size, color 
and refractive quality. Cataract may be an isolated anomaly or part of a 
syndrome. The majority of inherited non-syndromic cataracts are trans -
mitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Mutations in the CRYG genes, 
which encode the main cytoplasmic proteins of the human lens, have 
been associated with cataracts of various appearances. The aim of the 
present study was to identify the disease locus for congenital cataract 
in a non-consanguineous family with three affected members. DNA 
from leukocytes was isolated to analyze the CRYGA-D cluster genes. 
DNA sequencing analysis of the three affected members showed a 
novel heterozygous missense mutation in the CRYGC gene. Analysis 
of the two unaffected members of the family and the normal parent 
showed a normal sequence of the CRYGA-D cluster genes. This mu -
tation was not found in a group of 120 unrelated controls discarding a Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
possible polymorphism. In this study we describe a novel mutation in 
the CRYGC causative of congenital cataract.
P12.035  A new diagnostic approach on genetic deafness, first 
cases of congenital deafness diagnosed by custom molecular 
microarray (Array cGc)
A. Palmeiro1, A. Lopes1, L. Dias1, L. Ramos2, E. Galhano3, L. Nunes4, M. 
Costeira5, P. Vidal-Ríos6, T. Lourenço4, J. Sá1,2, P. Rendeiro1, H. G. Santos1, P. 
Tavares1;  
1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra EPE, 
Coimbra, Portugal, 3Maternidade Bissaya Barreto EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 
4Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, E.P.E., Lisboa, Portugal, 5Centro 
Hospitalar do Alto Ave EPE, Guimarães, Portugal, 6Complejo Hospitalario de 
Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Introduction: Congenital hearing loss/deafness is the most common 
birth defect and the most prevalent sensorineural disorder in developed 
countries but currently only a minority of genes is included in genetic 
diagnostics. Genetic factors are considered to cause more than 50% of 
the cases of congenital deafness in children. Genetic deafness can be 
inherited, as an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked 
recessive trait, as well as by mitochondrial inheritance. Over 400 ge -
netic syndromes that include deafness have been described. Moreover, 
in some syndromes deafness may appear as the first symptom, while 
other pathological manifestations may have a later onset during devel -
opment. Molecular testing is a vital asset to complement the differential 
diagnosis between nonsyndromic and syndromic hearing loss.
Method: Using a custom microarray panel (Arrays CGC - Patent Pend -
ing) that contains 312 point mutations, identified in 32 main genes in -
volved on congenital deafness it is possible to identify the molecular 
basis of the most common forms, both syndromic and nonsyndromic.
Results: The samples analyzed were obtained from an already scru -
tinized population, so the most common genetic alterations were al -
ready excluded. We analyzed 69 cases and in 16 we detected muta -
tions or sequence variants on CDH23, GJB2, GJB3, MYO1A, MYO7A, 
OTOF, SLC26A4 and WFS1.
Conclusion: The usual diagnostic approach only analyses few genes. 
With this approach we can drastically increase the number of genes/
mutations analyzed maintaining accuracy but reducing turnaround 
time. This approach greatly enhances genetic diagnostics, allowing 
early decision-making process in patient management as well as new 
epidemiologic data.
P12.036  molecular analysis of novel and known candidate 
genes in patients with isolated congenital heart defects
A. De Luca1, A. Sarkozy2,3, V. Guida1,2, F. Lepri1, R. Ferese1,2, F. Consoli1,2, M. 
Dentici1, C. Iannascoli1, P. Vergara1, R. Vijzelaar4, A. De Zorzi5, P. Versacci6, M. 
Digilio7, B. Marino6, B. Dallapiccola8;  
1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, 
Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine „Sapienza“ University, 
Rome, Italy, 3Northern Genetic Service, Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle 
University, United Kingdom, 4MRC Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Pediatric 
Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics,“Sapienza“ University, Rome, 
Italy, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 8Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Mutations of the ZFPM2/FOG2 , GATA4 , NKX2.5  genes have been 
associated with the pathogenesis of non-syndromic congenital heart 
defects (CHDs), in particular conotruncal (CTD) and septal defects. 
Here, we aimed to better evaluate the occurrence and the prevalence 
of mutations in these genes as well as in  two novel candidate s (ISLET1  
and GDF1 ) in a cohort of 202 individuals with different CTDs, includ -
ing tetralogy of Fallot (ToF), double outlet right ventricle (DORV) and 
truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, we verified the possible occurrence 
of GATA4  gene deletions/duplications in a cohort of 161 additional 
patients, including ToF, atrial and atrioventricular septal defects and 
Ebstein anomaly. DHPLC analysis disclosed no putative pathogenic 
mutation in GATA4 , ISLET1 , and GDF1 genes. Three distinct ZFPM2/
FOG2 missense variants (Glu30Gly, Ile227Val, Met544Ile) were identi -
fied in 3 of 178 (0.6%) with ToF and 2 of 13 (15.4%) with DORV. One 
known missense change (Arg25Cys) was detected in NKX2.5 gene 
in two (1.1%) patients with ToF. MLPA analysis revealed that GATA4 
MLPA signals were all within the normal range values in all patients. 
The present results i) exclude a major contribution of GATA4 , GDF1 , and ISLET1 genes in the pathogenesis of the investigated CHDs; ii) 
corroborate the association between ZFPM2 /FOG2 mutations and 
ToF and suggest that these mutations may occur in a substantial per -
centage of patients with DORV; iii) confirm that mutations outside the 
NKX2.5 gene homeodomain are responsible for a subset of patients 
with ToF; iv) exclude a major contribution of GATA4  gene copy number 
variants in CHD pathogenesis.
P12.037  Analysis of the GJB2  and GJB  genes in italian patients 
with nonsyndromic hearing loss: frequencies, novel mutations, 
genotypes and degree of hearing loss.
P. Primignani1, P. Castorina2, F. Lalatta2, C. Radaelli1, L. C. Trotta1, L. 
Garavelli3, P. Formigoni3, A. Murri4, D. Cuda5, U. Ambrosetti6, A. Cesarani6, D. 
A. Coviello1;  
1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Service - Fondazione 
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Medical 
Genetics Service - Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4ENT 
Department - Ospedale ‘‘Guglielmo da Saliceto,’’, Piacenza, Italy, 5ENT 
Department - Ospedale ‘‘Guglielmo da Saliceto’’, Piacenza, Italy, 6ENT 
Department - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
Mutations in the GJB2  gene, which encodes the gap-junction protein 
Connexin 26 (Cx26), are the most common cause of nonsyndromic 
hearing loss (NSHL) and account for about 32% of cases. The subjects 
referred to our Hospital were affected by sensory neural deafness with 
various degrees (from mild to profound) of hearing loss (HL). Since 
January 2001 we analyzed 1102 patients and identified mutations in 
707/2204 chromosomes. We characterized 41 different mutations and 
six polymorphisms in 399 NSHL subjects. Our data confirm 35delG as 
the most frequent GJB2 mutation in the Italian population, account -
ing for about 65% of all the mutated GJB2 alleles analyzed. We also 
identified five novel variants of unknown pathogenetic significance: 
the p.V156I aminoacid substitution, the c.-216T>C, the c.-41G>C and 
the c.-96G>C heterozygous changes in the 5’UTR and the c.684C>A 
change in the 3’UTR of the gene. The GJB6  gene deletion, del( GJB6 -
D13S1830), which can cause HL in combination with GJB2  mutations 
in trans, was identified in nine patients, while the del( GJB6 -D13S1854) 
was not observed in our cohort of patients. Our study also tried to 
provide information about GJB2  genotypes and degree of HL. Pheno -
types of subjects carrying biallelic GJB2 mutations show a variable in -
tra and interfamilial degree of HL. We collected audiometric data from 
200 patients with biallelic DFNB1 mutations or with dominant mutation 
in GJB2  to determine the degree of HL to correlate the genotypes with 
the audiological phenotypes.
P12.038  A novel truncation mutation in the GJB1 gene, causing an X-linked, charcot -marie-t ooth disease.
C. Vinkler1, E. Leshinsky-Silver2, D. Lev1;  
1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Molecular 
Genetics Laboratory, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel.
X-linked CMT (CMTX) accounts for 10%-20% of all hereditary demy -
elinating neuropathies. At least five genes and loci are known to be as -
sociated with CMTX. Most common are mutations in the GJB1 gene. 
The GJB1 gene encodes the gap junction protein connexin32 (Cx32) 
Mutations in the GJB1 gene result in a demyelinating neuropathy that 
predominantly affects motor axons. Although variable expression has 
been described occasionally for the same mutation, it has been previ -
ously suggested that premature truncation mutations result in a sever 
neuropathy. We describe a family with CMTX, due to a novel truncation 
mutation with a mild to moderate presentation.
The proband is a 72 y old male who complained of mild gait distur -
bances since the age of 20 years. By the age of 43 his gait started 
to deteriorate slowly. At the age of 63 he was admitted to a rehabili -
tation center with moderate leg weakness, mild arm weakness and 
bilateral drop foot. EMG studies were compatible with sensorymotor 
axonal neuropathy. Family history was compatible with an X linked 
inheritance pattern with no male to male transmission. The molecular 
study revealed a c.633-634insTA mutation in exon 2 of the GJB1 gene. 
This novel mutation creates a frameshift, resulting in a premature stop 
codon (p.Leu212fsX42)
Most GJB1 mutations cause neuropathy through loss of normal Cx32 
function.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
We suggest that a less severe phenotype in this family may be due to 
the rather distal truncation of the protein, retaining some of the normal 
function of the protein.
P12.039  Decreased expression of PtEN transcript level in 
a cowden syndrome patient without detectable PtEN gene 
mutations
D. Turchetti1, L. M. Pradella1, R. Zuntini1, I. Neri2, C. Misciali2, G. Gasparre1, G. 
Romeo1;  
1Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2Unit of Dermatology, Bologna, Italy.
Cowden Syndrome (CS) is an autosomal dominant disease character -
ized by multiple mucocutaneous lesions, benign tumors and cancer 
predisposition.
80-85% of patients with CS carry detectable mutations in the PTEN 
gene. These mutations cause decreased protein expression, rais -
ing the hypothesis of a haploinsufficiency mechanism underlying CS 
pathogenesis.
Mutational analysis of the PTEN gene, based on direct sequencing of 
the entire coding sequence and promoter region and on the search for 
deletions and duplications with MLPA, is performed at our laboratory in 
CS and CS-like patients to a diagnostic purpose. So far, in all patients 
with CS but one we have found pathogenic PTEN mutations, including 
two novel small deletions in exon 5 and 6.
In the only patient without detectable PTEN mutations, we performed 
PTEN expression analysis based on qReal Time PCR on cDNA ob -
tained from the peripheral blood cells of the patient and Epstein Barr 
virus-transformed human B lymphocytes.
The analysis showed that PTEN transcript was about 40% lower com -
pared to healthy controls, being, however, higher than in a patient har -
bouring a frameshift mutation predicted to induce mRNA decay. The 
reduction of the transcript found in this case led us to hypothesize an 
epigenetic mechanism altering PTEN expression, which is currently 
under investigation. If confirmed, this would represent a novel, and 
probably uncommon, mechanism of PTEN dysfunction, as a previous 
study on PTEN-negative CS patients failed to find decreased expres -
sion of PTEN transcript levels despite decreased protein expression, 
suggesting a dysregulation at protein level.
P12.040**  involvement of LTBP  and FBLN  mutations in 
patients with autosomal recessive cutis laxa : clinical and 
molecular considerations
P. Vlummens , T. Van Damme, F. Malfait, L. Van Laer, A. De Paepe;  
Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
Hereditary cutis laxa delineates a heterogeneous group of conditions 
characterized by abnormalities of the elastic fibers and presenting with 
loose, sagging and inelastic skin and variable systemic manifestations. 
Mutations in the fibulin-5 gene ( FBLN5 ) cause an autosomal recessive 
form of cutis laxa (ARCL) characterized by severe skin laxity, pulmo -
nary emphysema and peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis. Very few 
FBLN5  mutations however, have been identified so far and the ge -
netic defect remains unknown in a significant proportion of patients. 
Recently the gene encoding the latent transforming growth factor-beta 
binding protein 4 ( LTBP4 ) was shown to be implicated in families with 
an ARCL phenotype. In the current study, we examined a cohort of 
16 patients with ARCL. Direct sequencing of FBLN5  in all patients 
identified 1 known and 1 novel mutation (p.C217R and p.E391X) in 
2 probands, whereas molecular analysis of LTBP4  in the 14 remain -
ing probands identified 9 novel loss-of-function mutations (p.R448X, 
p.C617X, p.S803X, p.Q1221X, p.Q1296X, p.R1377X, c.1263delC, 
c.4114dupC and c.780+2T>G) and 1 known mutation (c.4127insC) in 
a total of 8 patients. These results show that LTBP4  mutations are 
more prevalent than FBLN5  mutations in ARCL. Phenotypic com -
parison between LTBP4  and FBLN5  mutation positive patients shows 
overlapping but also distinguishing clinical features, i.e. LTBP4  muta -
tion positive patients have more severe gastro-intestinal and urinary 
tract involvement. Our results also suggest LTBP4  as the first gene to 
test in the molecular work up of patients with ARCL.P12.041  Simultaneous detection of common cystic fibrosis 
mutations by reverse-hybridization teststrips
H. Puehringer, B. Rauscher, C. Oberkanins ;  
ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive 
disorders, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 3000 live births in 
Caucasians. CF is caused by mutations in the cystic-fibrosis trans -
membrane regulator (CFTR) gene, encoding a chloride channel pro -
tein. Patients with classical CF accumulate viscous mucus in the respi -
ratory and gastrointestinal system, leading to chronic lung infections, 
excess salt loss, difficulties in digestion, and ultimately to a shortened 
life expectancy. More than 1000 CFTR mutations have been described 
to date, the majority being very rare or private. The most frequent mu -
tation worldwide F508del accounts for 30-72% of CF chromosomes 
depending upon ethnicity. Overall there is great heterogeneity in the 
remaining pathogenic mutations, as type and distribution vary sub -
stantially between populations.
We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay (Cystic Fibrosis 
StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous analysis of common CFTR 
mutations. The assay covers 23 mutations recommended by the 
ACMG plus 10 additional ones prevalent in different parts of Europe, 
as well as the IVS8 polyT (5T/7T/9T) variants. Thus a coverage of 
70-93% can be obtained almost all over Europe. The test is based on 
multiplex DNA amplification and hybridization to teststrips presenting a 
parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotide probes for each mutant 
and wild-type allele. The procedure is rapid, simple and convenient, 
accessible to automation and requires very small amounts of samples, 
which is of particular importance for prenatal diagnosis and newborn 
screening. Currently the Cystic Fibrosis StripAssay is validated in a 
multi-center study. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at)
P12.042  Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene mutations in patients from the middle Black sea region of turkey
H. Bağcı1, S. Güneş1, N. Kara1, E. Taşkın1, N. Karakuş1, K. Özdamar2;  
1Ondokuz Mayıs University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, 
Samsun, Turkey, 2Osman Gazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of 
Biostatistics, Eskişehir, Turkey.
Cystic fibrosis (CF; OMIM no.#219700) is the most common autoso -
mal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population (1/2500). Disease 
is caused by mutations in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR; 602421) gene. The aim of this study was to deter -
mine the frequencies of the 36 mutations in CFTR gene in patients with 
CF from the middle Black Sea region of Turkey.
We screened 254 patients with suspicion of CF for CFTR mutations 
using a multiplex PCR based reverse hybridization assay.
Overall, CFTR mutations were detected in 13.0% of the patients, while 
no mutations were detected in 87.0%. F508del allele was present at 
8.8%; N1303K 0.8%; I148T 1.2%; W1282X 0.8%; 2789+5G-A 0.4%; 
R1162X 0.4%; 1706del117 0.4%, E60X 0.4%, and dele2,3 0.4%. Of 
the 33 patients with CFTR gene mutation(s), 24% were homozygotes, 
70% were heterozygotes with single mutations, and 6% was com -
pound heterozygotes with two mutations.
We were able to identify 10 different allelic combinations of the 36 
mutations tested in CFTR gene in Turkish patients in whom CF was 
suspected. The data seems to indicate that the Turkish population may 
have variable genetic heterogeneity at the CFTR locus.
P12.043  cFtR mutations in newborns with 
hypertrypsinogenemia in Russian population
N. V. Petrova , Z. A. Kusova, T. A. Vasilyeva, E. E. Timkovskaya, N. Y. 
Kashirskaya, N. I. Kapranov, R. A. Zinchenko;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF; OMIM no.219700) is the most common severe au -
tosomal recessive disorder in Caucasians caused by mutations in the 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) gene. 
The spectrum of presentation of cystic fibrosis (CF) is significantly var -
ied. Neonatal hypertrypsinogenemia is one of the clinical symptoms 
due to the functional insufficiency in the pancreas. Neonatal screening 
for CF consists of the immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) test usually as 
the first step. The aim was to search the CFTR mutations common in 
Russian CF patients in newborns with the first positive IRT test result.
DNA samples extracted from dried blood spots of 990 newborns with Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders10
the first positive IRT test result were analyzed for 11 CFTR muta -
tions (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), F508del, Idel507, 1677delTA, 2184insA, 
2143delT, 2183AA>G, 2184delA, 394delTT, 3821delT, L138insA). All 
newborns were born Moscow during 01.01.2008 to 31.12.2008 period. 
Screened mutations shared 67,5% out of all mutant alleles of CF pa -
tients from Russia. MultiplexPCR and gel electrophoresis were car -
ried out for mutation screening. 5 persons with two CFTR mutations 
(3 - F508del/F508del, 1 - CFTRdele2,3(21kb)/CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 
1 - F508del/2184insA) and 38 persons with one mutant CFTR allele 
(26 heterozygous for F508del, 5 - CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 2 - 2143delT, 
2 - 2184insA, 1 - 3821delT, 2 - L138ins) were revealed during the in -
vestigation.
The total frequency of identified CF mutant alleles in Moscow newborns 
with the first positive IRT test result was 0.02424 (0.01883÷0.03073). 
This evaluation is significantly higher than the frequency of these 
mutations in the Russian population defined previously (0.00642 
(0.0041÷0.00951; χ2=29,26; p<0.001).
P12.044  Phenotypic consequences of the ΔF508 mutation in 
pancreatic insufficient Iranian CF patients
A. Khodadad1, S. S. Banihosseini2, H. Asgharian3, S. Hasheminasab2;  
1Children‘s Medical Center Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
SciencesChildren Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Students’ Scientific Research Center (SSRC), 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Department of Biotechnology, University College of science, University of 
Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal recessive autosomal 
disease in European populations, with an estimated incidence of one in 
2000 live births. Hundreds of mutations in the causative gene, CFTR, 
have been identified. The ΔF508 mutation is the most common mutation 
and constitutes approximately 70% of the mutated alleles worldwide. 
CF is associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum, and the spectrum 
of phenoptypes varies in different geographical regions and amongst 
different ethnicities. Homozygosity of the ΔF508 mutation is generally 
associated with a very severe phenotype. Here, we aimed to assess 
the overall phenotypic effects of the ΔF508 mutation in a subgroup of 
Iranian CF patients exhibiting pancreatic insufficiency. Genotype/phe -
notype correlations of patients homozygous for the ΔF508 mutation, 
heterozygous for this mutation, and those not harboring a ΔF508 allele 
were assessed. Thirty six patients were studied. Demographic, clinical, 
radiologic and paraclinical data were recorded. The ΔF508 mutation 
was screened by an allele specific PCR protocol. Descriptive and ana -
lytical statistics of the results were performed using SPSS16 software 
and the χ-squared test. Seven (19.4%) patients were heterozygous for 
ΔF508, 2 (5.6%) were homozygous, and 27 (75%) did not harbor the 
mutation. Occurrence of dyspnea and bronchiectasia was significantly 
higher in homozygous patients compared to the group without a ΔF508 
allele. Amount of chloride ion in the sweat, and fat droplets in the stool 
were also higher in the homozygous group. No other statistically sig -
nificant difference was observed among the groups.
P12.045  mutational analysis of the DCX  and LIS1  genes in 
patients with Lissencephaly and subcortical band heterotopia 
from southern italy 
V. Greco1, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. 
Provenzano1,2, P. Tarantino1,2, V. Scornaienchi1, A. Gambardella1,3, G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, 
2Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology, University 
of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
Classical lissencephaly (LIS) and subcortical band heterotopia (SBH) 
or ‚double cortex syndrome’, are neuronal migration disorders asso -
ciated with epilepsy and mental retardation. SBH is usually caused 
by mutations in the doublecortin (DCX ) (Xq22.3-q23) gene, and much 
less frequently in the LIS1 ( 17p13.3) gene. Both genes encode pro -
teins involved in microtubule homeostasis. DCX mutations predomi -
nantly cause SBH in heterozygous females and severe lissencephaly 
in males, although rare males with SBH and DCX  mutations have been 
reported. In this study, we have analyzed familial and sporadic patients 
with SBH or LIS from Southern Italy to investigate abnormalities of the 
DCX  gene. We have performed a mutational analysis of this gene in 7 
patients (5 sporadic and 2 familial) with SBH or LIS by direct sequenc -ing; esonic rearrangements were carried out by multiplex ligation-de -
pendent probe amplification (MLPA). We have found a stop codon mu -
tation (R303X) in the exon V of the DCX gene in one unrelated female 
with SBH and we have excluded deletions and duplications by MLPA 
in all the patients. These preliminary data suggest an involvement of 
other genes besides DCX , unless some variants are located in the 
unexplored 5-untranslated region or in the promotor sequences of this 
gene. The analysis of the other major gene implicated in these disor -
ders, LIS1, is still in progress. However, since a small percentage of 
genetically undiagnosed cases of lissencephaly have been reported, it 
would be interesting to extend our study to other genes, such as ARX, 
TUBA1A, FLNA , involved in cortical development.
P12.046  mutational screening of the 35delG of the connexin 26 
gene among Libyan Non syndromic Recessive deafness cases
A. Elwindi1, K. M. M. Telesi1, E. Zarik1, H. Rtemi1, S. Masmoudi2, M. M. Sharif1, 
S. S. Saleh1, N. S. Enattah1;  
1Biotechnology Research Center (BTRC), Twisha, Tripoli, Libya, Tripoli, Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya, 2Laboratory of human molecular genetics, Medical faculty, 
Sfax, tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia.
A single mutation (35delG) in the GJB2 gene, encoding the gap-junc -
tion protein connexin 26, accounts for the majority of nonsyndromic re -
cessive deafness (NSRD) in many different populations. This mutation 
represents a deletion of a guanine within a strecth of six Gs between 
nucleotide positions +30 and +35 of the GJB2 cDNA (35delG). The 
aim of this study is to determine the frequency of this mutation among 
the Libyan NSRD patients. To screen for this mutation, we analyzed 
the genomic DNAs of 139 affected patients, originating from different 
parts of the western Libya and were genotyped by direct restriction 
enzyme analysis of the targeted amplified PCR products. Out of 139 
samples, 11 samples were heterozygous for the 35delG mutation and 
were verified by direct sequencing. This result shows that most likley 
several genetic loci uderlie the NSRD in Libya as 35 delG mutation 
were found to expalin only 8% ofthe NSRD cases. Further analysis of 
the GJB2 gene and other deafness genomic loci in Libyan patients is 
warranted.
P12.047  Homozygosity for iVs1+1G>A GJB2  (connexin-26) 
splice site mutation in 73 unrelated patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss from East siberia
N. A. Barashkov1, L. U. Dzhemileva2, S. A. Fedorova1, F. M. Terutin3, E. E. 
Fedotova3, E. K. Khusnutdinova2;  
1Yakut Research Centre of Complex medical problems, Siberian Branch of 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Republican Hospital ¹1 – National Centre 
of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
We studied GJB2 mutation spectrum in patients with nonsyndromic 
hearing loss (NSHL) in the Sakha Republic (East Siberia, Russia). A 
total of 150 patients with NSHL of different ethnic affiliation (Cauca -
sians and Asians) were analyzed by PCR-SSCP and further sequenc -
ing of GJB2 gene. The molecular screening of IVS1+1G>A was per -
formed using by PCR-RFLP method [Sirmaci et al., 2006], detection 
of del(GJB6-D13S1830), del(GJB6-D13S1854) was carried out using 
appropriate protocols [del Castillo et al., 2005].
GJB2  mutations (IVS1+1G>A, 35delG, V27I, M34T, V37I, 312del14, 
333-334delAA, R127H, E114G) and one large deletion of 342kb - 
del(GJB6-D13S1830) were found in 50.9% of Caucasian and 68.9% 
of Asian patients chromosomes. One of the common mutation in 
Caucasian (Russian) patients is 35delG, in Asian (Yakut) patients is 
IVS1+1G>A. We found 73 unrelated patients with IVS1+1G>A muta -
tion in homozygote state, in 18 individuals IVS1+1G>A was detected 
in compound heterozygote state with other GJB2  mutations. Molecular 
screening of IVS1+1G>A in hearing individuals from 6 populations of 
Sakha Republic (Yakuts, Dolgans, Evenks, Evens, Yukaghirs, Rus -
sians) showed that it was one of the common allelic variant in Turkic-
speaking populations of Yakuts and Dolgans. This is a first report of 
IVS1+1G>A in East Asians population. High prevalence of IVS1+1G>A 
in Yakut isolate population may be a result of common founder effect.
This work was supported by RFBR (09-04-01123-à) and RHSF (08-
06-84602a/U).Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders11
P12.048  GJB2 caused hearing loss in Russia
E. A. Bliznetz1, V. A. Galkina1, T. G. Markova2, G. N. Matyushchenko1, A. V. 
Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2National 
Research Centre for Audiology and Hearing Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Mutations in Connexin 26 gene ( GJB2 ) are responsible for more 
than half of all cases of prelingual nonsyndromic recessive deafness 
(PNSRD) in Caucasians. The carrier frequency of the c.35delG muta -
tion in GJB2  gene was found to be as high as 1-4% in the European 
populations. The aim of this study was to estimate GJB2  caused cases 
fraction and mutation spectrum in 367 Russian patients with PNSRD. 
The c.35delG mutation frequency was most high and was found to be 
79% in all mutant chromosomes. Therefore, from homozygous and 
heterozygous/compound heterozygous c.35delG carriers frequen -
cies, the calculated portion of GJB2  caused deafness is to be 47%. 
The c.35delG mutation frequency was calculated to be 77% in GJB2  
caused cases. Another mutations c.-3202+1G>A or IVS+1G>A (4%), 
c.313_326del14 (3%), c.235delC (3%), c.167delT (2%), p.Glu120del 
(1%), p.Leu90Pro (1%), p.Met34Thr (1%), p.Trp24X (1%) and found in 
one chromosome mutations p.Arg32His, p.Leu205Pro, p.Glu129Lys, 
p.Arg184Gln, c.-3224C>A, c.129delG, c.290_291insA, p.Gly200Arg, 
which last four are novel, were revealed at compound heterozygous or 
homozygous state. Five questionable sequence variations (p.Val27Ile, 
p.Val37Ile and novel c.*3C>A being 1% apiece; p.Val153Ile and 
p.Gly160Ser in 1 chromosome) was found at heterozygous state; only 
in one patient p.Val37Ile was compound heterozygous with c.35delG. 
The mutation 309 kb del in GJB6  gene (delGJB6-D13S1830) was not 
found in the patients with one mutant chromosome only. That, in gen -
eral in GJB2  caused deafness, the portion of patients with one mutant 
allele only remains to be 17%, in which 12% are patients heterozygous 
at c.35delG, is to have been investigated.
P12.049  spectrum and frequency of SLC2A  mutations among 
czech patients with non-syndromic hearing loss
R. Pourová1, P. Janoušek1, M. Jurovčík1, M. Dvořáková1, M. Malíková1, D. 
Rašková2, O. Bendová3, Z. Kabelka1, J. Astl3, P. Seeman1;  
1Charles University in Prague, Second Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 2Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Charles University in Prague, 
First Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mutations in SLC26A4  cause Pendred syndrome (PS) - hearing loss 
with goitre - or DFNB4 - non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) with inner 
ear abnormalities as Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct (EVA) or Mondini 
Dysplasia (MD). We tested 303 unrelated Czech patients with early 
NSHL, all GJB2  negative, for SLC26A4  mutations and evaluated their 
clinical and radiological phenotype. Among 115 available HRCT/MRI 
scans we detected 3 MD (2.6%), 3 Mondini-like affections (2.6%) and 
16 EVA (13 bilateral - 19.2% and 15.6% respectively), 61 HRCT/MRI 
scans (73.4%) were EVA/MD negative. We found mutation(s) in 26 
patients (8.6%) and biallelic mutations in 8 patients (2.7%) out of 303 
tested. In 18 of 26 (69%) patients with at least one mutation, no sec -
ond mutation could be detected even using MLPA. The spectrum of 
SLC26A4  mutations in Czech NSHL patients is broad without any 
prevalent mutation. We detected 21 different mutations of which 4 are 
novel. The most frequent mutations in Czech patients are p.Val138Phe 
and p.Leu445Trp representing 18% and 8.9% of pathogenic alleles re -
spectively. The other mutations have not been found more than twice. 
Among 13 patients with bilateral EVA, biallelic mutations were detect -
ed in 6 patients (50%). In EVA-negative patients no biallelic mutations 
were found but 4.9% had monoallelic mutations. SLC26A4  mutations 
are present mostly in patients with EVA/MD and/or progressive HL and 
those with affected siblings.
Supported by Czech Ministry of Health Grant Agency - IGA NS 9913/4 
and VZ FNM 64203/6501.
P12.050  Unclear interactions of GJB2 and mitochondrial DNA 
mutations in families presenting non-syndromic deafness
M. B. Petersen1, M. Grigoriadou1, G. S. Korres1, E. Ferekidou1, D. Kandiloros2, 
S. Korres2, H. Kokotas1;  
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s 
Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology 
- Head and Neck Surgery, Athens University Medical School, Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are present in less than one 
per cent of children with prelingual deafness, but more frequent at a 
later age. In the Caucasian population, at least 5% of postlingual, non-
syndromic hearing impairment is due to known mtDNA mutations, rep -
resenting the most frequent cause of hearing loss after the 35delG mu -
tation in the GJB2 gene encoding connexin 26. MtDNA mutations usu -
ally lead to progressive hearing loss with an age of onset varying from 
childhood to early adulthood. Interestingly, there is a great variability of 
phenotype between individuals harboring the same mitochondrial mu -
tation, even within the same family, and the phenotype may range from 
profound deafness to completely normal hearing. In the past years, the 
debate on mitochondrial mutations has been about penetrance, tissue 
specificity and the mechanisms of modifier genes that can modulate 
the severity of the phenotypic expression of the deafness-associated 
mtDNA mutations. A synergism between GJB2 and A1555G mtDNA 
mutations has been suggested and can be explained by an ability to 
maintain the normal turnover rate of the connexin 26 gap junction pro -
tein because of the reduced amount of ATP caused by the A1555G 
mutation. Here we present families originating from Spain, Japan, and 
Greece, all harboring one GJB2 and one deafness-causing mtDNA 
mutation, and we discuss the impact of the coexistence of mitochon -
drial and GJB2 mutations in these families.
P12.051  Low penetrance of the G7444A mitochondrial DNA 
deafness-causing mutation in a Greek family
H. Kokotas1, L. Yang2, M. Grigoriadou1, Y. Gyftodimou1, G. S. Korres1, E. 
Ferekidou1, D. Kandiloros3, S. Korres3, M. X. Guan2, M. B. Petersen1;  
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s 
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children‘s 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 3Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Athens University Medical 
School, Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Mitochondria harbor their own DNA, known as mtDNA, encoding cer -
tain essential components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and 
protein synthesis apparatus. MtDNA mutations have an impact on cel -
lular ATP production and many of them are undoubtedly a factor that 
contributes to sensorineural deafness, including both syndromic and 
non-syndromic forms. Mitochondrial disease is characterized by an 
impressive degree of variation, and both inter- and even intrafamilial 
variation is the rule rather than the exception. The G7444A mtDNA mu -
tation affects COI (the precursor of tRNASer(UCN)), encoding the first 
subunit of cytochrome oxidase. The mutation has been associated with 
non-syndromic hearing loss in only a few families worldwide, and has 
been reported alone or in cosegregation with other mtDNA mutations. 
In this study we describe the first Greek family with the G7444A mtDNA 
mutation, which to our knowledge is the first reported also harboring 
the GJB2 35delG mutation. The proband, his brother and their mother 
had the G7444A mtDNA mutation and also the GJB2 35delG mutation 
in heterozygosity. The phenotype of the family members carrying the 
two mutations was extremely variable; the proband had hearing loss 
and various other symptoms; his brother had speech delay but normal 
hearing and oral communication skills; the mother had normal hearing 
and speech. Our study demonstrates a low penetrance of the G7444A 
mtDNA mutation in this family, and indicates that a possible synergism 
between the G7444A mtDNA mutation and the GJB2 35delG mutation 
seems rather unclear.
P12.052  molecular analysis of patients with congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia in Uberaba and Uberlândia region, mG, Brazil
R. L. Silva-Grecco1,2, M. D. B. Silva2, U. R. Souza2, R. J. Petroli2, F. B. Coeli2, 
M. A. S. Balarin1, H. M. C. Palhares1,3, M. Borges3, D. C. Gomes4, M. P. de 
Mello2;  
1Laboratório da Disciplina de Genética Humana, Universidade Federal do 
Triângulo Mineiro – UFTM, Uberaba - MG, Brazil, 2Laboratório de Genética 
Molecular Humana do Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética 
(CBMEG), Universidade Estadual de Campinas – UNICAMP, Campinas - SP, 
Brazil, 3Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Universidade Federal do Triângulo 
Mineiro - UFTM, Uberaba - MG, Brazil, 4Disciplina de Endocrinologia, 
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia - UFU, Uberlândia - MG, Brazil.
Deficiency of 21-hydroxilase (21-OHD) is the most common form of 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), an autosomal recessive disor -
der. Clinical forms of CAH are divided as: classical (salt-wasting or Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders12
simple virilizing) and non-classical form. This variability is associated 
with mutations in the CYP21A2  gene that in 85% of the cases are 
derived from its non-functional pseudogene ( CYP21A1P ). Analyses 
of deletions, large gene conversions and pseudogene-derived muta -
tions in a group of patients with 21-OHD were performed. Patients are 
from a geographic region in Brazil different from those already studied. 
Molecular genotypes were obtained for 121 subjects representing 33 
unrelated families. Eleven children (31.4%) presented with the salt-
wasting, two (5.6%) with the simple virilizing, twenty (60%) with the 
non-classical, and two (5.6%) have not been classified. From a total of 
21 affected alleles segregating in the patients with the classical form 
19% and 14% carried, respectively, large gene conversions and dele -
tions. Each of pseudogene-derived mutations IVS2-13A/C>G, I172N 
and cluster 6 was found in 9.5% and Q318X was identified in 4,8%. 
IVS2-2A>G and 992_993insA mutations that are not pseudogene-de -
rived were identified in two alleles. Seven out of the 34 affected al -
leles in the non-classic presented the mutation V281L (20.5%). Within 
this group, conversion, IVS2-13A/C>G and I172N were found each in 
one allele (3%). Nineteen and 70% alleles remained undetermined, 
respectively, in classical and non-classical forms. Comparing to others 
studies in Brazil, frequencies for conversion and deletions are higher 
for the group studied here indicating that regional characteristics within 
the country might influence mutation frequencies.
P12.053  Novel Homozygous mutation in DSP causing skin 
Fragility-Woolly Hair syndrome: report of a large family and 
review of the desmoplakin-related phenotypes
M. A. Al-Owain , S. Wakeel;  
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Desmoplakin is member of the plakin family of cytoskeletal linkers. 
Along with other proteins, plakins are crucial for the function of the 
desmosomes. Linking desmoplakin to certain types of cardiocutane -
ous syndromes has been a hot topic recently. Skin fragility-woolly hair 
syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder involving the des -
mosomes and is caused by mutation in the desmoplakin gene ( DSP). 
We report five members from a large family with skin fragility-woolly 
hair syndrome. The proband is a fourteen-year-old girl with palmoplan -
tar keratoderma, woolly hair, variable alopecia, dystrophic nails, and 
excessive blistering to trivial mechanical trauma. Cardiac evaluation 
revealed normal heart. The skin biopsy from a blister showed variably 
necrotic roof and moderate spongiosis in the adjacent epidermis. Ho -
mozygosity mapping and linkage analysis revealed a high LOD score 
of 4.7 in the region in the short arm of chromosome 6 that harbors the 
DSP gene. Full sequencing of the DSP gene demonstrated a novel ho -
mozygous c.7097 G>A (p.R2366H) mutation in all affected members, 
and the parents were heterozygous. This is the report of the 3rd case/
family of the skin fragility-woolly hair syndrome in the literature. We 
also present a clinical and molecular review of various desmoplakin-
related phenotypes, with emphasis on onset of cardiomyopathy. The 
diagnostic approach to this family depicts the value of linkage analysis 
versus the candidate gene strategy.
P12.054  DFNB1 hearing loss in iran
N. Mahdieh1, A. Shirkavand2, M. Raeisi2, H. Bagherian2, Z. Shahab Movahed2, 
M. Masoudifard2, M. Mashayekhi2, F. Keshavarzi3, S. Zeinali4,2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar‘s Human Genetic 
Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Sanandej Azad University, 
Sanandej, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: DFNB1 is the most prevalent locus causing nonsyndromic 
sensorineural hearing loss in many populations. Mutations in GJB2 & 6 
genes are the main cause of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hear -
ing loss (ARNSHL). Mutation detection is essential for carrier detection 
and genetic counseling of the families affected by hearing loss.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 91 patients from fifty fami -
lies affected by ARNSHL. Clinical studies and genetic counseling were 
performed for all families. GJB2 and GJB6 genes were sequenced 
directly. Also, we checked three known large deletions in GJB6 gene. 
We also compared our results with the previous studies in Iranian 
populations.
Results: Frequency of GJB2 mutations was 20% in this study. Here, we 
report three novel mutations in GJB2 gene: 313-322delAAGTTCAT -CA, E110D and G12D. Neither point mutations nor large deletions in 
GJB6 gene were found. Mean frequency of GJB2 mutations was 18% 
in Iranian populations.
Discussion: GJB2 and GJB6 mutations are not major causes of hear -
ing loss in Iranian groups compared to European cohorts. We suggest 
other genes may be involved in our populations. However, GJB2 gene 
should be checked for all patients, at first.
P12.055  most distal Renal t ubular Acidosis (dRt A) cases 
in cyprus are caused by two ATPV1B1 founder mutations 
originating around 17th century Ac . First prenatal diagnosis.
K. Voskarides1, A. Elia2, P. Demosthenous1, A. Michalopoulou3, M. Malliarou3, 
E. Georgaki4, Y. Athanasiou5, C. Patsias5, A. Pierides6, C. Deltas1;  
1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 
2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, 
Cyprus, 3First Department of Paediatrics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 
4Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Agia Sophia Childrens Hospital, Athens, 
Greece, 5Department of Nephrology, Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 
6Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Mutations in the ATP6V1B1  gene (subunit B1 of apical H+ ATPase) 
cause a recessive form of distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA), associ -
ated also with early sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). In this study, 
nine dRTA families from Cyprus and one from Greece were analyzed 
for mutations in ATP6V1B1  gene by DNA re-sequencing and PCR-
RFLPs.
Results show that 78% of dRTA cases in Cyprus are caused by 
229+1G>T and R157C mutations in ATP6V1B1  gene. Both mutations 
originate to common founders as it has been proved by flanking mic -
rosatellite markers and haplotype analysis. 229+1G>T mutation was 
estimated to be older than 400-yo through Linkage Disequilibrium es -
timation and a specific equation. The mutations are not clustered in 
specific geographic regions of the island, probably due their old age. 
No genotype - phenotype correlation was found for these two founder 
mutations with relation to progressive SNHL. A known (L81P) and a 
novel mutation (912delT) were found in the Greek family. Prenatal di -
agnosis was performed for one Cypriot family, after parents demand, 
showing that the embryo was heterozygous carrier.
Existence of only two ATP6V1B1 mutations in the Cypriot population 
is an advantage for easy and fast molecular diagnosis. The age of 
onset of SNHL varies in our patients and probably is not related to 
ATP6V1B1 genotypes. Effective therapy for most of the syndrome 
symptoms is not satisfactory for some parents who choose prenatal 
diagnosis to ensure their child’s health.
P12.056  Detection of Duchene muscular dystrophy carriers with 
quantitative fluorescent PCR
A. Kuskucu1,2, N. Buyru2, P. Oflazer3, S. Hacihanefioglu2;  
1Bakirkoy Women and Children‘s Health Education and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Cerrahpasa School of Medicine Dept. 
Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul University Istanbul School og 
Medicine Dept. Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is most common X linked neu -
romuscular disease. DMD is progressive, lethal and results from mu -
tations in Dystrophin gene at Xp21.2. Partial gene deletions respon -
sible for up to 60-65% DMD cases and 5-10% of cases result from 
gene duplications which are located in two “Hot spot” regions. Point 
mutations and insertion of few nucleotides account for the remaining 
cases (25-30%). Mutations are either inherited from female carriers 
(2/3) or occur de novo (1/3). In affected males, deletions can be easily 
detected using multiplex PCR. But determining female carrier status 
is difficult. This difficulty reflected in the great variety of techniques 
that have been used for this purpose, such as linkage analysis, FISH, 
MLPA. In our study we used gene dosage method quantitative fluo -
rescent PCR (QF PCR). QF PCR refers to the amplification of DNA 
fragment using fluorescence-labeled primers, followed by quantitative 
analysis to determine copy number of DNA fragments. We used this 
method to determine deletions in 23 DMD patients, who were previ -
ously diagnosed and 24 female in carrier status. We tested 18 exons, 
promoter region and STR markers as internal control. We found the 
same results, which previously reported, in 19 patients. In 3 patients 
we found an extra exon deletion and in 1 patient we found less exon 
deletion than previously found. In 19 families females were carriers. 
As a result we conclude that QF PCR is a fast, reproducible robust Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
method for detection of deletions of DMD patients and it’s useful for 
carrier screening.
P12.057  The first MLPA analysis of dystrophin gene 
duplications in iranian DmD/BmD patients
M. Hayat Nosaeid1, S. Fallah Mohammad2, S. Jamali1, R. Mahdian1, L. 
Kokabee1, A. Hosseinian3, S. Zeinali1;  
1Molecular medicine department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Genetics Research 
Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahid Rajaei Cardiovascular 
Medical and Research Center, Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy and Becker Muscular Dystrophy can be 
caused by deletions, duplications or point mutations in the DMD gene. 
Partial gene duplications account for up to 5-10 % of DMD and up to 
5- 19% of BMD cases. Cases with gene duplication in DMD/BMD are 
determined by quantitative methods such as MAPH, Sothern blotting 
and Q-PCR that are laborious and technically demanding. We have 
applied multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay 
to simultaneously screen all 79 DMD gene exons for deletions and du -
plications in DMD/BMD patients. MLPA was performed using the SAL -
SA MLPA kit P034-A2 and P035-A2 (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands) based on the instruction of manufacture. MLPA samples 
consisted of approximately 200 ng of genomic DNA. All amplified frag -
ments were separated using capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM 
3130 Genetic Analyzer. The area under peak for each individual ampli -
fied fragment was measured using the gene marker software (v.1.6). 
Analysis of mutations was performed in 20 unrelated DMD patients 
previously found to be negative for large deletions by standard multi -
plex PCR assays. Gene duplication was found in five patients (25%) 
with various lengths from 4 to 22 exons across dystrophin gene. This 
is the first report of the relative frequency of duplicational mutations 
in Iranian DMD/BMD patients. The DMD MLPA test provides a simple 
and cheap DNA- based test for deletion/duplication screening of total 
dystrophin gene.This technique can follow by Real-time PCR assay to 
confirm the genetic defects in DMD gene and to improve the precision 
of genetic counseling.
P12.058  High Resolution Agilent 244K oligoarray CGH analysis of a patient with DmD and mR
S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Tzetis1, N. Vogiatzakis1, K. Kekou1, K. Giannikou1, A. 
Pampanos1, A. Dinopoulos2, E. Kanavakis1;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 23rd Dept. of 
Pediatrics, University Hospital “ATTIKON”, Athens, Greece.
The dystrophinopathies include a spectrum of muscle disease caused 
by mutations in the DMD gene encoding for dystrophin. The clinical 
phenotype is variable, ranging from mild (muscle cramps, asymptom -
atic increase in creatine phosphate kinase), to severe (progressive 
muscle disease, classified as Duchenne - Becker muscular dystro -
phy). Dystrophin is expressed in skeletal muscles, cardiac muscle, ret -
ina and brain. The DMD gene has 7 known promoters, among these, 
Dp71 and Dp140 are particularly abundant in foetal brain, which has 
led to the suggestion that they may contribute to the cognitive defects 
in DMD. Intellectual disability is well described in association with up to 
30% of cases of Duchenne, with a preferential impairment of verbal IQ. 
Here, we present a specific case of DMD with a tandem de novo dupli -
cation of exons 2-18 of the DMD gene (diagnosed by array-CGH and 
subsequently confirmed with MLPA analysis) in a patient with predict -
ed DMD phenotype and profound microcephaly, facial dysmorphism 
and brain atrophy. Additional a-CGH findings that could contribute to 
his severe phenotype were a 3.0Mb deletion in 10q23.31- q23.33, re -
sulting in haploisufficiency of amongst others the FER113 gene, which 
has been implicated as a possible modifier of DMD phenotype and 
a 0.703Mb deletion of Xq21.31 containing the PCDH11X gene which 
plays a fundamental role in cell-cell recognition and is essential for 
the segmental development and function of the central nervous sys -
tem. This case shows a central nervous system-specific and restrictive 
phenotype for a disorder that is conceptualized as being progressively 
neuromuscular in clinical expression.P12.059  Further improvement in the i-PEP method for low copy 
number DNA profiling at forensic genetics
Z. Zafari1,2, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Kiyan Far1, A. B. Sarhaddi1, A. Shirkavand1,3, M. 
R. Mashayekhi1,4, A. Ghasemi1,5, S. Zeinali1,6;  
1Kawsar‘s Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biology Group, Faculty 
of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Biology 
Group, Faculty of Science, Science and research Branch of Tehran, Islamic 
Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Islamic Azad University of 
Jahrom, Jahrom, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Biotechnology Research Center, 
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
DNA profiling has become one of the most robust and reliable methods 
at forensic identification; However,  an insufficient DNA quantity (less 
than 100 Pg or 33 copies), found often in forensic evidence samples, is 
a major hindrance. Amplification of such low copy number (LCN) DNA 
samples, is attainable with the most efficient whole genome amplifica -
tion (WGA) method, named improved primer extension preamplifica -
tion (I-PEP) PCR.
By initial assessment of existing methods (i.e. PEP and I-PEP) on 
serially diluted DNA, it was attempted to reach an improved method 
leading to reliable profiling with the lowest amount of template. This 
method employs degenerate 15-mer PCR primers followed by specific 
amplification of DNA with specific primers. Subsequent to the amplifi -
cation with the new modified and improved I-PEP, which we term KI-
PEP PCR, complete DNA profile was obtained using only 2.5 pg of 
input DNA. Using this method, a fragment size of 1106 bp was effort -
lessly amplified with the specific primers. These results demonstrated 
fifty percent reduction in the template amount reported to be required 
by commercial DNA identification kits using the I-PEP method. In con -
clusion, the utility of KI-PEP PCR, not only increases the low quantity 
of DNA, but also provides optimum length appropriate to DNA typing.
Keywords : DNA Profiling, Forensic genetics, LCN DNA, Whole ge -
nome amplification, Improved primer extension preamplification PCR, 
KI-PEP PCR
P12.060  Dubowitz-syndrome associated with Hyper-igE-syndrome in a female patient. No evidence thus far for a 
common genetic basis.
P. M. Kroisel1, A. C. Obenauf1, C. Windpassinger1, D. Pfeifer2, K. Wagner1, K. 
M. Roetzer1, T. Schwarzbraun1, M. R. Speicher1, C. Woellner3, M. Beitzke4, B. 
Grimbacher5;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Core Facility II Genomics, 
Freiburg, Germany, 3Dept of Immunology & Molecular Pathology, UCL, London, 
United Kingdom, 4Dept of Neurology, MUG, Graz, Austria, 5Dept of Immunology, 
Division of Infection & Immunity, UCL, London, United Kingdom.
An association of Dubowitz-syndrome and Hyper-IgE-syndrome 
(HIES) or Job-syndrome thus far has just extremely rarely been re -
ported. HIES, a rare disorder, is heterogeneous with an autosomal 
dominant form caused by mutations of the STAT3-gene but autosomal 
recessive variants of HIES with at least two different causally related 
genes have been identified as well. Dubowitz-syndrome, a very rare 
disease, follows an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Recently 
a microdeletion/duplication has been reported in a patient with Dubow -
itz-syndrome. Here we describe another patient with an association 
of both syndromes. She is now 30 years old and fulfils the required 
diagnostic criteria for HIES and Dubowitz-syndrome as well. It was 
possible to demonstrate that a de novo heterozygous mutation of the 
STAT3-gene is responsible for her Hyper-IgE-syndrome. Cytogenetic 
and microarray CGH analysis using an Agilent 244 k oligonucleotide 
chip ruled out an aberration or genomic imbalance up to the resolution 
achieved. In addition an Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 
6.0 analysis was performed for homozygosity mapping of larger ge -
nomic blocks of a possible LOH since a consanguinity of the parents of 
the patient is not unlikely. Several larger segments of suspected LOH 
of up to about > 3 Mbs which will be analyzed in more detail have been 
identified. This might allow narrowing down candidate gene regions for 
Dubowitz-syndrome however none of the larger LOH loci maps to the 
STAT3-gene or any other known HIES gene locus.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
P12.061  Duchene/Becker muscular Dystrophy, fenotype-
genotype correlations and folate cycle genes interaction
V. C. Sacara1, E. Scvortova1, M. V. Duka2, S. A. Groppa1;  
1Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, 
Republic of, 2University of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Chisinau, 
Moldova, Republic of.
MTHFR, MTRR and MTR are the most important enzymes in the ho -
mocysteine and methionine metabolic cycle. The enzymes functions 
are to convert 5 and 10-methylenetetrahydrofolate into 5-methyltetra -
hydrofolate, providing methyl radicals to homocysteine and synthesiz -
ing methionine in this metabolic process. A common (C677T) poly -
morphism in the MTHFRgene results in thermolability and reduced 
MTHFR activity that decreases the pool of methylTHF and increases 
the pool of methyleneTHF. Recently, another polymorphism in MTHFR 
(A1298C) has been identified that also results in diminished enzyme 
activity also as MTRR A66G polymorphism. We tested whether car -
riers of these variants alleles have the worst effect of the myopathyc 
process.
We analyzed DNA of 14 patients with the Duchene muscular dystro -
phy. The PCR multiplex deletion test (two 9 plex mixes) are used for 
detection of distrophin deletions MTHFR, MTRR variant alleles were 
determined by a PCR - RFLP assay.
Patients with in-frame deletions in dystrophin gene in combination with 
heterozygous status MTHFR, MTRR genes have severe clinical pic -
ture instead the mild. Patients with mild clinical picture have the next 
genotype of folate circus genes: 677TT, 1298CC.
During researches were we found out incidence of C677T(21,4%). 
This mutation lead to redaction activity of MTHFR with 35-60% which 
influence myopathyc process. The proband (43 years old) with dele -
tion of 47-48 exons and with genotype C677C and C1298C had not 
very severity clinical feature. Analysis of MTRR polymorphism reviled 
prevalence of A66G(92,9%).
Were set interaction between genes of folate circus MTHFR, MTRR, 
MTR and difficulty of Duchene/Becker Miodistrophy
P12.062  cOL7A1 mutation spectrum in patients with Dystrophic 
Epidermolysis Bullosa in Poland
K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, C. Kowalewski2, A. 
Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, K. Woźniak2, J. Bal1;  
1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 
2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB) is genodermatose caused by 
mutations in COL7A1 , which spans 32kb and comprise 118 exons. Its 
product - collagen VII, forms homotrimers which further assembles into 
anchoring fibrilis, structures responsible for epidermis-dermis integra -
tion. Mutations in COL7A1  can result in either disturbance of anchoring 
fibrilis formation and function or complete lack of collagen VII. There 
are about 520 COL7A1  mutations known, of which only few are recur -
rent, mainly among individual ethnic groups. We present the results 
of molecular analysis of 31 DEB patients of Polish origin. We found 
that c.425G>A is the most frequent mutation in our group of patients 
(42% of patients; 27% of alleles). Another recurrent mutations are: 
c.682+1G>A (13%; 6% respectively) and, unreported in the literature 
data before*, c.7154delC (10%; 5% respectively). Our analysis is still 
proceed, but up to now we also found 11 rare variants, including 7 
changes unreported before*. In conclusion, our work is the first CO-
L7A1  genotyping study performed in Polish DEB patients. Our results 
enable us to propose patients of Polish origin the molecular diagnostic 
scheme, which will be completed soon.
*according to PubMed and HGMD free version.
Supported by NN407171134 and NN 402233137
P12.063  Analysis of the COL7A1  gene in czech patients 
with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, novel and recurrent 
mutations.
L. Fajkusová1,2, L. Kopečková1, B. Jeřábková1, H. Bučková1;  
1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk university, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
Backgroud : Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) is an inherited 
skin fragility disorder where blistering occurs in the sublamina densa 
zone at the level of anchoring fibrils of the dermo-epidermal junction 
zone. Both autosomal dominant (DDEB) and recessive (RDEB) forms 
result from mutations in the type VII collagen gene ( COL7A1 ). Ob-jective : The purpose of this study was to analyse the COL7A1  gene 
and perform genotype-phenotype correlations in Czech patients with 
DEB. Methods : Mutations in the COL7A1 gene were characterised 
using polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing. Results : DNA 
analysis of the COL7A1  gene was performed in 27 probands with di -
agnosis of RDEB and 6 probands with diagnosis of DDEB. 29 different 
sequence variants were found, ten of which have not been reported 
previously In the set of our RDEB patients, the most frequent muta -
tion was the splice site mutation c.425A>G (29,6% of RDEB mutant 
alleles). The novel mutations comprised “silent” glycine substitutions 
(p.Gly1845R, p.Gly2296Glu, and Gly2557Arg), the novel nonsense 
mutation p.Ser609X, three splice site mutations (c.3894+1G>A, 
c.5856+1G>A and c.6751-2delAG), the deletion c.4556delG, the in -
sertion c5644insA, and the missense mutation p.Lys1981Arg. A mis -
sense mutation of Lys was not described in DEB association so far. 
The patient´s phenotype associated with p.Lys1981Arg was milder in 
comparison with patients´ phenotypes associated with substitutions of 
Gly and Arg detected in our DEB patients. Conclusions : In summary, 
screening the COL7A1  gene is useful for understanding different clini -
cal variants of DEB.
This work was funded the Czech Ministry of Education (LC06023 and 
MSM0021622415).
P12.064  splicing abnormalities in the DMD  gene
J. Juan-Mateu1, E. Verdura1, L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, E. Gallardo2, E. Rivas3, 
M. Marotta4, M. Madruga5, I. Illa2, M. Roig6, J. Colomer7, A. Nascimento7, M. 
Baiget1, P. Gallano1;  
1Genetics. HOSPITAL SANT PAU. CIBERER, BARCELONA, Spain, 
2Neurology. HOSPITAL SANT PAU. CIBERNED, BARCELONA, 
Spain, 3Pathology. HOSPITAL VIRGEN DEL ROCIO, SEVILLA, Spain, 
4Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VALL DE HEBRON, BARCELONA, Spain, 
5Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VIRGEN DEL ROCIO, SEVILLA, Spain, 
6Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL VALL DE HEBRON, BARCELONA, Spain, 
7Neuropaediatrics. HOSPITAL SANT JOAN DE DEU, BARCELONA, Spain.
The most common form of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystro -
phies causing mutations are large intragenic deletions and duplica -
tions that account for 60 to 80% of all cases. The remaining cases are 
caused by small mutations consisting of nonsense, missense, small 
insertion-deletions and a wide range of complex changes due to ab -
normalities of normal splice processing. Genomic based techniques 
have sometimes limited ability to detect such changes.
The technical approach that we used consisted in: 1) immunohis -
tochemical and western-blot analysis of patient’s muscle biopsies 
against dystrophin and different muscle dystrophy associated proteins, 
2) exclusion of exonic deletion and duplication in DMD gene by MLPA 
technique, 3) muscle biopsy RNA sequencing of total coding region 
and, 4) further confirmation in targeted genomic DNA.
We describe one DMD and five BMD patients diagnosed by clinical 
and immunohistochemical criteria, in which further genetic analysis 
revealed the presence of different mutations that alter normal splicing 
process. Exceptions to the reading frame rule were observed in two 
patients.
Two of them destroy the normal donor-site, one leading to exon skip -
ping and the other causing partial intron transcription. Another creates 
a new donor splice site inside the coding region deleting 5 exonic bp. 
The fourth one, creates a cryptic exon in deep intronic region. The fifth 
mutation located at the donor site, leads to normal splice efficiency re -
duction. In the last case, a BMD patient presents a nonsense mutation 
and a partial skipping of the mutated exon that could explain the milder 
phenotype that has been observed.
P12.065  Dyt1 mutations in primary torsion dystonia in iranian 
patients
M. T. Akbari1,2;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical 
Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Early-onset, generalized primary torsion dystonia (PTD) is an auto -
somal dominantly inherited disorder, characterized by involuntary 
movements and abnormal postures. The majority of cases are caused 
by a 3-bp deletion (GAG deletion at position 946) in the DYT1 gene on 
chromosome 9q34 that allows for specific genetic testing. Forty eight 
patients with early onset primary torsion dystonia were screened for 
mutation in exon 5 of the DYT1 gene using PCR and DNA sequenc -Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
ing. In this study, we examined 48 Iranian patients with dystonia, and 
found the mutation in 8 patients (17%). The results showed that the 
prevalence rate of DYT1 mutation in Iranian patients was not too much 
different from European (27.3%) and Asian (22.2%) patients with early 
onset primary torsion dystonia.
P12.066  secondary genetic determinants of phenotypic severity 
in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB)
J. E. Mejía1,2, A. Décha1,2, V. Pendaries1,2, N. Pironon1,2, M. Titeux1,2, S. 
Turczynski3,4, L. Tonasso1,2, G. Gasc1,2, C. Bodemer5, A. Hovnanian1,6;  
1Inserm, U563, Toulouse, France, 2Université Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, 
Toulouse, France, 3Inserm, U781, Paris, France, 4Université Paris V René 
Descartes, Paris, France, 5Dermatology Department, Necker-Enfants Malades 
Hospital, Paris, France, 6Genetics and Dermatology Departments, Necker-
Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
RDEB is a skin blistering disorder caused by type VII collagen deficien -
cy, responsible for a wide spectrum of disease severity. Correlation be -
tween COL7A1  genotypes and RDEB severity is incomplete, and we 
showed previously that an MMP1  promoter polymorphism associates 
with higher severity. Using microarrays, we analyzed the transcriptome 
of cutaneous cells cultured from three brothers with consanguineous 
parents, homozygous for the same missense COL7A1  mutation but re -
spectively affected with localized, generalized, and severe generalized 
RDEB (RDEBL, RDEBG, RDEBSG). RDEBL fibroblasts expressed 10-
fold higher levels of TGFB2  mRNA than RDEBSG cells (2.5-fold higher 
than RDEBG), 2-fold higher concentrations of TGF-β2 in conditioned 
medium, and larger pools of SMAD proteins. Transcripts increased in 
RDEBL fibroblasts relative to RDEBSG clustered to gene ontologies of 
cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM). NF-AT-binding motifs 
were overrepresented in the corresponding gene promoters. The recip -
rocal transcript set was heterogeneous and depleted in those gene on -
tologies. Interferon response motifs were remarkably overrepresented 
in the gene promoters. Transcripts increased in RDEBL keratinocytes 
relative to RDEBSG mapped to gene ontologies of mitosis, DNA replica -
tion and repair, and the cell cycle, with higher cyclin B mRNA levels. 
The reciprocal transcript set was depleted in those categories, and 
proliferation inhibitor CDKN2A  mRNA was augmented. The fibroblast 
TGF-β2 profiles indicate a protective role for this pleiotropic cytokine 
as a regulator of ECM and several signaling pathways of immunity 
and inflammation. We observed no TGFB2 allelic polymorphism in this 
RDEB sibship, however, suggesting that TGF-β2 changes are second -
ary to an upstream regulatory gene.
P12.067  mutation R163W in the KRT  gene in a mexican 
family with Epidermolytic Palmoplantar Keratoderma and new 
associated features
J. Lopez-Valdez1, M. Rivera-Vega2, L. Gonzalez-Huerta2, J. Cazarin-
Barrientos3, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias4;  
1Genetica, Hospital General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Genetica 
Hospital General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Dermatologia, Hospital 
General De Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 4Genetica, Hospital General De 
Mexico; Facultad De Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autonoma De Mexico, 
Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Background: The epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma (EPPK), an 
autosomal dominant genodermatosis, is the most frequent form of the 
hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. The EPPK is characterized by 
hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. About 90% of patients present 
mutations in the KRT9 gene, generally affect the highly conserved coil 
1A region of the α-helical rod domain of keratin 9, a domain important 
for keratin heterodimerization. Objective: To perform a clinical and mo -
lecular study in a Mexican family with EPPK. Methods: We analyzed 
clinically and genetically a family with 12 affected members with EPPK. 
The KRT9 gene was analyzed from genomic DNA through PCR and 
DNA sequencing analysis. Results: The 12 affected members of the 
family had hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. We detect R163W 
mutation in the KRT9  gene in all affected members of the family.
Conclusions: Although the R163W change in the KRT9  gene is the 
most frequent mutation in EPPK, only 2 families have been reported 
with knuckle pads associated to this mutation.P12.068  Congenital factor XIII deficiency caused by two 
mutations in eight Tunisian families: molecular confirmation of a 
founder effect
N. Louhichi1, M. Medhaffar2, I. Hadj Salem1, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, N. Fendri-
Kriaa1, H. Kanoun1, F. Yaïch1, T. Souissi2, M. Elloumi2, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Human Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service of Hematology. 
C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia.
Introduction: Inherited factor XIII (FXIII) deficiency is a rare bleeding 
disorder characterized by an umbilical bleeding during the neonatal 
period, delayed soft tissue bruising, mucosal bleeding spontaneous 
intracranial hemorrhage and soft tissue hemorrhages. Congenital 
FXIII deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, usually attributed 
to a defect in the FXIIIA and B subunits coding respectively by F13A 
and F13B genes. Aim: The aim of this study was to determine the 
molecular defects responsible for congenital factor XIII deficiency in 
eight Tunisian families. Methods: Molecular analysis was performed 
by direct DNA sequencing of polymerase chain reaction amplified frag -
ments spanning the coding regions and splice junctions of the FXIIIA 
subunit gene (F13A) in probands and in families’ members and com -
pared with the reported sequence of this gene. Results: In all patients, 
FXIIIA activity was undetectable and the FXIIIB was within the normal 
range. Direct sequencing of the F13A gene in all probands showed 
two mutations: the c.869insC mutation found in eight patients and the 
c.1226G>A transition found in only one. We also confirmed the pres -
ence of a founder effect for the first frequent mutation by using two 
microsatellite markers, HUMF13A01 and a generated ployAC marker 
(HUMF13A02). Conclusion: We describe here molecular abnormali -
ties found in nine Tunisian probands diagnosed with FXIIIA deficiency. 
The identification of the founder mutation and polymorphisms allowed 
a genetic counselling in relatives of these families and the antenatal 
diagnosis is now available.
P12.069  Frequency of PRF1 , STX11  and UNC1D  mutations in 
patients with a genetic diagnosis of familial hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis 
M. Entesarian1,2, M. Meeths1,2, E. Rudd1,2, M. Nordenskjöld2, J. Henter1;  
1Department of Women´s and Children´s Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of 
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University 
Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
Familial hemophagocytic lymhohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare autosomal 
recessive lethal condition characterized by fever, cytopenia, hepato -
splenomegaly and hemophagocytosis. It is usually rapidly fatal without 
adequate therapy. The hallmark of FHL is defect apoptosis triggering 
and deficient lymphocyte cellular cytotoxicity. Four disease-causing 
genes have been identified PRF1 , UNC13D , STX11 and, most recent -
ly, STXBP2 . We have reviewed the frequency of biallelic mutations in 
different FHL genes in a large, multi-ethnic cohort of 54 patients/fami -
lies with a genetic diagnosis of FHL. These patients were analysed up 
to mid 2009, no patients had then been analyzed for STXBP2 . Bial -
lelic mutations in PRF1 , UNC13D  and STX11  were demonstrated in 
27/54 (50%), 15/54 (28%) and 12/54 (22%) patients, respectively. We 
observed a significantly higher prevalence of STX11  mutations in the 
Turkish patients compared to European patients (10/23 vs. 0/15, p = 
0.003). In Middle East patients, PRF1  was the most common disease 
causing gene (10/16, 63%).
Another autosomal recessive immunodeficiency associated with de -
velopment of a hemophagocytic syndrome including partial albinism is 
Griscelli syndrome type 2 (GS2) caused by mutations in RAB27A . We 
have identified RAB27A  mutations in five patients/families with a clini -
cal diagnosis of GS2. In addition, we have identified two patients with 
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) type 1 and one patient 
with XLP type 2 caused by mutations in SH2D1A  and XIAP, respective -
ly. Genetic analysis has proven to be a most helpful tool in diagnosis of 
FHL and related disorders. Moreover, genetics is essential for prenatal 
screening and carrier testing.
P12.070  Resequencing of LDLR and APOB genes in patients 
with clinical diagnosis of Familial Hypercholesterolaemia
A. C. Alves , M. Bourbon;  
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal.
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a monogenic condition caused 
in most cases by mutations in LDLR gene, but mutations in APOB Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
and PCSK9 genes are also cause of FH. These 3 genes are currently 
studied in the “Portuguese FH Study”. From the 359 families with a 
clinical diagnosis of FH studied, only 48% of these have a detectable 
mutation in the 3 genes mention above so, other mutations in these 3 
genes or other gene defects must exist to explain the cause of hyper -
cholesterolemia in the remaining families. In order to find if a LDLR 
or APOB mutation was been missed by current methods, the coding 
regions and exon/intron boundaries of LDLR and APOB gene, of 65 in -
dex patients with clinical diagnosis of FH and no detectable mutations 
in LDLR and APOB genes, were resequencing by a novel method, py -
rosequencing. By this method a pool of the 65 DNAs was sequenced 
together several times and the results are given based on number of 
alleles estimated taking into account the frequency of each alteration, 
total number of reads obtained for each fragment and number of indi -
viduals sequenced. In the LDLR gene 41 alterations were detected, 
most of them are polymorphism, 3 were positive controls and 3 new 
alterations. In the APOB gene 87 alterations were detected, being 27 
previously described SNPs.
Pyrosequencing allows the rapid sequencing of a large number of in -
dividuals, but apart from its high cost, it has some limitations and re -
quires an improvement of technique.
P12.071  Portuguese Familial Hypercholesterolemia study: 
comparison of the effect of LDLR gene mutations in FH patients
A. M. Medeiros , A. C. Alves, S. Silva, V. Francisco, M. Bourbon, O. behalf of 
investigators of Portuguese FH Study;  
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common genetic disorder 
(1/500) associated with high levels of plasma cholesterol and prema -
ture coronary heart disease (pCHD). In the Portuguese FH Study the 
genetic diagnosis is based on molecular study of LDLR, APOB and 
PCSK9 genes, but mutations in the LDLR gene account for the major -
ity of identified mutations. The aim of the present work was to analyse 
the phenotype of FH patients carrying a null or a defective allele muta -
tion in LDLR .
To this date a total of 404 individuals were identified with a genet -
ic defect in LDLR . Mean levels of total cholesterol and LDLc in the 
paediatric and adult group were calculated using SPSS v.17. Pae -
diatric patients with null mutations presented mean total cholesterol 
of 312.88±71.15mg/dL and LDLc of 242.21±67.74mg/dL Paediatric 
patients carrying a defective allele mutation presented levels of total 
cholesterol and LDLc of 272.15±59.67mg/dL and 196.75±51.94mg/dL. 
Adult FH patients with null mutations present mean total cholesterol of 
369.33±91.14mg/dL and LDLc of 281.79±99.62mg/dL. Adult FH pa -
tients carrying a defective allele mutation presented a mean level of 
total cholesterol of 334.98±67.94mg/dL and LDLc of 250.19±68.01mg/
dL. In the first group 21.4% had pCHD and in the second 13.3%. All 
differences observed were statistically significant.
Null allele mutations in LDLR gene (large deletions, small deletions/
insertions, nonsense and splicing mutations) are predicted to result in 
the production of a non-functional protein and present this way a much 
severe phenotype. The type of mutation is important to access the 
cardiovascular risk of these patients.
P12.072  study of LDL receptor gene mutations in patients with 
familial hypercholesterolemia in chaharmahal va Bakhtiari 
province.
S. Asadi mobarake1, e. farrokhe2, G. Mobini2, M. Banitaleby2, J. Saffari 
Chaleshtori2, M. Taherzadeh2, F. Shayesteh2, H. Nazem1, R. Haji Hosini1, f. 
Roghani2, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2;  
1Payamenoor Univ.Tehran,Iran,Islamic Republic of, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Research Center,Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci, 
Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aim: Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autoso -
mal dominant inherited disorder characterized by increased level of 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol that leads to lipid accumulation in 
tendons and arteries ,premature atherosclerosis and increased risk 
of coronary heart disease (CHD). Familial hyper cholesterolemia is 
caused mainly by mutations in low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) 
gene. The aim of this study was to analyse the LDLR gene mutations 
in a group of patients from chahar mahal va Bakhtiari province.
Methods: in this descriptive -lab based study ,57 suspected FH 
patients were screened for mutations in promoter and exons 1,3,5,11,13,15,16,17 and 18 of LDLR gene using PCR-SSCP strat -
egy.
Results: Tow different LDLR gene variations including heterozygote 
mutation 283T>A and polymorphism 1959T>C were identified in 1 and 
9 FH Families studied respectively.
Conclusion: We conclude that LDLR gene mutation many not be the 
major cause of FH in the population studied and the cause of FH in 
chaharmahal va Bakhtiari province remains to be detected in other 
loci or genes.
Familial Hypercholesterolemia, Low density lipoprotein receptor 
gene,PCR-SSCP
P12.073  PcsK9 alterations in patients with Familial 
Hypercholesterolaemia
V. Francisco , A. C. Alves, A. M. Medeiros, M. Bourbon, O. behalf of 
investigators of Portuguese FH Study;  
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is characterized by increased lev -
els of LDL cholesterol and premature Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). 
Although LDLR and APOB defects are more common causes of FH, 
mutations in PCSK9 also cause FH. The Portuguese FH Study was 
developed to identify FH patients in order to prevent the development 
of premature CHD. The aim of this study is the molecular analysis of 
PCSK9 gene, in patients with no mutation in LDLR or APOB gene. 
A total of 425 index patients have been studied and a mutation in 
the LDLR or in the APOB gene was found in 169 patients. Until now 
a total of 48 index patients without mutation in LDLR or APOB, 11 
children (TC 256±34,4 mg/dL; LDLc 189±30,1 mg/dL) and 37 adults 
(TC 340±43,6 mg/dL; LDLc 240±36,9 mg/dL) were completely tested 
for genetic defects in PCSK9 gene. The 12 exons and exon-intronic 
boundaries of the PCSK9 gene were amplified by PCR and direct se -
quence. All possible mutations and polymorphisms were annotated. 
Two unrelated patients were found to be heterozygous for a novel mu -
tation in PCSK9, predicted to cause a single amino acid substitution, 
D374H. Both presented a severe phenotype (premature CHD; patient 
1, TC 567 mg/dL; LDLc 503mg/dL; patient 2, TC 444 mg/dL). The 
polymorphisms, c.43_44insCTG in exon 1 and E670G, A>G variant in 
exon 12, showed a higher incidence in the Portuguese population than 
the revealed in other Caucasian populations. FH patients with PCSK9 
mutation have a rare but more severe form of the disease.
P12.074  A novel mevalonate kinase gene mutation in combination with mVK V377i substitution and the common mEFV V726A mutation.
M. Amorini , L. Rigoli, R. Gallizzi, P. Romeo, G. E. Calabrò, C. Salpietro;  
Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche Mediche e Chirurgiche, Messina, Italy.
Hyper-IgD (HIDS) syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder char -
acterized by recurrent episodes of fever associated with lymphade -
nopathy, arthralgia, gastrointestinal disturbance, and skin rash. HIDS 
is caused by mutations of MVK gene. Familial Mediterranean fever 
(FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by fever and 
synovial inflammation. FMF is caused by mutations affecting both al -
leles of gene MEFV.
In the present study we present data from a Sicilian patient with typi -
cal symptoms of the FMF, but only heterozygous mutation in MEFV 
(V726A) and compound heterozygous in MVK gene (V377I, P228L, in -
herited from the mother and father respectively). The P228L is a novel 
missense mutation involving the exchange of a proline (CCA), highly 
conserved in mammals and birds, with a Leucine (CTA).
The proband then is affect from unusually form of HIDS (IgD no detect -
able, proteinuria and serum amyloid A levels are of 120,00 ug/ml). This 
findings encourage our assumptions about the oligogenic transmis -
sion of the syndromes associated with periodic fevers, on the basis 
of the identification of 3 mutated alleles in 2 different genes. The third 
mutation in the gene MEFV could play a role epistatic, modifying the 
spectrum symptoms of HIDS.
Further study on HIDS and FMF wider population would is important 
not only to clarify the genetic heterogeneity of this family of syndromes, 
but mainly to establish a new diagnostic and therapeutic approach to 
these patients.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders17
P12.075  mEFV gene mutations in patients with FmF from the 
middle Black sea region of t urkey.
H. Bagci1, K. Ozdamar2, E. Taskin1, N. Karakus1;  
1Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biology, Samsun, Turkey, 2Osmangazi University, Department of Biostatistics, 
Eskisehir, Turkey.
Background: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal 
recessive disease presenting with recurrent bouts of fever, inflamma -
tion of serosal membranes, skin rashes, and joint problems. FMF is 
frequenty seen in populations of Arab, Armenian, Jewish, and Turkish 
ancestry. Disease is caused by mutations in MEFV gene, sequence 
variants of which totals 188 according to the Infevers Database. The 
purpose of the present study was to determine the frequencies of the 
12 mutations in MEFV gene in patients with FMF from the middle Black 
Sea region of Turkey.
Method: We screened 3904 patients with suspicion of FMF for MEFV 
mutations using commercially available FMF StripAssayTM method, a 
multiplex PCR based reverse hybridization assay.
Results: Overall, MEFV mutations were detected in 47.80% of the 
patients, while no mutations were detected in 52.20%. Of the 2755 
MEFV alleles identified, M694V allele was present at 46.75%; M680I 
21.67%; E148Q 14.66%; V726A 8.78%; P369S 3.19%; A744S 1.38%; 
R761H 1.20%; F479L 1.13%; K695R 0.91%; and M694I 0.33%. Of 
the 1866 patients with MEFV gene mutation(s), 21.65% were homo -
zygotes, 52.79% were heterozygotes with single mutations, 25.19% 
were compound heterozygotes with two mutations, and 0.38% were 
with complex genotypes (n: 7 patients; 2 patients with E148Q/E148Q/
M680I/M680I genotypes, 2 patients with M694V/E148Q/P369S geno -
types, 2 patients with M680I/E148Q/P369S genotypes, 1 patient with 
V726A/V726A/E148Q genotype).
Conclusions: We were able to identify 53 different allelic combinations 
of the 12 mutations tested in MEFV gene in Turkish patients in whom 
FMF was suspected. We will present, the genotype-phenotype cor -
relations in depth.
P12.076**  Detection of a hotspot for mutations in KitLG 
responsible for Familial Progressive Hyper- and Hypo-
pigmentation
M. Amyere1, T. Vogt2, J. Hoo3, F. Brandrup4, L. Boon5, M. Vikkula1;  
1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, 
University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, 
SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, NY, United States, 
4Department of Dermatology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 
5Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques 
Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
Familial Progressive Hyperpigmentation and Hypopigmentation (FPHH) 
is an autosomal dominant disorder with reduced penetrance. Clinical 
signs consist of progressive diffuse, partly blotchy hyperpigmented 
lesions, multiple café-au-lait spots intermingled with hypopigmented-
appearing maculae, and lentiges. Histological and ultrastructural sec -
tions from the hyperpigmented lesions display strong basal hyperpig -
mentation of the epidermis with numerous melanophages containing 
large amounts of melanin. In contrast, the hypopigmented-appearing 
maculae show slight basal hyperpigmentation of the epidermis, with 
virtually no melanophages in the upper dermis. FPHH is distinct from 
FPH, in which no hypopigmented features are present, and which is 
phenotypically and histologically closer to Dyschromatosis Universalis 
Hereditaria 2 (DUH2). We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis 
in seven families with FPHH using Affymetrix SNP GeneChips, and 
identified linkage on 12q21.12-q22. This locus overlaps with that of 
DUH2. Moreover, one mutation was reported in the KITLG gene in 
this locus in a Chinese family with FPH. We discovered three different 
mutations in four of our FPHH families. The reported FPH substitution 
was found in two families, and two novel substitutions in the other two 
families. Thus, mutations in the same gene cause FPH and FPHH, 
and most likely DUH2. Interestingly, all the mutations are located in 
a highly conserved third β-strand in KITLG, suggesting an important 
role in activation of the downstream signalling pathway, which affects 
melanocyte migration and melanin distribution. This pathway groups 
other Mendelian disorders with dyspigmentation, such as piebaldism, 
neurofibromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome. Morever, hair and skin 
color was recently associated with the KITLG locus.P12.077  Identification of novel loci linked to Familial Pulmonary 
Fibrosis
F. K. E. Kamel , S. Bartlett, G. Fox, R. Batia, E. Sala, N. Duguid, B. Noble, L. 
Edwards, H. Yang, M. Dube, B. Fernandez, M. O. Woods;  
Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John‘s, NL, Canada.
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) is pathologically characterized by 
inflammation and fibrosis of the lung parenchyma. It is a late onset 
disease with variable penetrance that generally develops from 50-70 
years of age and is associated with an estimated survival of 20-50% at 
5 years after diagnosis. The prevalence of IPF in Newfoundland is 117 
cases per million, which is much greater than the prevalence in the UK 
of 1.34 cases per million. Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis (FPF) is patho -
logically indifferent to IPF; however an earlier age of onset is frequently 
observed in FPF families. SFTPC , TERT , TERC , SFTPA2  and ABCA3  
are the genes known to be associated with the disease.
We hypothesize that there is a gene(s) carrying a mutation(s) that is 
the underlying cause of FPF in Newfoundland families. We sequenced 
the 5 known FPF genes in 59 probands and excluded them as FPF 
causing in the vast majority of individuals. Six families with 37 affected 
and 205 unaffected individuals were selected for novel gene discovery. 
The pedigrees are consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance 
pattern, which is consistent with previous reports of FPF. Genome-
wide scans with a 10cM microsatellite set and a 610k SNP-chip sug -
gested linkage to multiple chromosomal loci.
Using paremtric, non-parametric and homozygosity haplotyping analy -
ses we indentified a number of novel loci linked with FPF in these fami -
lies. A candidate-gene approach is being utilized to select genes within 
the regions of interest for sequencing. Genes are selected based on 
association with lung diseases, function and mRNA expression.
P12.078  DNA bank for Polish patients with a predisposition for 
intestinal polyposis
A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, R. Slomski1, D. Lipinski1, P. Krokowicz2, M. Drews2, 
J. Paszkowski2, W. Cichy2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University 
of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Intestinal polyposis syndromes include a group of diseases conditioned 
by the occurrence of hereditary mutations. Here we present a collec -
tion of DNA samples derived from persons from families with a diag -
nosed adenomatous polyposes which comprise: familial polyposis coli 
together with its recessive form, Turcot’s syndrome, inherited mixed 
polyposis as well as persons with recognised hamartomatous polypo -
ses: juvenile polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden syndrome 
and Proteus syndrome. The objective of this study was to present cur -
rent achievements associated with the establishment of the DNA Bank 
for intestinal polyposis. At the present time, the DNA Bank comprises 
the total of 1097 DNA samples derived from 449 families with intestinal 
polyposis of which 945 samples come from persons in whose families 
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) occurred. In addition, the col -
lected data also contain material for analyses derived from 25 families 
with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and 20 families with juvenile polyposis 
as well as single cases with the Cowden syndrome, Proteus syndrome 
and desmoid tumors. The performed molecular investigations allowed 
identification of mutations ranging from 44 to 50%.
The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher 
Education projects
no. N402 481537, N401 331936
P12.079  STXBP2  mutations are not detected in group of Russian 
patients with Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 
(FHL).
N. Poltavets1, M. Maschan2, A. Polyakov1, G. Novichkova2, A. Maschan2;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal 
Research Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
FHL is a rare inherited immune dysregulation syndrome characterized 
by a defect in natural killer cell function and caused by mutations in 
PRF1 , UNC13D  and STX11  genes (FHL2, FHL3 and FHL4). These 
genes code the proteins involved in perforin-dependent NK and T cells 
cytotoxicity. A new genetic form FHL5 had been described in 2009. 
The causative FHL5 gene is STXBP2 (19p) coding syntaxin-binding 
protein 2 (Munc 18-2). Munc 18-2 protein interacts with syntaxin 11 
and is involved in the regulation of vesicle transport in NK cells and Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
DNA samples of sixteen Russian FHL patients (3 girls and 13 boys) 
were examined for mutation in coding region of SXTBP2 . The diagno -
sis in all cases was established according to the criteria of the Histio -
cyte Society. The investigation of PRF1 , UNC13D  and STX11  genes 
coding regions had not reveal mutations.
No mutations were detected in coding region of STXBP2  gene in DNA 
samples of these patients. A number of previously reported SNP`s were 
detected. Only a few new nucleotide substitutions were revealed:
c.247-29G>A (GL6, 7, 8, 25, 29, 30)
c.429+12G>C (GL7, 8)
c.794-4C>T (GL24)
c.960+22C>T (GL25)
c.902+32insC (GL29)
c.1288C>T (p.430Arg>Cys) (GL7)
c.1034C>T (p.345Thr>Met) (GL8)
c.1375C>T (p.459Arg>Trp) (GL29)
c.1538+35G>T (GL11)
c.1697-34C>G (GL29)
Some of these polymorphisms could prove to be missence mutations, 
so the further population and functional analysis should be performed.
FHL5 does not appear to represent a frequent form among Russian 
patients.
P12.080  Existence of FMF-like condition unrelated to MEFV
D. Babikyan , H. Hayrapetyan, T. Davtyan, T. Sarkisian;  
Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is the most prevalent hereditary 
autoinflammatory disease which arises from mutations of MEFV gene 
regulating the innate immune system. A systematic mutation screen -
ing among Armenians revealed a group of patients (n=46) with clini -
cal symptoms of FMF but without demonstrable MEFV mutation com -
pared to FMF patients with expected straight forward recessive form of 
inheritance. Given the frequent identification of single-mutation cases 
(30%) may be due to the recognition of a broader FMF phenotype, and 
extremely high frequencies of MEFV mutant alleles among healthy Ar -
menian carriers (1:3), this supports the existence of new,  FMF-like  au-
toinflammatory condition unrelated to MEFV. The stratified genotype-
phenotype analysis revealed some  significant differences between two 
clinically-similar conditions. Although the cardinal feature of FMF, pe -
riodic fever was significantly higher among FMF patients (p=0.0095), 
still it was detected in 83% of FMF-like patients without MEFV muta -
tions, which importantly explains nearly all cases of FMF in whom no 
MEFV mutation have been identified. Despite similar clinical picture, 
some features such as artralgia and skin elements were more frequent 
among patients with the suspected syndrome (p=0.0001).  The search 
of autoinflammatory cytokine-markers also revealed a higher frequen -
cy and a higher level of IL-10 in FMF-like patients (0.77pg/ml in 33,3% 
cases) compared to healthy controls (0.41pg/ml in 16,3% cases) and 
FMF-patients (0.17pg/ml in 7,6% cases). Thus, changing the concept 
regarding broader FMF phenotype may call for a higher awareness 
of the existence of MEFV-unrelated autoinflammatory condition distin -
guishable from other autoinflammatory syndromes but yet indiscern -
ible from MEFV-related FMF.
P12.081  Risk measure for expansion upon transmission in 
FmR1 grey alleles
B. Lopez1, J. A. Garrote2, E. Velasco1, M. J. Alonso1, M. Duran1, A. Blanco1, I. 
Fernández-Carvajal1;  
11Laboratorio de Genética Humana, Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y 
Perinatal, Valladolid, Spain, 2Facultad de Medicina, Valladolid, Spain.
Fragile X Syndrome is due to an expansion of CGG-repeat tract in the 
5´-untranslated region of the Fmr-1  gene. In normal alleles, every 9-10 
CGG repeats a trinucleotide AGG is inserted which seems to provide 
stability to this sequence. Its absence or deletion at the 3´ end may be 
prone to expansion upon transmission.
Aim: To study AGG interspersion pattern in order to evaluate grey al -
lele stability and its predisposition for fragile X syndrome.
Patients and Methods: Herein, we describe a study performed on 37 
male blood samples among the 40-55 CGG repeats range coming 
from neuropediatric units and a group of 12 samples <40 CGG repeats 
as normal controls.
PCR test to amplify the CGG triplet repeat region of Fmr -1 alleles was performed followed by sequencing in order to identify the AGG inter -
ruptions.
To evaluate the instability we used an interspersion rate parameter.
Statistics: Mann-Whitney test, ROC curve test and Spearman test and 
Box Plot to evaluate the diagnostic technical efficiency.
Results: After the 10 firts CGG repeats, the number of interspersed 
AGG among grey alleles is nearly the half than among the normal con -
trol alleles this was evaluated with the Mann-Whitney test.
Values below or equal to a threshold value of 0.89 are considered 
instable alleles with high risk of expansion; with 91,7% sensitivity and 
89,2% specificity.
Conclusion: Low  “interspersion rate” is correlated with high risk of ex -
pansion upon transmission. We propose a revision of the instability 
risk of intermediate alleles, especially in genetic counselling for male-
female transmissions.
P12.082  An unusual case of fragile X syndrome due to partial deletion of FmR1
A. Lott1, H. Gabriel1, I. Hikkel2, M. Gencik1;  
1diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2medgene, Bratislava, Slovakia.
The most common cause of fragile X syndrome is the expansion of a 
CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’UTR region of FMR1, which leads to 
functional silencing of this gene by hypermethylation. However, in rare 
cases (< 1%) the loss of FMR1 gene function is due to partial or whole 
gene deletions, ranging in size from single nucleotides to several Mb.
Here we report on a 9 year old boy with features compatible to fragile 
X syndrome. ArrayCGH using a whole genome 44k Oligo-array (Agi -
lent) revealed a small deletion of 70-170kb on Xq27.3, including the 
gene FMR1NB and possibly a part of FMR1: arrXq27(146.844.547-
146.915.743)x1 (ISCN 2009, hg18).
To further characterize this result and to determine if the deletion was 
maternally transmitted, we performed MS-MLPA for fragile X syndrome 
(Kit ME0289-B1, MRC Holland).This analysis confirmed a normal 
methylation pattern in the patient and his mother and a deletion of 
exons 15 to 17 of the FMR1 gene in the patient but not in his mother. 
Finally, the breakpoints were further analyzed by long distance inverse 
PCR (LDI-PCR) and sequencing.
Summarized, these results prove in our patient a de novo deletion of 
the 3’ part of the FMR1 gene with the proximal deletion breakpoint in 
intron 14, protruding 118 kb distal including the FMR1NB gene. To our 
knowledge, this is the first case of a deletion of only the 3’ part of FMR1 
and the distally neighboring gene FMR1NB, resulting in a phenotype 
compatible to fragile X syndrome.
P12.083  Evidence for existence of a founder effect for the 
common mutation (W374X) in Perforin gene causing familial 
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
G. Balta , H. Okur, A. Gurgey;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare autoso -
mal recessive disorder of immune dysfunction caused by mutations in 
Perforin, Munc13-4, Syntaxin 11 and recently STXBP2 genes. Although 
FHL is a very rare disorder, it is relatively common in Turkish population 
probably because of the frequent consanguineous marriages. Perforin 
gene Trp374Stop (W374X) mutation in exon 3 (1122 G>A) appear to 
be the major genetic cause of FHL in Turkish population. In our studies 
on the molecular pathologies of FHL, we have identified this mutation 
in a total of unrelated 17 families coming from southeastern part of 
Turkey except 2 from middle part. Abreast studies of these families in 
haplotype analysis exploiting the genotyping of 5 different polymorphic 
microsatellite markers closely flanking Perforin gene indicated that 
W374X mutation was obviously segregated with the same conserved 
haplotype in all families except one where the mutation segregates not 
with the conserved haplotype but with only one of the conserved allele 
of a very close marker in linkage disequilibrium. The distribution of 
this allele was quite different between patients (1.0) and controls from 
healthy Turkish population (0.30). This and one family who has fully 
conserved haplotype were originated from the middle part of Turkey 
while all the rest 15 families from the southeastern part. These results 
may suggest that all families inherited the same disease allele from a 
common ancestor. In conclusion, this study provides evidence for the 
possible existence of a founder effect for the mutation. This study was 
supported by TUBITAK (Project No: 105S386-SBAG-3193).Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1
P12.084  Molecular diagnosis for FMR1 related disorders 
P. Rendeiro , R. Cerqueira, I. Miguel, A. Palmeiro, P. Tavares;  
CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: The Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 gene ( FMR1 ) is asso -
ciated with three distinct conditions: Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), Fragile 
X-associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS) and Premature Ovar -
ian Failure (POF). The most common molecular basis of FMR1 -related 
disorders is an abnormal expansion of CGG repeats in the 5‘ untrans -
lated region of the FMR1 gene, which are hypermethylated, causing 
no FMR1 expression. Based on the size of the expansion, it is possible 
to distinguish four types of alleles: normal (NL), intermediate, premu -
tation (PM, associated with both FXTAS and POF) and Full-Mutation 
(FM, associated with FXS). Despite being a low-resolution and time 
consuming technique that requires large amounts of genomic DNA, 
Southern-Blot is still the most commonly used method for diagnosing 
FMR1 related disorders. In alternative, we adopted the combination of 
direct PCR and fluorescent methylation-specific PCR (ms-PCR) (as 
published by Zhou Y. et al. 2006).
Method/ Results:From 300 samples studied by conventional PCR, 66 
were referred to ms-PCR with the following results: 59 females had a 
normal ms-PCR pattern, 3 males with a FM pattern, 2 females and 1 
male with a PM pattern and 1 female with a gray zone allele. All the 
results were verified by southern-blot confirming the sensibility of this 
method.
Conclusion: This approach confirms the efficiency to rapidly determine 
the allele status of males and females, including homozygous females 
on standard PCR, according to their unique GeneScan™ electrophe -
rogram patterns.
P12.085  Analysis of granulin gene in patients with familial 
frontotemporal dementia
J. M. Uterga1, M. J. García-Barcina2, E. Sarasola2, N. Liaño2, J. M. Fernández1, 
A. Rodríguez-Antigüedad1;  
1Servicio de Neurología del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA 
/ Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Unidad de Genética del Hospital 
Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, 
Spain.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD;MIM # 600274) represents 
the second most common dementia subtype in patients younger than 
65 years. Positive family history is observed in up to 50% of FTLD 
patients. Most of these cases are linked to a region in chromosome 
17q21, and in some of these families the microtubule-associated pro -
tein tau gene (MAPT; MIM # 157140) was found to be the causative 
gene. Other families with FTLD mapping to 17q21 and without varia -
tions in MAPT, carried mutations in the gene encoding progranulin and 
known as granulin (GRN; MIM # 138945).
Mutation screening of GRN gene was performed in 11 unrelated pa -
tients with familial FTLD using automatic sequencing. We did not iden -
tify any pathogenic mutation in coding regions or intronic boundaries. 
However, five different polymorphisms were found (one not reported in 
the literature) and the identification of a risk haplotype combining these 
polymorphisms and others already described is being carried out.
P12.086  Segregation of a new mutation in SLC2A  and E47X 
mutation in GJB2 within a consanguineous t unisian family 
affected with hereditary deafness
M. Hmani-Aifa1, M. Bensaid1, H. Dhouib2, Z. BenZina3, A. Ghorbel2, F. Moreno4, 
H. Ayadi1;  
1Targets for Diagnosis and Therapy, Centre of Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia, 
2Service d‘O.R.L., C.H.U.H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’Ophtalmologie, 
C.H.U. H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital 
Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
Autosomal recessive forms of hearing loss account for approximate -
ly 80% of genetic cases. At least 60 genes have been identified to 
cause autosomal recessive syndromic and non-syndromic hearing 
loss. Among these genes, SLC26A4  in which mutations have been re -
ported to be responsible for non syndromic hearing loss (DFNB4) and 
Pendred syndrome characterized by the association of sensorineural 
hearing loss and the presence of goiter. This gene encoded a chloride 
transporter protein called Pendrin. Mutations in GJB2  gene result in 
autosomal recessive (DFNB1) and dominant (DFNA3) non-syndromic 
hearing loss. We describe a Tunisian Consanguineous Family show -
ing linkage to GJB2  and SLC26A4 genes. Mutation analysis of these two genes revealed a novel frameshift mutation [c.451-delG] and the 
E47X mutation in the same family. Haplotype analysis for microsatellite 
markers and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) closely flanking 
the GJB2  gene revealed the presence of two haplotypes associated 
with the E47X mutation, suggesting that two founder effects for this 
mutation are responsible for hearing loss among Tunisian population. 
This report presents an illustration of how consanguinity and founder 
effect could increase familial clustering of hereditary mutations within 
the same family.
P12.087  MLPA technique identifies large deletions in Gitelman 
syndrome
M. Syrén1,2, N. Borsa1, A. Bettinelli3, S. Salardi1, C. Calderone1, D. A. Coviello1, 
S. Tedeschi1;  
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Materno-Infantili, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, 
Ospedale Mandic, Merate (Lecco), Italy.
Gitelman syndrome (GS) is part of the renal tubulopathies, character -
ised by hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, high renin and aldosterone. 
The disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Most mutations detected in GS are point mutations defined by se -
quencing. About 30% of GS-patients show only one mutation after 
coding sequences analysis.
Rarely, deletions of one or more exons have been described in GS-pa -
tients. We therefore hypothesized that the missing mutation of our het -
erozygous GS-patients could be a deletion or a duplication (del/dup).
We screened 13 heterozygotes for abnormal exon copy number, plus 
two brothers showing a homozygous absence of PCR product in exon 
26.
The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed 
using the commercial kit (MLPA®, MRC Holland) to determine the 
copy number of 25 out of the 26 exons of the SLC12A3 gene.
The MLPA fragments were loaded on 3130 xl Genetic Analyzer (Ap -
plied Biosystems) and analysed using the appropriate software.
MLPA confirmed the homozygous deletion of exon 26 in the 2 brothers; 
four heterozygotes showed a 50% copy number reduction of at least 
one exon.
Direct sequencing permits a high detection rate for point mutations 
whereas large del/dup are missed.
We have introduced the MLPA technique as second screening after 
sequencing the coding region of the gene. It will be interesting to see 
the proportion of large del/dups among mutations in GS and their im -
pact on the disease. This will furthermore permit to define if the propor -
tion of del/dup could justify the introduction of MLPA as a first screen -
ing method.
P12.088  Phenotypic variability of non-syndromic hearing loss in 
a Lur family due to delE120 mutation in GJB2 gene
N. Mahdieh1, H. Bagherian2, A. Shirkavand2, M. Sharafi2, S. Zeinali3,4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar‘s Human Genetic 
Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biotechnology Research 
Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kawsar‘s 
Human Genetic Research Center, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in the 
world. The genetic basis of this condition is very complex. Molecular 
variations in GJB2 gene are the common cause of hearing impairment 
in Caucasians. One expects that affected members of a family with 
same mutation have similar phenotype. Here we report phenotypic 
variability in hearing loss among the members of a Lur family.
Case Presentation and Methods: A Lur family from Lorestan province 
in western Iran having hearing impairment came for genetic counsel -
ing. There were two brothers with variable degrees of nonsyndromic 
sensorineural hearing loss. Clinical examinations, audiological tests 
and molecular studies including GJB2 gene sequencing and detection 
of Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) deletion were performed.
Results: Sequencing GJB2 gene revealed delE120 mutation in both 
brothers in homozygote form. Since one of them was profoundly deaf 
and the other was mildly affected, we were expecting different geno -
types or other causative effects. Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) not was found.
Discussion: Phenotypic variability between members of different family 
members with the same type of mutation can be expected which may Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders20
be due to the role of modifying factors but within the same family is less 
likely, particularly to the extend seen in our study.
P12.089  The inheritance of a missense c.487A>G mutation in 
GJB2 gene in two iranian families.
M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, S. Akbaroghli3, S. Mahmodian1, M. Farhadi1;  
1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33Tehran welfare Organization, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4National institute of genetic engineering and 
biotchnology, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Mutations in GJB2 gene are the most common cause of 
hereditary hearing loss. The majority of GJB2 mutations are recessive, 
but a few dominant mutations have been associated with hearing loss. 
This study introduces some new fact about M163V mutation in GJB2 
gene in two Iranian families.
Material and Methods: Genomic DNA of Two unrelated Iranian families 
with sensorineural hearing loss were obtained from six family mem -
bers and screened for GJB2 mutations with direct sequencing.
Results: Fathers of both families showed late onset hearing impair -
ment in fourth decade of the life, but hearing loss in children was early 
onset in both families with more severity rather than fathers. Also, one 
grandfather of every family showed late onset hearing loss in seven 
decade. The analysis of familial pedigree revealed anticipation in phe -
notype and autosomal dominant inheritance. There was a substitution 
of A to G in exon 2 at nucleotide 487(M163V). This mutation was het -
erozygous in fathers and children while mothers were normal.
Discussion: Previously, M163V always introduced as unknown het -
erozygous not even as compound heterozygous. Researcher showed 
the produced protein of M163V failed in the formation of homotypic 
junctional channel.
Due to other mutation in this nucleotide was reported as M163L in 
autosomal dominant inheritance that defects trafficking to the plasma 
membrane and increase cell death.
Our finding can confirm the autosomal dominant inheritance of this 
mutation. This hypothesis was further supported by conservation of 
the methionine residue at position 163 across the 23 mammalian spe -
cies.
P12.090  molecular analysis of the GJB2 gene in congenital sensorineural hearing impairment in a sample of mexican 
patients
M. Rivera-Vega1, P. Berruecos2, D. Castro-Coyotl1, M. Arellano-Sanchez1, L. 
Gonzalez-Huerta1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3;  
1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Audiologia 
y Foniatria, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, 
Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., 
Mexico.
Congenital sensorineural hearing impairment is the most common 
sensory defect with an incidence of approximately 1 in 500 newborns. 
Almost half of cases of hearing loss are due to genetic factors of which 
70% are classified as nonsyndromic. Autosomal recessive transmis -
sion remains the most frequent. The discovery of different mutations 
leading to hearing loss has led to clarify the molecular basis of dis -
ease. Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which encodes for connexin 26, is 
responsible for more than half of cases of genetic origin. In the present 
study we analyzed the GJB2 gene in 16 Mexican families and found in 
87% of cases different mutations. A relevant fact was the high preva -
lence of heterozygous, we consider that the most likely cause of hear -
ing loss was additional participation of the GJB6 gene, at least in the 
analyzed sample.
P12.091  study of two deletions in GJB6 gene as the second 
mutant allele in GJB2 heterozygous autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss subjects in iran.
D. Kooshavar1, E. Farrokhi2, M. Hashemzade chaleshtori2;  
1Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2shahrekord University of Medical Science, molecular and cellular research 
center, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hereditary non-syndromic hearing loss is inherited in autosomal reces -
sive pattern in about 80% of cases. Mutations in GJB2 gene (connexin 
26) and two deletions in the GJB6 gene (connexin 30); del (GJB6-
D13S1830) and del (GJB6-D13S1854), are accounted for 50% of au -tosomal recessive hearing losses in some regions. Approximately 10 
to 50% of the patients with GJB2 mutations carry only one mutant 
allele. This study aims to determine whether GJB6 deletions are the 
second mutant allele causing the disease in the GJB2 heterozygous 
cases studied.
We examined 45 unrelated GJB2 heterozygous autosomal reces -
sive non-syndromic hearing loss subjects for presence of del (GJB6-
D13S1830) and del (GJB6-D13S1854) mutations, using multiplex 
Polymerase Chain Reaction.
We detected none of the two deletions of GJB6 in the patients studied. 
So GJB2 gene deletions; GJB6-D13S1830 and GJB6-D13S1854 are 
not the second mutant allele in patients with only one GJB2 mutant 
allele in studied samples in Iran.
P12.092  compound heterozygosity for Hemoglobin Knossos 
and cd 39 mutation in a young Romanian patient
R. TALMACI1, L. Dan2, M. Crisan3, R. Stoia3, M. Dogaru3, S. Badelita1, D. 
Coriu1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetics Institute 
of Bucharest University, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Fundeni“ Clinical Institute, 
Bucharest, Romania.
In the frame of beta-thalassemia mutation screening study, we inves -
tigated the first Romanian patient with thalassemia major due to com -
pound heterozygosity for Hb Knossos and cd 39 (C-T) mutation. Hb 
Knossos (cd 27 [G-T]) is characterized by reduced synthesis and by 
interaction with beta-thalassemia, in which the double heterozygotes 
display typical features of thalassemia intermedia. Here we report the 
first case of Hb Knossos in our country.
Molecular analysis of the mutations in the β-globin gene has been 
performed using the PCR based methods: DGGE, ARMS-PCR and 
PCR-RFLP. Direct DNA sequencing confirmed that the propositus is 
compound heterozygous for Hb Knossos (cd 27 GCC-TCC) and cd 39 
(C-T) mutation.
Hb Knossos is a variant with a single base substitution causing amino 
acid replacement and alternative splicing of precursor beta-messenger 
RNA by activating cryptic donor sites in the exon I. CAG-TAG substi -
tution at codon 39 in beta-globin gene changes codon 39 into a stop 
codon terminating translation.
Hb Knossos displays a slightly decreased oxygen affinity; this factor 
may compensate in part for the severe anemia of the double heterozy -
gotes. In our case co-inheritance of Hb Knossos with severe β0 muta -
tion causes the beta-thalassemia major phenotype and this is impor -
tant for genetic counseling. This work was supported by the grant PN II 
41-045 from the Romanian Ministry Education and Research.
P12.093  screening of genes causing Huntington disease Like 
phenotype
A. Patitucci1, P. Tarantino1, F. Annesi1, I. Manna1, A. Magariello1, A. L. 
Gabriele1, F. L. Conforti1, R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, L. Citrigno1,2, W. Sproviero1,3, 
A. Gambardella1,3, M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of 
Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences, University of 
Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University „Magna Graecia“, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant disorder of the 
central nervous system, characterized by involuntary choreic move -
ments, progressive motor impairment, psychiatric symptoms and 
cognitive decline. HD is caused by an expansion of CAG trinucleotide 
repeats in the IT15 gene located on chromosome 4p16.3, encoding 
for Huntingtin. There is a group of disorders with clinical features of 
HD but negative for trinucleotide repeats expansion in the IT15 gene, 
known as HD-Like disease: Huntington disease like 1 (HDL1), an au -
tosomal dominant disease, caused by an extra octapeptide repeat in 
the prion protein gene (PRNP), on chromosome 20p12; HDL2, with 
autosomal dominant inheritance, caused by CAG repeats expansion 
above 40 repeat in the Junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene, on chromosome 
16q24.3. Furthermore, two dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), 
dentatorubralpallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) and Spinocerebellar 
Ataxia (SCA17), may also have overlapping symptoms with HD.
We report a group of 455 Italian patients with Huntington phenotype: 
154 out of 455 resulted negative for the IT15 CAG expansion. These 
patients were firstly tested for JPH3 gene CAG expansion, but we did 
not found CAG expansion in any patient, according to the previous Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders21
data in Caucasian population. Then, we tested the patients for other 
HD-like genes: PRPN gene, Atrophyn 1 (ATP1) gene and TATA-binding 
protein gene (TBP). All patients resulted negative for all tested genes 
excluding one patient carrying TBP expansion causing SCA17.
Our study confirms the importance of testing all actually known genes 
involved in HD-like phenotypes.
P12.094  the most common causes of hearing loss in patients 
REfered to genetic counciling.
T. S. Zimovina ;  
National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, 
Belarus.
Objectives: Hearing impairment is a common disorder that affects 
about 10% of general population and its prevalence increases with 
age. One in 1000 children is born deaf, with about 60% of case being 
due to genetic factors in developed countries. Mutations in the Con -
nexin 26 (GJB2) and Connexin 30 (GJB6) genes cause nonsyndromic 
deafness. Mutations in the Connexin 26 gene play a major role and 
account for about 50% of all autosomal recessive deafness in Europe. 
The most common mutation in northern Europeans is the deletion 
35delG (GJB2). GJB2 mutation, 167 delT occurs almost exclusively in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish.
Patients and methods: The aim of the study was to elucidate the 
causes of hereditary nonsyndromic loss of hearing in 45 members 
of unrelated families with the diagnosis of grade III-IV nonsyndromic 
bilateral sensorineural deafness undergoing genetic counciling. The 
search for mutations in the GJB2 (35delG, 167 delT) gene and GJB6 
(delGJB6-D13S1830) gene was performed.
Results and Conclusions: We have detected mutations in 18 out of 
45 persons screened. Eleven persons were homozygous, six hetero -
zygous for 35delG mutation, one had compound heterozygosity for 
167 delT/ delGJB6-D13S1830, and one had heterozygosity for del -
GJB6-D13S1830 mutation. It was possible to consider the reason of 
decrease in hearing established at 11 patients on which both chromo -
somes it has been revealed 35delG, and at one patient with compound 
heterozygosity for 167 delT/ delGJB6-D13S1830. The mutations in 
Connexin genes are the common reason of hearing loss in Belarus.
P12.095  mutation screening of mitochondrial DNA in non-
syndromic hearing loss
M. Mignardi1,2, E. Marasco1, C. Bergonzoni3, M. Montaguti3, D. Bastia1, M. 
Cenci4, M. Seri4, G. Romeo4, V. Mantovani1,4;  
1Centro Ricerca Biomedica Applicata CRBA, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of 
Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden, 3U.O. Otorinolaringoiatria, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 
Italy, 4U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy.
Background: Maternally inherited deafness accounts for approximate -
ly 1% of hereditary hearing loss (HL). Several mitochondrial mutations 
have been associated to this condition, but their occurrence and pen -
etrance among different populations remain poorly investigated. Aim of 
our study was to screen mitochondrial DNA in Italian patients affected 
by non-syndromic sensorineural HL. 252 unrelated patients and 26 
normally hearing subjects have been screened for the mitochondrial 
mutations most frequently reported associated to deafness (A827G, 
961delTinsC(n), C1494T, A1555G, A3243G, A7445G, 7472insC, 
T7510C and T7511C), by using dHPLC and sequencing. All samples 
have been also checked for mutations in the connexin genes GJB2/
GJB6.
Results: A1555G, A3243G, A827G, 961delTinsC(n) mutations have 
been found each in 1/252 (0,4%) patients. The last two mutations were 
also detected each in 1/26 (3,8%) normal hearing subjects. No one of 
the other common HH-associated mutations has been detected. In ad -
dition, four new variants have been found in four patients: 3168 insT, 
A3261G, 7471delC and A7576G.
For A3261G and 7471delC variants the analysis of the tRNA second -
ary structure as well as the check of phylogenetic conservation strong -
ly suggest a pathogenetic role.
Conclusion: The mitochondrial mutations commonly associated to HH 
resulted less frequent among the Italian patients than in other popu -
lations. A827G and 961delTinsC(n) variants could be either very low 
penetrance mutations or non-causative polymorphisms, whereas two 
novel variants here detected are suggestive for having a causative 
role in HH.P12.096  New mutations in WFS1  gene are involved in isolated 
deafness with ascending or U-shape audiometric curves, as well 
as “frontier phenotypes”
S. Marlin1, L. Jonard1, M. Niasme1, C. Bonnet1, M. Louha1, D. Feldmann1, 
R. Couderc1, H. Dollfus2, V. Drouin-Garraud3, D. Lacombe4, F. Fellmann5, C. 
Francannet6, G. Lina-Granade7, F. Denoyelle1;  
1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Hautepierre, Strasbourg, 
France, 3Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 4Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, 
France, 5Hôpital Saint Jacques, Besançon, France, 6Hotel Dieu, Clermont 
Ferrand, France, 7Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France.
Introduction: Wolfram syndrome (also called DIDMOAD for Diabetes 
Insipidus, Diabetes Mellitus, Optic Atrophy and Deafness) is an auto -
somal recessive syndromic disease due to mutations in WFS1 . Domi -
nant mutations of WFS1 , usually located in exon 8 and affecting C-ter -
minal region of the protein wolframin, are also found in non-syndromic 
deafness, predominantly affecting low frequencies (DFNA6/14/38).
Methods: We have screened WFS1  gene in a wide cohort of sporadic 
or familial cases of non-syndromic deafness, characterised by ascend -
ing or U-shape audiometric curves.
Results: 
Fifteen heterozygous mutations (including eleven missense mutations 
and one duplication) have been identified in WFS1  sequence, some 
of them being present in several unrelated families. We could also 
detect WFS1  mutations in « frontier phenotypes », meaning autosomal 
dominant deafness associated with either diabetes mellitus or optic 
atrophy.
Conclusion: The molecular screening of WFS1  is recommended in 
non-syndromic hearing impairment predominantly affecting low or 
middle frequencies. It might also be useful in autosomal dominant « 
frontier phenotypes » associating deafness and either optic atrophy 
or diabetes.
P12.097  Genotype phenotype correlation in iranian patients with 
Hemoglobin H disease
S. Ebrahimkhani1, A. Azarkeivan1, N. Bayat1, M. Houry Parvin1, S. Jalil Nejad1, 
S. Zand1, Z. Golkar1, V. Hadavi1, H. Imaniyan1, C. Oberkanins2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
Background: Some genotypes of HbH patients have severe anemia 
and are dependent on regular blood transfusion. This retrospective 
study provides the molecular genetics of HbH disease and determines 
the genotype-phenotype correlation in a group of HbH patients in 
Iran.
Methods: DNA analysis of 40 patients with HbH disease was performed 
by Polymerase Chain Reaction. Suspected cases with α-thalassemia 
was more analyzed by Reverse dot blot hybridization and sequencing 
to confirm the diagnosis.
Results: Of the total 40 respondents, 27 (67.5%) were female and 13 
(32.5%) were male with mean age 25.73 (SD±16.07) years. Eight pa -
tients (20%) were undergoing regular blood transfusion from whom four 
(10%) needed blood transfusion after 30 years of age. Five (12.5%) 
underwent irregular transfusion, and 27(67.5%) didn’t have history of 
any transfusion. Four patients (10%) had a history of splenomegaly, 
and severe hypochromic microcytic anemia.
Most frequent mutations observed, were -α3.7/--MED in 10 cases (22.5%) 
and --20.5/-5 ntα in 6 patients (15%) and --20.5/~-α3.7 in 4 cases (10%). 
We could find a positive correlation between mutation and transfusion 
dependency (P value =0.03)
Conclusion: Regarding to results we can conclude that particular gen -
otypes of alpha thalassemia may produce mild disease with no need 
for transfusion and are not recommended for prenatal diagnosis. On 
the other hand some special genotypes such as --MED/αCSα, αCSα/~αCSα, 
and αPolyA1α/αPolyA1α lead to regular or irregular transfusion dependency. 
In this condition prenatal diagnosis is necessary and may advise par -
ents for abortion. 
P12.098  Rapid, sensitive and discriminatory HbS and HbC 
mutation detection using High Resolution melting Analysis
S. J. Van Dooren , K. Endels, K. Keymolen, S. Seneca, I. Liebaers, W. Lissens;  
Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium.
Background: Hemoglobinopathies are common monogenic diseases 
forming a major public health problem due to their severity and dis -
abling nature. Genetic identification of the two most frequently ob -Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders22
served missense mutations in the beta-globin gene, HbS and HbC, 
are important epidemiologically and aid in prevention of the sickle cell 
trait and other serious hemoglobin disorders.
Aim: Our increasing patient population of Mediterranean, African and 
Middle Eastern origin urge for the need of a rapid, inexpensive and 
high-throughput genetic testing for HbS and HbC variants.
Results: Classical high resolution melting analysis with an optimized 
PCR amplicon of 110 bp allowed a sensitive and reliable identification 
of the two neighbouring HbS (c.20A>T) and HbC (c.19G>A) mutations. 
Discriminatory melting profiles were observed for all possible combi -
nations of mutations: HbAA, HbAS, HbAC, HbSS, HbCC and HbSC, 
and confirmed the results obtained by Hb-chromatography and PCR 
followed by restriction digestion. Within the wild type control popula -
tion tested, mainly consisting of Belgian and North African individuals, 
two other aberrant melting patterns were observed. Sequencing of all 
samples with aberrant melting patterns revealed one polymorphism at 
position c.9 either in heterozygous or homozygous state. Further test -
ing including samples from over 35 other nationalities did not disclose 
other melting profiles.
Conclusion: This HbS and HbC HRM seems a promising, inexpensive 
and high-throughput alternative to PCR and restriction digestion analy -
sis, although further validation is needed prior to implementation in a 
post- and prenatal diagnostic setting.
P12.099  Molecular analyses of F8 gene in Serbian Hemophilia A 
patients
N. S. Lakic1, A. Krstic1, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. Micic1, M. Kuzmanovic1, N. 
Rasovic1, N. Konstantinidis2;  
1Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Children Health 
Care Institute, Novi Sad, Serbia.
Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder. It is caused 
by mutations within F8 gene, which result in deficient activity of the 
factor VIII. More than 900 various mutations of F8 gene have been 
detected and reported in HAMSTeRS database, until now. In order to 
initiate characterization of mutations in Serbian hemophilia A patients, 
we started with detection of the most frequent rearrangements of F8 
gene, inversion of intron 22 (type 1 and type 2) and intron 1. Using 
inverse shifting-polymerase chain reaction (IS-PCR) we screened 24 
patients and their families, so far. Inversion of intron 22 was found in 
6 patients (25%), Inv22-type 1 in 5 patients and Inv22-type 2 in one 
among them. Analyses showed presence of intron 1 inversion in 2 pa -
tients. All identified mutations were associated with severe phenotype. 
Carrier status was also analyzed in overall number of families. All of 
these results will be further discussed and compared with the present 
literature data.
P12.100  An inverse shifting-polymerase chain reaction for 
genotyping hemophilia-causative rearrangements involving 
int22h  and int1h  hotspots in the factor Viii
L. Kokabee , M. Kokabee, S. Zeinali, M. Karimipoor;  
Molecular medicine department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hemophilia A (HA) is an X -linked coagulation disorder with a world -
wide incidence of approximately 1 in every 5000 males. Almost one 
half of patients with severe HA have large inversions that disrupt either 
intron 22 (Inv22) or intron 1 (Inv1) of the factor VIII gene ( F8). In order 
to improve the molecular diagnosis of Inv22 and Inv1, due to problems 
in using southern blotting and Long-PCR strategies for detection of 
Inv22, efforts are being made to generate new diagnostic tests. Re -
cently, inverse shifting-PCR (IS-PCR) has been developed to over -
coming this defect. Here we report the reproducibility of the modified 
method in genotyping of Inv22 and Inv1 in some Iranian HA patients. 
For this purpose, 4 known cases ( 2 affected males with Inv22 and 2 
carrier females) previously confirmed by southern blot and 7 cases 
( 3 severe HA males, 2 carrier females and 2 normal males) were 
analyzed. BclI digestion followed by self-ligation to create BclI circles , 
and finally PCR was performed on genomic DNA. A perfect match was 
obtained for 4 cases analyzed by southern blot. In new patients, one 
affected male and one carrier female were positive for Inv22. It seems 
IS-PCR technique have proven to be a rapid, robust and reliable tech -
nique for genotyping of inv22 in HA patients.P12.101  WKN1/HSN2  gene analysis in two families with 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type ii
G. Pacheco-Cuellar1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, J. Valdes-Miranda1, S. Zenteno-
Bacheron2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3;  
1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Neurologia, 
Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General 
de Mexico; Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSANs) are clinical -
ly and genetically heterogeneous. They are classified into five different 
types characterized by variable sensory and autonomic dysfunction 
due to peripheral nerve degeneration. Currently at least seven genes 
are associated with HSANs. Mutations in the protein kinase with-
nolysine(K)-1/hereditary sensory neuropathy type 2 ( WNK1/HSN2 ) 
gene cause autosomal recessive HSAN type II, an early-onset ulcero-
mutilating sensory neuropathy. HSN2  is a nervous system-specific 
gene within the WNK1  gene which is located on 12p33.33. In the pres -
ent study we report two unrelated Mexican families with HSN2 due to 
HSN2  gene mutations. The only exon of HSN2  was PCR amplified and 
sequenced from genomic DNA. Diagnosis of HSN2 was made based 
on clinical findings. We identified a mutation in the coding region of 
HSN2 . Both families harbour a homozygous deletion of eight nucleo -
tides that predicted to cause a novel stop codon located 11 nucleo -
tides after the original sotp codon. Such mutation potentially creates 
a protein with additional amino acids that may disrupt any regulatory 
function of the 3`untranslated region downstream from the normal stop 
codon.
P12.102  Identification of a new locus on chromosome 9p for a syndrome associating spastic Paraplegia, Axonal Neuropathy and congenital cataract segregating in an Autosomal Recessive 
pattern (sPANcA tAR syndrome)
H. Azzedine1, H. Tonekaboni1, K. Saadi2, E. LeGuern1, M. Chaouch2, N. 
Birouk3;  
1INSERM/UPMC UMRS975, Paris, France, 2Service de neurologie Hopital 
de Ben Aknoun, Algiers, Algeria, 3Service de nerophysiologie Hôpital des 
spécialités, Rabat, Morocco.
Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSP) as well as Axonal Peripheral 
Neuropathies (APN) could be transmitted as dominant or recessive 
traits. HSP are subdivided in pure and complicated affections. They 
are clinically characterized by progressive bilateral lower-extremity 
spastic weakness due to corticospinal tract deficits. Degeneration is 
maximal at the distal ends of the corticospinal tracts and, to a lesser 
extent, at the distal ends of dorsal column fibbers. Both axonal and de -
myelinating peripheral neuropathies are also known as Charcot Marie 
Tooth disease that is the most frequent neuropathy with an incidence 
of 1/2500.
Many years ago, in 2 large consanguineous families originated from 
north Africa, including 2 and 3 affected individuals respectively, we per -
formed a wide genome search using 400 microsatellites markers. We 
identified positive Lod Scores in different regions of the genome. Ad -
ditional polymorphic markers were necessary to test these regions. All 
of them were excluded except one on chromosome 9 P. More than 20 
additional microsatellite markers were tested in this last region lead -
ing to a 30 cM homozygous interval of segregation in the 2 analyzed 
families. Other families with the same phenotype are recruited in order 
to refine the locus and identified the responsible gene.
P12.103  Genetic analysis of the high bone mass phenotype 
segregating in a small spanish family
P. Sarrión1,2, L. Mellibovsky3, R. Urreizti1,2, N. García-Giralt3, G. Yoskovitz3, R. 
Güerri3, X. Nogués3, A. Diez-Perez3, D. Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2;  
1Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 
2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3URFOA, IMIM, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, 
Spain.
High bone mass (HBM) was originally defined as an asymptomatic au -
tosomal dominant condition characterized by increased bone mineral 
density (BMD) due to gain-of-function mutations in the LRP5  gene. In 
the general population, BMD is normally distributed, and at the high 
extreme of the curve people display BMD values similar to those found 
in HBM patients. The range of densities of HBM is defined by a sum 
Zscore > 4 (totalLS-Zscore + TotalHip-Zscore). In the BARCOS cohort 
of postmenopausal women, 0.6% of individuals display BMD values in 
this range (10 probands). Whether they have mutations in the LRP5  Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
gene is unknown. We present one familiar case (family of proband 
nº10) in which the mother and one of the two sibs have BMD values in 
the range of HBM: mother, sum Zscore = 5.12; HBM-like son = 5.01, 
normal son = 3.41.
As a first approach, we undertook sequencing of relevant exons (2, 3, 
4, 9, 10, 11, and 12) of the LRP5  gene, plus all the coding sequences 
of the DKK1  gene, and no mutations were found.
A second approach consisted on cosegregation analyses of markers 
within several candidate genes and this phenotype. Combining SN -
Plex genotyping and results from a SNP array we could exclude the 
following genes: LRP5 , DKK2, IL6R, RANK, BMP2, and KRM1. The 
only gene cosegregating was RANKL . As a final step, we sequenced 
RANKL  in the proband but no mutations were found. Thus, LRP5 is not 
the cause of HBM in this family, neither are several other candidates.
P12.104  Genotype-phenotype correlation in families with myelin 
protein zero ( MPZ ) gene mutations
E. L. Dadaly1, T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, V. P. Fedotov2;  
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC 
genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) is the most com -
mon cause of inherited peripheral neuropathies with a frequency es -
timated at 1/2500. Electroneuromyographic examination distinguishes 
a demyelinating forms (CMT1) and an axonal forms of the disease 
(CMT2). The MPZ  gene encoding basic protein of the peripheral my -
elin. Different HMSN forms are resulted MPZ  gene mutations.
Electrophysiologically, pathologically and genetically examinations 
were performed to Russia CMT patients. We evaluated demyelinating 
and axonal features of 36 patients from 17 families with MPZ  muta -
tions. The demyelination polyneuropathy with early onset and lower 
motor conduction velocity (MCV) in median nerve was detected in 15 
families (88%). The axonal polyneuropathy with late onset and normal 
MCV was detected in two families (12%).
Mutation’s allocation in protein’s domains were analyzed by us. In the 
majority of cases (81%) mutations localize in Ig-alike domain. How -
ever, correlation between clinical implications and mutation’s location 
were not found in comparably with other author.
P12.105  Novel Rearrangements in Partial Deletions in the 
PMP22  Gene in t wo spanish Families
I. Banchs1, C. Casasnovas2, E. Lopez1, L. De Jorge1, V. Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM)-IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Uni. de Bellvitge-IDIBELL, 
L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an 
autosomal dominant inherited disorder characterized by episodic and 
recurrent demyelinising neuropathy of the peripheral nervous system.
HNPP is mainly caused by a 1.4 Mb deletion in the CMT1A/HNPP 
region at 17p11.2-12, which includes the Peripheral Myelin Protein 22  
(PMP22 ) gene. This region has an elevated rate of rearrangements 
because of a high density of repetitive elements, which account for 
43.37% of the entire CMT1A/HNPP region. Alu sequences represent 
around 23% of these repetitive elements.
We studied the 1.4Mb deletion in two families with HNPP, using al -
lelotyping studies and MLPA. Only with the MLPA kit we were able to 
identify two partial PMP22  gene deletions. For further characterisation 
of these deletions we performed a qGenomics array:
*Family CMT-482: The deletion spans about 30.46 kb, from exon 8 of 
CDRT1 gene to exon 4 of PMP22  gene. Both breakpoints occur in a 
36 pb region of perfect homology, within two Alu sequences, located in 
CDRT1  intron 7 and PMP22  intron 4.
*Family CMT-1678: The deletion spans about 368 kb, from exon 3 to 
3’UTR of the PMP22  gene. The rearrangement is probably enhanced 
by the presence of two shared bases (AG) at the breakpoints that are 
located in intron 2 and 3’ UTR of PMP22  gene.
These results show that MLPA improves the sensitivity of the genetic 
diagnosis of HNPP and contributes to understanding the molecular 
mechanisms of genomic rearrangements in the CMT1A/HNPP re -
gion.P12.106  Application of SNP-arrays to the identification of 
genomic rearrangements causing inherited metabolic disease
L. R. Desviat , P. Rodríguez-Pombo, C. Pérez-Cerdá, B. Merinero, L. Gallego, 
R. Navarrete, M. Ugarte, B. Pérez;  
Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.
Our group performs the genetic diagnosis of more than 50 different in -
herited metabolic diseases (IMD). In all the IMD studied there is a vari -
able number of patients with incomplete genotype after application of 
standard mutation detection techniques (sequencing of PCR-amplified 
cDNA and/or exonic fragments) which do not allow the identification of 
pathological genomic rearrangements (deletions, duplications …). We 
have applied array-based technologies to detect this type of genetic 
lesions in patients with IMD. We have used the Illumina platform for 
whole genome analysis (Human Hap-Quad 610K) and DNA extracted 
from blood or fibroblast samples. We have identified novel deletions 
affecting the ALDH7A1 gene (causing piridoxine-dependent epilepsy, 
OMIM 107323), the GLDC gene (causing non-ketotic hyperglycinemia, 
OMIM 239300) and the BCKDHA gene (causing maple syrup urine 
disease, OMIM 608348). In one patient with homocystinuria, cblE type 
(OMIM 602568) and in one propionic acidemia patient (OMIM 606054), 
SNP-arrays revealed the presence of copy neutral homozygous seg -
ments encompassing the corresponding genes, consistent with seg -
mental uniparental disomy (UPD) being the underlying mechanism of 
disease. These are the first cases of UPD causing homozygosity for a 
pathogenic mutation in these diseases. Further microsatellite analysis 
will determine the pattern of parental segregation of the correspond -
ing chromosomes giving clues to the mechanism leading to UPD. The 
results underscore the importance of completing the genetic analysis 
using novel technologies and of testing the parents of a child with an 
autosomal recessive disease to provide accurate genetic counselling 
especially in terms of recurrence risk for future pregnancies.
P12.107  clinical and genetic study of an italian family with 
Autosomal Recessive spastic Paraplegia associated with 
dysarthria and hearing loss
A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, L. Citrigno1,2, A. L. Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, 
F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, M. Caracciolo1, R. Compagnato1, D. Celi3, W. 
Sproviero1,4, A. Gambardella1,4, M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Piano Lago di Mangone (CS), Italy, 
2Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences, 
University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3IRCCS Centro Neurolesi “Bonino 
Pulejo”, Messina, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are genetically and phenotypi -
cally heterogeneous disorders characterized by progressive spastic -
ity in the lower limbs. Both “uncomplicated” and “complicated” forms 
have been described. HSPs may be inherited as an autosomal domi -
nant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), or X-linked form. To date, 19 
AR-HSPs loci have been mapped. The AR-HSPs have varying age at 
onsets and are mostly complicated forms. The aim of this study was 
to perform a linkage analysis in a small consanguineous AR-HSP Ital -
ian family comprising five members one unaffected and two affected 
siblings in which the parents were first cousins. The neurological ex -
amination of the two affected members revealed spastic paraplegia, 
cerebellar dysarthria, hearing loss, Babinski and Hoffmann signs. Age 
at onset was in childhood. Autozigosity mapping was performed us -
ing microsatellite markers linked to the following AR-HSP loci: SPG5, 
SPG7, SPG11, SPG14, SPG15, SPG20, SPG21, SPG23, SPG24, 
SPG26, SPG27, SPG28, SPG30, HSP-TCC and to three recessive 
spastic-ataxia loci (SACS, SAX3, SAX2). In the two affected patients a 
homozygous region was observed only with the microsatellite markers 
associated to SPG26 locus on chromosome 12. The haplotype recon -
struction and analysis of recombination narrowed the SPG26 locus to 
a 20 cM region flanked by D12S59 and D12S1649 markers. As the 
current SPG26 locus on chromosome 12 is still large to select can -
didate genes, analysis of additional SPG26-linked families could be 
useful to further refine the candidate region and facilitate the selection 
of candidate genes.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
P12.108  Juvenile Huntington disease in Russian families
G. E. Rudenskaya1, N. M. Galeeva1, S. A. Kurbatov2;  
1Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genetic 
Counseling Department, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Juvenile Huntington disease (JHD) manifests before 21 years and 
amounts 2-9 per cent of all HD cases. JHD pathogenesis is related to 
anticipation and imprinting, its typical features are akinesia and rigid -
ity (in contrast to chorea in adult HD), paternal inheritance and hun -
tingtin mutations with amount of CAG repeats >60, though atypical 
cases exist and maternal inheritance is possible. Eight JHD cases, 6 
unrelated and 2 brothers, are presented. Seven patients, one of the 
brothers among them, had rigid JHD with onset in 7-12 years and mu -
tations containing 63-81 repeats; in the second brother (57 repeats) 
JHD started in 20 years and represented like hyperkinetic form with 
no dementia. All cases were familial, but HD history in some was not 
evident due to anticipation and/or erroneous diagnosis. Thus, HD in a 
grandfather started in 60 years, 7 years after JHD onset in his grand -
daughter (78 repeats); JHD in the mother started in 19 years and was 
misdiagnosed as multiple sclerosis. Maternal JHD transmission was 
seen in other two families, both mothers had “classic” HD with rela -
tively early onset. One more family illustrates anticipation and differ -
ences between sibs: JHD in a girl started in 10 years (78 repeats), her 
19-year-old brother was asymptomatic (49 repeats), HD in the father 
started in 48 years (45 repeats). In many cases diagnosis was delayed 
(up to 18 years after onset) which proves JHD underestimation. JHD 
should be considered even in ‘non-familial’ cases, and DNA testing for 
huntingtin mutations should be routine.
P12.109  A novel PcBD gene mutation in an iranian patient with 
Hyperphenylalaninemia
M. Raeisi1, N. Mahdieh2, H. Bagherian1, R. Vahidi1, M. Masoudifard1, S. 
Zeinali1,3;  
1Kawsar research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ilam University 
of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dep’t of Mol. Med., 
Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Neonatal screening for PKU is carried out nationally and our center 
is one of the referral centers for molecular analysis of PKU in Iran. 
Hyperphenylalaninemias are common disorders of phenyalanine ca -
tabolism. Six genes including PAH, PTPS, DHPR, GTPCH, SR and 
PCBD independently play role in this disorder.
A 2-year-old boy was referred to our center for genetic diagnosis of 
PKU. PAH gene was sequenced but no mutation was found. Using 
STR based linkage mapping approach, BH4-metabolizing genes were 
screened. Pattern of autozygosity by descent (ABD) suggested that 
PCBD gene may be involved in this family. This gene was sequenced 
and a homozygous T>C substitution (X105Q) was found in the termi -
nation codon.
P12.110  Fine-scale survey of X chromosome copy Number 
Variants Underlying intellectual Disability
A. Whibley1, V. Plagnol1,2, P. Tarpey3, F. Abidi4, T. Fullston5,6, M. Choma1, C. 
Boucher1, L. Shepherd1, L. Willatt7, G. Parkin7, R. Smith3, P. Futreal3, M. Shaw5, 
J. Boyle8, R. Stevenson4, G. Turner8, A. Hackett8, M. Field8, C. Schwartz4, J. 
Gecz5,6, M. Stratton3, F. Raymond1;  
1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
2University College, London, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4J.C.Self Research Insitute of Human Genetics, 
Greenwood, SC, United States, 5Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Adelaide, 
Australia, 6University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 7Addenbrookes Hospital, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Hunter Genetics Service, Waratah, Australia.
Copy number variants in 251 families with evidence of X-linked intellec -
tual disability (XLID) were investigated by array comparative genomic 
hybridization on a high-density oligonucleotide X chromosome array 
platform. We identified pathogenic copy number variants in 10% of 
families, with mutations ranging from 2kb-11Mb in size. The challenge 
of assessing causality was facilitated by prior knowledge of XLID-as -
sociated genes and the ability to test for co-segregation of variants 
with disease through extended pedigrees. Fine-scale analysis of rare 
variants in XLID families leads us to propose four additional genes, 
PTCHD1, WDR13, FAAH2 and GSPT2, as candidates for XLID causa -
tion and the identification of further deletions and duplications affecting 
X chromosome genes but without apparent disease consequences. Breakpoints of pathogenic variants were characterised to provide in -
sight into the underlying mutational mechanisms and indicated a pre -
dominance of mitotic rather than meiotic events. By effectively bridging 
the gap between karyotype-level investigations and X chromosome 
exon re-sequencing, this study informs discussion of alternative mu -
tational mechanisms, such as non-coding variants and non-X linked 
disease, which might explain the shortfall of mutation yield in the well-
characterised IGOLD cohort, where currently disease remains unex -
plained in two thirds of families.
P12.111  Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome a new 
manifestation of p.S38G in KCNE1 gene.
M. Farhadi1, M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, O. Aryani3, H. Emamdjomeh1, A. 
Asghari1;  
1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and neck Surgery of Iran 
Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Medical Genetic Laboratory Special Medical Centre., Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Autosomal recessive Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome (J-LN) is a 
condition that causes profound hearing loss and disruption of heart‘s 
normal rhythm . J-LN caused by homozygous or compound heterozy -
gous mutations on the KCNQ1  or on the KCNE1  genes encoding the 
Iks current channel.
An 8-year-old girl was referred to the Department and Research cen -
tre of ENT because of sensorineural hearing loss and twice history of 
fainting episodes and QT prolongation 527 msec and with consanguin -
eous parents.
Genomic DNA was obtained from peripheral blood, screened KCNE1 
mutation with direct sequencing.
Direct sequencing showed P.S38G that caused serine by a glycine re -
side at amino acid position 38 ,this change reported before separately 
with noise-induced hearing loss and in patient with Atrial Fibrillation 
that here for the first time represented with Jervell and Lange Nielsen 
syndrome.
Due to Jervell and Lange Nielsen syndrome is a reason for young 
syncope so examination of presence of KCNE1 gene mutation can 
usefully contribute to diagnosis and medical from preventing death.
P12.112  t ackling rare diseases using new possibilities; KFsD 
and t OD cracked
J. T. den Dunnen1, R. Al-Momani2, Y. Sun2, E. Aten2, E. Bakker2, M. H. 
Breuning2;  
1Leiden Genome Technology Center, Human & Clincal Genetics, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Human & Clincal Genetics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Due to recent developments in sequencing technology (next genera -
tion sequencing - NGS) the cost to sequence large genomic regions, 
full human exomes and even complete genomes is rapidly decreasing. 
We have applied these new possibilities to tackle unresolved cases of 
monogenetic diseases where cases are rare, families too small and/or 
candidate gene regions were too large. Regions of interest were tar -
geted by PCR amplification and/or hybridisation capture (on array / in 
solution) using custom-design or X-chromosome exome probe sets. 
The first case cracked was Keratosis Follicularis Spinularis Decalvans 
(OMIM 308800), a rare genetic disorder affecting both skin and eyes. 
Sequencing of genes in the candidate region implicated only mutations 
in the MBTPS2 gene as causing KFSD. Other mutations in this gene 
have been recently shown to cause IFAP syndrome (OMIM 308205), a 
disease with partially overlapping phenotype. A second case was Ter -
minal Osseous Dysplasia (OMIM 300244), a rare male-lethal X-linked 
dominant disease characterized by skeletal dysplasia of the limbs, 
pigmentary defects of the skin, and recurrent digital fibroma during 
infancy. Pathogenic mutations were found in only 1 gene in the candi -
date region with all unrelated patients studied so far having an identi -
cal mutation. The variant X-chromosome was fully inactivated in all 
samples analysed, making it difficult to prove the pathogenic effect of 
the mutation, suggested to affect splicing. Further diseases are under 
analysis; our progress will be reported at the meeting.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
P12.113  molecular genetic evaluation of patients with Klinefelter 
syndrome
T. M. Sorokina , V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo, O. P. Ryzhkova, E. A. Bliznetz, A. 
V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The Klinefelter’s syndrome (KS) is the most common chromosomal 
disorder characterized by testicular dysgenesis, male hypogonadism 
and infertility. The aim of our study was to evaluate genetic factors that 
may be involved in phenotypic variability in KS patients.
Materials and Methods: We examined 20 non-mosaic KS patients. The 
Y-microdeletions and the androgen receptor (AR) gene were analyzed. 
Classic AZF deletions were tested according to EAA/EMQN guidelines 
(1999). Partial AZFc deletions were detected by mPCR of following 
STSs: sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, sY1206, sY1054 and sY1125. 
PCR with primers flanking (CAG)n polymorphic region in exon 1 of the 
AR gene and methylation-sensitive restriction with enzyme HpaII were 
used to determine CAG repeat length and the X-inactivation.
Results: No complete AZF deletion was found. Partial AZFc deletions 
were detected in 15% patients. All individuals presented Yq microdele -
tions were azoospermic. In two patients the b2/b3 deletion was found, 
in the other one rare partial AZFc deletion was detected. The mean 
CAG repeat number was 21.25. Only 42% patients were found to be 
the heterozygotes. Non-random X- inactivation was revealed in these 
individuals. Long AR (CAG)n repeat allele (n>26), was detected only 
in 2.6% examined chromosomes.
Conclusions: Our study demonstrated an absence of classic AZF dele -
tions in KS patients. Partial AZFc deletions were found out with enough 
high frequency. Non-random X-inactivation and long AR (CAG)n al -
leles apparently are rare in KS patients. The further large cohort stud -
ies will allow more accurately assessing a frequency of partial AZFc 
deletions and their significance in KS patients.
P12.114  Familial Hypercholesterolemia in the czech Republic
L. Tichy1, K. Stehlikova1, P. Zapletalova1, L. Duskova1, L. Kopeckova1, T. 
Freiberger2, L. Fajkusova1;  
1University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 2Saint Ann Hospital, Center for Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by mutations and large rearrangements in the gene encoding 
the low-density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ). The frequency of hetero -
zygotes is 1/500. The frequency of homozygotes or compound hetero -
zygotes is 1/1 000 000.
In the set of Czech patients with FH, we found 75 types of causal small 
DNA rearrangements (18 of them were not described so far) and 9 
types of large DNA rearrangements (6 of them were not described so 
far) in LDLR . Large DNA rearrangements were analyzed using MLPA. 
Using long-range PCR, PCR, and DNA sequencing, we analyzed 
breakpoints of deletions/duplications identified in our FH patients. In 
8 rearrangements, we characterized their exact extent and breakpoint 
sequences. The results showed that 6 events were products of un -
equal allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) between Alu repeat 
sequences. The remaining 2 events apparently originated from non-
homologous end joining (NHEJ). NHEJ has not been described in rela -
tion to LDLR  up to now.
From 1253 FH probands, causal events were found in 476 of them. 
Further, we designed genotyping microarray based on the technology 
APEX (Arrayed Primer Extension) that enable detection of 75 muta -
tions found in the Czech population and 75 most common mutations 
from another European population. The validation results indicate that 
the FH chip seems to be a suitable tool for the first line screening of 
mutations in the LDLR  gene.
This work was supported by grant MSMT 2B08060 and LC06023.
P12.115  Identification of novel mutations in LCA5 gene by 
genome-wide homozygosity mapping in patients with Leber 
congenital amaurosis
M. Corton1,2, E. Vallespin1, A. Ávila-Fernández1, B. Almoguera1, R. Riveiro-
Álvarez1, D. Cantalapiedra1, J. Aguirre-Lambán1, M. A. López-Martínez1, M. 
Brión2,3, A. Carracedo2,4, C. Ayuso1;  
1Genetics Department, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-CIBERER, CAIBER 
Unit, Madrid, Spain, 2Genomics Medicine Group, University of Santiago de Compostela-CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Genetics of 
Cardiovascular and Ophthalmologic Diseases, Hospital-University Complex 
of Santiago (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4National Genotyping 
Center (CEGEN), University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
Purpose: Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most 
severe form of all inherited retinal dystrophies, responsible for congen -
ital blindness. To date, 14 LCA-associated genes have been identified 
by linkage analysis, homozygosity mapping and/or candidate gene 
analysis: AIPL1 (17p13.1), CEP290 (12q21.3), CRB1 (1q31-q32.2), 
CRX (19q13.3), GUCY2D (17p13.3), IMPDH1 (7q31.3-q32), LCA5 
(6q14.1), LRAT (4q32.1), RD3 (1q32.3), RDH12 (14q23.3-q24.1), 
RPE65 (1p31), RPGRIP1 (14q11), SPATA7 (14q31.3) and TULP1 
(6q21.3). Mutations in these genes account up to 70% of the LCA pa -
tients, suggesting that additional causative mutations in new and/or 
previously known genes remain to be identified. In this study, we have 
used a genome-wide homozygosity mapping strategy to identify novel 
mutations in LCA individual with inbred or outbred background.
Material And MethodS: Patients from a Spanish cohort of 28 reces -
sive LCA families were genotyped with GeneChip 500K Affymetrix 
SNP microarrays. Known mutations in eight LCA genes were previ -
ously excluded with a genotyping microarray based on arrayed primer 
extension (APEX) technology.
Results: Several homozygous segments were identified in all the 28 
patients, regardless of the absence of proven consanguinity. Eight 
families (28%) shared a homozygous region at chromosome 6q13-
14.1, encompassing the LCA5  locus. By direct sequencing, two novel 
homozygous mutations were identified in LCA5 gene in two of the eight 
families: 1) a frameshift p.Glu132fsX5 and 2) a missense p.Ser202Pro. 
Both variants were not found in a Spanish cohort of 100 healthy indi -
vidual controls.
Conclusions: This study underlines homozygosity mapping as a use -
ful approach to identify novel pathogenic mutations in LCA molecular 
diagnosis.
P12.116  Homozygosity mapping in a t urkish family with Leber 
congenital Amaurosis by high density sNP microarray
D. Yücel1, R. K. Özgül2;  
1Hacettepe University, Department of Molecular Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 
2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, 
Ankara, Turkey.
Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is one of the most severe heredi -
tary eye disease that represent genetic cause of congenital visual im -
pairment in infants and children. LCA is a genetically heterogeneous 
condition, consisting of a group of autosomal recessive retinal dystro -
phies. Recent molecular genetic studies have linked 12 genes (AIPL1, 
CEP290, CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, LCA5, RD3, RDH12, RPE65, RP -
GRIP1, TULP1, LRAT) to LCA. Difficulties in clinical classification of 
LCA cases can cause misdiagnosis. Beside this, the genetic hetero -
genity and complexity of several LCA genes has hampered routine 
molecular analysis. High-throughput molecular screening techniques 
are necessary to surmount this issue.
In this study, whole genome genotyping was performed by Affymetrix 
250K SNP arrays in a consanguineous Turkish family in which four chil -
dren have macular coloboma type LCA. Homozygosity mapping have 
shown linkage to chromosome 14 in this family. LCA causing RDH12 
gene located in this chromosomal region was selected as a first candi -
date gene for mutation screening. In four patients, Thr49Met mutation 
in exon 2 was identified by direct sequence analysis in RDH12 gene.
RDH12 mutations account less than 3% of all LCA-associated gene 
mutations. Therefore, RDH12 gene is not primarily preferred among 
other responsible genes for mutation screening studies in LCA. In 
large LCA families, homozygosity mapping could be used as a rapid 
identification of disease causing locus and molecular diagnosis.
P12.117  mutation Analysis of Limb Girdle muscular Dystrophies 
in the czech Republic
K. Stehlikova , Z. Hruba, L. Fajkusova;  
University Hospital, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of disorders 
characterised by progressive involvement of proximal limb girdle mus -
cles.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder characterized by atrophy and weakness of proximal 
girdle muscles. LGMD2A is caused by mutations in the CAPN3  gene 
(15q15) that encodes the muscle specific protein, calpain-3 (p94). LG -
MD2A is the most frequent form of LGMD in many European coun -
tries.
Another relatively common form of LGMD is LGMD2I caused by muta -
tions in the FKRP  gene (19q13.3) that encodes a protein which partici -
pates in the glycosylation of α-dystroglycan in the muscle fibre.
We performed analysis of the CAPN3  gene and FKRP  gene in a cohort 
of patients with preliminary diagnoses of LGMD at both the mRNA lev -
el using reverse transcription-PCR or at the DNA level using PCR and 
direct sequencing. We screened 175 unrelated patients for mutations 
in the CAPN3  gene. 40 patients (23%) were found to carry mutations in 
the CAPN3  gene. We detected 16 previously reported mutations and 
3 novel mutations (c. 802_945del, c. 1783_1788del, p.Q619X). Our 
results show that mutation 550delA is the most frequent CAPN3 defect 
in Czech LGMD2A patients (53 %). We screened 76 unrelated patients 
for the most common mutation in the FKRP  gene (p.Leu276Ile). The 
mutation was found in 5 patients (7%).
This work was supported by grans MSMT LC06023 and 2B08060
P12.118  The frequency of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 1C in 
southern italy
P. Spadafora1, M. Liguori1, M. Caracciolo1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, I. Manna1, 
G. Spinelli1, V. Andreoli1, R. Cittadella1, F. Trecroci1, A. Quattrone1,2, A. 
Gambardella1,2;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences - National Research Council, CS, Italy, 
2Institute of Neurology -Department of Medical Sciences, University “Magna 
Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy.
Caveolin-3 (Cav3) is a protein composed of 151 amino acids mainly 
expressed in skeletal muscle tissue where it seems to play a key role 
in the maintenance of plasma membrane integrity. In addition cave -
olin-3 has been implicated in signal transduction and vesicular traf -
ficking. Mutations in the gene encoding caveolin-3 (CAV3), located 
on chromosome 3p25, were first identified in patients with autosomal 
dominant limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1C), hyperCKemia, 
rippling muscle disease and distal myopathy. Mutations in CAV3 gene 
were also reported in long QT syndrome and in Sudden infant death 
syndrome. Recently, missense mutations in CAV3 gene were associ -
ated with an autosomal recessive LGMD phenotype.To evaluate the 
frequency of LGMD1C in southern Italy we performed the molecular 
analysis of CAV3 gene in clinically suspected LGMD patients. The ex -
ons and flanking intronic boundaries of the gene were analysed by 
sequencing. Among the screened 50 LGMD patients we identified only 
a patient with a heterozygous 3bp microdeletion (290-293del) in exon 
2 of CAV3 gene, resulting in loss of a phenylalanine (Phe97del). This 
mutation has been previously identified by other authors in an Italian 
family. The autosomal dominant forms of LGMD are relatively rare and 
represent probably less than 10% of all cases. Our findings indicate 
that the frequency of the LGMD1C in southern Italy is around 2%. Our 
future plain is to perform the molecular analysis of the other genes 
involved in the pathogenesis of LGMD in order to evaluate the relative 
proportion of the different types of LGMD in southern Italy.
P12.119  Novel mutations in cAPN3 and LAmA2 genes 
associated with genetic and phenotypic heterogeneities within 
a single consanguineous family involving both congenital and 
progressive muscular dystrophies.
I. HADJ SALEM1, L. Nacim1, R. Souad2, T. Chahnez3, F. Faiza1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Médecine de 
Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Biotech RDP. Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, 
Tunisia., Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service de Neuro-pédiatrie. C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de 
Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, Tunisia.
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) and congenital muscular 
dystrophy (CMD) are two common forms of neuromuscular disorders 
which are distinguishable by their age of onset but with probably simi -
lar underlying pathway. In this study, we report the immunohistochemi -
cal, western blot and genetic analyses in a large consanguineous 
Tunisian family with two branches including seven patients sharing 
similar LGMD2 phenotype in one branch and one CMD patient inthe 
second. Linkage analyses were compatible with the LGMD2A locus in 
one family branch and with MDC1A locus in the other one. This result was supported by deficiency in merosin and calpain3 in the CMD pa -
tient and LGMD patients respectively. Mutation analysis revealed two 
distinct mutations: a c.8005delT frameshift deletion in exon 56 of the 
LAMA2 gene (MDC1A) was found in the CMD patient and a new ho -
mozygous mutation c.1536+1G>T in the donor splice site of intron 12 
of the CAPN3 gene (LGMD2A) was found in the LGMD patients for the 
first time. RTPCR performed on total RNA from a LGMD2A patient’s 
muscle biopsy showed a complete retention of intron 12 in CAPN3 
cDNA generating a premature termination codon which potentially elic -
its the nonsense mRNA to degradation by NMD (nonsense-mediated 
mRNA decay). Our data indicate that mRNA analysis is necessary to 
clarify the primary effect of genomic mutations on splicing efficiency 
that alters mRNA processing and expression level.
P12.120  Establishing web-based gene variant databases for all mendelian disorders
I. F. Fokkema1, J. Celli1, P. E. Taschner1, J. T. den Dunnen1, &. the Gen2Phen 
Consortium2;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2www.
gen2phen.org, United Kingdom.
The EU-funded Gen2Phen project (http://www.Gen2Phen.org/) aims 
to provide advanced informatics solutions to link genotypes to phe -
notypes. One deliverable is to establish web-based gene sequence 
variant databases (LSDBs) for all human genes involved in Mende -
lian disorders. This should provide all those involved an easy, cheap 
and effective way to share their findings and use the full collection to 
draw conclusions on the potential phenotypic consequences of a given 
variant, e.g. „pathogenic or not“ when in a clinical setting. Recently, a 
study was completed that sequenced the coding exons of all genes 
on the X chromosome in 208 families with X-linked mental retarda -
tion. All sequence variants identified were stored on a gene-by-gene 
basis in a single LSDB installation containing 542 genes (http://www.
LOVD.nl/MR). The platform used, LOVD, allows easy web-access, 
submitting and curating variants and viewing and querying of the col -
lected information. Individual databases can be customized to specific 
user needs, directly link to other sources (internet, intranet, local-PC 
files) and exchange data with central repositories. By mid-2010, the 
LSDBs established will be extended to cover all human genes involved 
in Mendelian disorders. To make this resource most useful, we invite 
clinicians and researchers working on genetic disorders world-wide 
to submit their findings. In addition we solicit volunteers to become a 
gene guardian (curator), checking incoming information and thereby 
ensuring data quality.
Funded by the European Community‘s Seventh Framework Pro -
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the 
GEN2PHEN project.
P12.121  contributions of alternative splicing to transcript diversity: novel variants of machado-Joseph Disease gene 
(ATXN )
C. Bettencourt1,2, C. Santos3, R. Montiel4, M. Costa5,6, P. Cruz-Morales4, L. R. 
Santos1, N. Simões1, T. Kay7, J. Vasconcelos8, P. Maciel6, M. Lima1,2;  
1University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Molecular and 
Cellular Biology Institute (IBMC), Porto, Portugal, 3Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la 
Biodiversidad, CINVESTAV-IPN, Irapuato, Mexico, 5University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, United States, 6University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 7Hospital of D. 
Estefania, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada 
- Azores, Portugal.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a late onset neurodegenerative dis -
order that presents clinical heterogeneity, not completely explained by 
its causative mutation. MJD is caused by an expansion of a CAG tract 
at exon 10 of the ATXN3  gene (14q32.1), which encodes for ataxin-3. 
The main goal of this study was to analyze the occurrence of alterna -
tive splicing at the ATXN3  gene, by sequencing a total of 415 cDNAs 
clones (from 20 MJD patients and 14 controls). Two novel exons were 
described for the ATXN3  gene. Fifty-six alternative splicing variants, 
generated by 4 types of splicing events, were observed. From those 
variants, 50 were not previously described and 26 were only found in 
MJD patients samples. Most of the variants (85.7%) present frame -
shift, which leads to the appearance of premature stop codons. Thirty-
seven of the observed variants constitute good targets to nonsense 
mediated decay. The remaining variants are likely to be translated into Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders27
at least 20 different isoforms. According to the presence/absence of 
known ataxin-3 domains, it can be predicted that some of those vari -
ants may contribute to increased toxicity, while others may be protec -
tive. Findings from this work confirm that alternative splicing consti -
tutes an important mechanism regulating protein diversity and indicate 
that there is genetic variability, other than that found in genomic DNA, 
which may be enrolled in the MJD pathogenic process, as well as in 
the neuropathology of other polyglutamine disorders.
P12.122  clinical and genetic studies of t unisian and Algerian 
families with mal de meleda disease
O. Mamaï1, M. Gribaa1, L. Boussofara2, L. Adala1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, A. 
Amara1, R. Bhouri1, M. Denguezli2, A. Saad1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique moléculaire et de Biologie de 
la Reproduction Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Dermatologie et de 
Vénérologie. CHU Farhat HACHED, Sousse, Tunisia.
Mal de Meleda MDM (OMIM 248300) is a rare autosomal recessive 
palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) with prevalence of 1 in 100000. Clini -
cally, it is characterized by transgressive PPK, particularly over the 
joints, perioral erythema, brachydactyly and nail abnormalities. The 
progressive lesion can lead to a severe functional handicap with re -
duced mobility of hands and feet including spontaneous amputation of 
digits. It is caused by mutations in SLURP1  gene located in chromo -
some 8 (8q24.3).
Here we investigate 2 consanguineous families. The first is Tunisian 
with one affected women and the second is Algerian with 2 affected 
children. A detailed disease history with the age of onset, distribution, 
and clinical course of their skin lesions were noted and a full clinical 
examination was performed for every patient. We proceed to direct 
sequencing of the 3 exons in the SLURP1 gene. Sequence analysis 
revealed 2 kwon mutations in exon 2; c.82delT in the Tunisian family 
and +1 iVs2 G>A  for the Algerian family.
P12.123  medullary cystic kidney disease: further evidence of 
genetic heterogeneity based on a large Portuguese family
G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1, J. Calado2, F. Carvalho2, C. Teixeira3, S. Jorge3, H. 
Viana2, A. Gomes da Costa3, E. Almeida3;  
1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 2Hospital Curry Cabral, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Hospital Santa 
Maria, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
Background: Medullary cystic kidney disease type 2 (MCKD2) is a rare 
autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by gout, tubulointersti -
tial nephropathy and end-stage renal failure (ESRF). The disease is 
caused by mutations in the uromodulin gene (UMOD, 16p12.3). Be -
sides, MCKD1, with overlapping phenotype to MCKD2, but milder 
symptoms and with later age-at-onset is associated with a candidate 
disease locus on chromosome 1q21.
Patients and Methods: We investigated a Portuguese family of 4 gen -
erations suffering of MCKD2 syndrome. The proband of the family de -
veloped ESRF at the age of 28 years. Further nine family members 
were affected. The disease showed a typical autosomic dominant trait 
in the family. We tested the entire coding region of the UMOD gene for 
mutations with PCR and direct sequencing analysis.
Results: Affected family members showed elevated serum uric acid 
levels. Renal biopsy, carried out in one affected family member re -
vealed signs of a tubulointerstitial disease. Immunohystochemistry of 
the kidney showed staining of uromodulin in tubule profiles. Genetic 
analysis of the UMOD gene showed three non-pathogenic variants but 
did not reveal any pathogenic mutations.
Conclusion: The clinical and pathological characteristics of this family 
suggest a clear MCKD2 syndrome. The missing of pathogenic muta -
tions in the UMOD gene points out the genetic heterogeneity of this 
disease and broadens the phenotypic spectrum of non-UMOD related 
MCKD. Further investigations of this family might be helpful in identi -
fying candidate genes for MCKD1 and describe genotype-phenotype 
correlations.
P12.124  monocarboxylate transporter 10 (mct10) implications 
in oligodendrocyte t3 transport and in dysmyelinating 
phenotypes
C. Vaurs-Barrière1, G. Giraud1, S. Mirafzal1, Y. Capri1, H. Heuer2, E. C. H. 
Friesema3, T. J. Visser3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,4;  
1GReD UMR INSERM U931 CNRS 6247, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Leibniz Institute for Age Research/Fritz Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany, 
3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Reference Center for 
leukodystrophies, Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Paris, France.
Thyroid hormones (TH) are known to be essential for proper brain de -
velopment, notably for myelination by controlling oligodendrocyte (the 
central nervous system (CNS) myelinating cells) differentiation. Never -
theless, nothing is known about TH transporters in oligodendrocytes. 
We reported that patients with mutations in the TH transporter mono -
carboxylate 8 (MCT8) display not only an X-linked mental retardation 
associated with spastic paraplegia but also a myelination delay. This 
observation suggested that MCT8 participates in TH transport in oligo -
dendrocytes and we demonstrated that this is the case in human and 
mouse oligodendrocyte cell lines.
Another member of the MCT family, MCT10, has recently been identi -
fied as a new TH transporter expressed in the mouse CNS in white 
matter structures where oligodendrocytes are localized. We therefore 
sought whether MCT10 could play a role in TH transport in oligoden -
drocytes and whether MCT10 mutations could be responsible for dys -
myelinating phenotypes. We established that MCT10 is implicated in 
T3 transport, at least in the human oligodendrocyte cell line MO3.13, 
since MCT10 silencing using siRNA impairs 25+/-8.02% of T3 trans -
port. Together, MCT8 and MCT10 account for at least 63+/-2.6% of T3 
transport in MO3.13. We are now looking for MCT10 mutation in dys -
myelinating phenotypes of unknown origin in a cohort of 45 patients 
presenting a myelination defect at birth. Results from the sequencing 
of the 6 coding exons of the MCT10 gene will be presented.
These results will contribute to better define how TH are transported 
into oligodendrocytes and to assess whether MCT10 could be impli -
cated in human pathology.
P12.125  Identification of an X-chromosomal microdeletion in a patient suspected of the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome using a dense sNP array.
E. C. Friesema1, F. Rivadeneira1, M. Jhamai1, A. G. Uitterlinden1, A. Zung2, T. 
J. Visser1;  
1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Kaplan Medical 
Center, Rehovot, Israel.
Thyroid hormone (TH) is crucial for the development of different or -
gans, in particular the brain. Different TH transporters have been iden -
tified including monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8). The clinical 
importance of TH transporters is shown in patients with mutations in 
MCT8  (SLC16A2 ). The patients suffer from severe X-linked psycho -
motor retardation in combination with disturbed TH levels, especially 
high serum T3 levels, now referred to as Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syn -
drome (AHDS).
A male patient with severe psychomotor retardation, elevated T3 se -
rum levels and suspected of having AHDS was referred to our lab for 
genetic studies. PCR analysis of MCT8  showed the presence of exon 
1, while exons 2-6 were missing. We used the Illumina HumanHap 
610-Quad array to determine in the patient the approximate size of 
the deletion downstream of MCT8  and if the deletion comprised other 
genes. DNA of the mother and two randomly selected female controls 
were also investigated. There was a complete loss of 9 SNPs involving 
45.5 kb around MCT8 which was confined to the DNA of the patient. 
Further analysis by PCR-based mapping revealed an X-chromosomal 
deletion between 59.6 and 82.7 kb.
In conclusion, using a high-density SNP array we could determine that 
the deletion in the patient was limited to MCT8  and of likely de novo  
origin considering that the mother was not a carrier of this X-chromo -
somal deletion. We confirmed that the patient is an AHDS patient with 
a large MCT8  deletion, which probably explains his phenotype by the 
suggested lack of MCT8 expression.
P12.126  mEFV mutations in iranian patients suffering from familial mediterranean fever: analysis of 12 mutations
H. Imanian1, M. Rostami1, V. Hadavi1, C. Oberkanins2, H. Najmabadi1, H. 
Loghmani Khouzani1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive inher -
ited inflammatory disorder. It is characterized by recurrent episodes of 
painful inflammation in the abdomen, chest or joints. The responsible Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
disease gene, designated MEFV , has been mapped on chromosome 
16p13, comprises of 10 exons and encodes a protein called mareno -
strin or pyrin, which is found in white blood cells. Because of non -
specific clinical symptoms, the molecular genetic analysis of MEFV  
significantly improves early and precise FMF diagnosis.
In this study we used multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridization (FMF 
StripAssay, ViennaLab Diagnostics) to analyze the following 12 MEFV  
mutations: E148Q, P369S, F479L, M680I (G/C), M680I (G/A), I692del, 
M694V, M694I, K695R, V726A, A744S and R761H in 250 Iranian pa -
tients, which were referred to us based on clinical criteria indicating 
FMF.
We identified MEFV  mutations in 60.4% of our patients. Out of these 
mutations, 83.5% were located in exon 10, while the remaining 16.5% 
were found in other exons. The most common mutation was M694V 
(42.3%), which is known to be a founder mutation in other populations. 
In 39.6% of patients we could not identify a mutation that could explain 
their clinical status. Some of our patients were sent for comprehensive 
MEFV sequencing, but no additional mutation was identified.
P12.127  X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets with audio-
vestibular symptoms - a model for understanding meniere’s 
disease?
C. Frykholm , U. Friberg;  
Surgical sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
The etiology of Meniere’s disease (MD) is unknown. Some individuals 
with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) exhibit audio-vestibular 
symptoms similar to MD. We hypothesized that XLH patients may be 
investigated in order to gain insight in the biochemical disturbances un -
derlying MD. A three-generation XLH-family with a known PHEX -gene 
mutation was studied. Some individuals with XLH had audio-vestibular 
symptoms, some did not. Past phosphate substitution, blood labora -
tory tests, audiological tests and inner ear images (CT and MRI) were 
studied in several affected family members. The differences found in 
the study of these XLH individuals, with and without audio-vestibular 
symptoms, will be presented.
P12.128  Molecular genetic testing of mental retardation in 
Bulgaria
T. Todorov1,2, A. Todorova1,2, D. Avdjieva3, P. Dimova4, R. Tincheva3, V. Mitev1;  
1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Madico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
3Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4“St. 
Naum” Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Mental retardation is highly heterogeneous in clinical and genetic point 
of view. Here we discuss on: Fragile X syndrome (FXS), Rett syn -
drome (RTT), Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes (PWS/AS) and mi -
crodeletion syndromes (MDS). The genes studied are: FMR1, MECP2, 
CDKL5, ARX, and methylation analysis of exon 1 of the SNRPN. Multi -
plex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis was used 
to look for large deletions/duplications, to screen for microdeletion syn -
dromes, and to clarify methylation status of FMR1 and SNRPN genes. 
Our results in the group of FXS revealed about 12% mutations in the 
FMR1 gene. A mosaic case full mutation/normal allele was detected. 
The genetic tests in the group of RTT girls revealed about 26% muta -
tions along the MECP2 gene. No CDKL5 gene mutations were detect -
ed. The genetic tests in the group of PWS/AS revealed 64% mutations 
along the 15q11-q13 region. The MLPA analysis in the group of MDS 
revealed genetically confirmed cases with diagnosis Williams Beuren 
and Wolf-Hirschhorn syndromes. Altogether, we manage to clarify the 
molecular basis in about 30% of our mentally retarded patients. The 
percentage of genetically proved diagnosis among our RTT patients, 
PWS/AS and MDS cases is relatively high, which represents a good 
clinical recognition of these pathological entities. On the contrary, the 
percentage of the genetically confirmed FXS cases is relatively low. 
Most probably this is due to the characteristics of this group, being 
clinically mixed and containing some definite autistic cases.
Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No 27/2009, 
Sofia Medical University, BulgariaP12.129  The Arg468His mutation in MFN2 is the most frequent cause of cmt2A in spanish Patients
C. Casasnovas1, I. Banchs2, J. Cassereau3, N. Gueguen4, A. Chevrollier4, J. 
Martínez-Matos1, D. Bonneau4, V. Volpini2;  
1Unitat de Neuromuscular. Neurology Department. Hospital Universitari de 
Bellvitge - IDIBELL,, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat. Barcelona, Spain, 2Center for 
Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) – IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, 
Spain, 3INSERM, U771, Département de Neurologie, Centre hospitalier 
universitaire., Angers, France, 4INSERM U694, Département de Biochimie et 
Génétique, Centre Hospitalier., Angers, France.
Introduction: The most common form of axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease (CMT) is type 2A, caused by mutations in mitochondrial GT -
Pase mitofusin 2 (MFN2). 
Objective: To establish the incidence of MFN2 mutations in a cohort of 
Spanish patients with axonal CMT neuropathy. 
Material and Methods: We studied 85 families with suspected axo -
nal CMT. All MFN2 exons were studied through direct sequencing. A 
bioenergetics study in fibroblasts was conducted using a skin biopsy 
taken from a patient with an Arg468His mutation. 
Results: Twenty-four patients from 14 different families were identified 
with nine different MFN2 mutations. MFN2 mutations were responsible 
for CMT2 in 16% ± 7.7% of the families studied and in 30.8% ± 14.2% 
(12/39) of families with known dominant inheritance. The Arg468His 
mutation was the most prevalent (6/14 families). A bioenergetics study 
in fibroblasts was conducted using a skin biopsy taken from a patient 
with this mutation. These bioenergetic studies showed the typical re -
sults of MFN2 patients. 
Conclusion: The Arg468His mutation is the most prevalent (6/14 fami -
lies) mutation in MFN2 causing CMT2A in Spanish patients and our 
study confirmed that it is actually pathological, presenting as a neu -
ropathy in a mild to moderate degree.
P12.130**  Role of the microRNA-183 family in the pathogenesis of hereditary nonsyndromic hearing loss in the italian 
population
G. Soldà1, F. Oldoni1, R. Asselta1, P. Primignani2, P. Castorina3, C. Radaelli2, D. 
Coviello2, S. Duga1;  
1Dip. Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS, 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 
3Medical Genetics, UO Audiology, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy.
The mir-183 microRNA (miRNA) family is composed of mir-183, mir-96, 
and mir-182, which are coordinately expressed from a single genetic 
locus in vertebrates. This highly conserved miRNA family is essential 
for differentiation and function of the vertebrate inner ear. In 2009, 2 
mutations in the human MIRN96 gene have been reported in 2 Span -
ish families affected by autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensori -
neural hearing loss (AD-NSHL). This represented the first evidence 
implicating a point mutation within a miRNA in a Mendelian disease.
We screened a total of 770 NSHL patients and 808 normal-hearing 
Italian controls for mutations in MIRN96, MIRN182, and MIRN183. 
Neither of the 2 previously reported MIRN96 mutations were found, 
suggesting that they might represent private mutations. Instead, at 
least one putative novel mutation within mir-96, +57T>C, was iden -
tified in a patient with a family history of AD-NSHL. The detected 
variant replaces a highly evolutionarily conserved nucleotide located 
outside the mature mir-96, and is predicted to reduce the stability of 
the pre-miRNA secondary structure (dG from -34.4 to -30.4 Kcal/Mol). 
Moreover, the variation occurs within the seed region of the mature 
mir-96*, which is processed from the complementary strand of the mir-
96 precursor. The mir-96* seem to have been maintained throughout 
vertebrate evolution, although its sequence is only partially conserved. 
Very little is known about mir-96* expression and function. The effect of 
mir-96+57T>C on mir-96 processing as well as on mir-96* processing/
target recognition is currently underway by ex-vivo expression experi -
ments in human cell lines.
P12.131  severe mitochondrial DNA depletion in infancy.
S. Seneca1,2, J. Smet3, R. Van Coster3, L. De Meirleir4,2, W. Lissens1,2, M. 
Bonduelle1,2, I. Liebaers1,2;  
1UZ Brussel, CMG, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 
Brussels, Belgium, 3University Hospital Ghent, Division of Paediatric Neurology Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders2
and Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 4UZ Brussel, Division of Paediatric Neurology, 
Brussels, Belgium.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number reduction, known as the mi -
tochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS), is a common cause of 
severe mitochondrial disorders of infancy and early childhood. MDS 
results from defects in nuclear encoded factors involved in mtDNA 
maintenance and within the past years mutations in the POLG1 , 
DGUOK , MPV17 , PEO1 , SUCLG1 , TK2, SUCLA2  and TYMP  genes 
have proven to be implicated in the pathogenesis of this disorder. The 
clinical phenotypes associated with the different gene alterations vary 
considerately but present either as a hepatocerebral or a myopathic 
syndrome.
We have identified a homozygous p.E85 deletion in exon 3 of the 
RRM2B  gene in a neonate. The patient, born to first-cousin Cauca -
sian parents, presented with lactic acidosis, severe hypotonia, deaf -
ness, blindness and hyperammonemia. Muscle biopsy showed RRF, 
a combined respiratory chain defects and massive subcomplexes of 
ATP synthase both with traditional spectrophotometry and BN-PAGE. 
Western blotting using antibodies against selective OXPHOS subunits 
indicated the preservation of nuclear encoded complex II. She died at 
2 months of age. Mutations of the RRM2B  gene, encoding the cyto -
solic R2 subunit of a p53 controlled ribonucleotide reductase (p53R2), 
have been reported to cause severe depletion of muscle mtDNA by 
Bourdon et al. 2007. Indeed, < 5% residual amount of mtDNA was 
measured in muscle tissue of our patient. Aberrations in these 9 genes 
count only for a minority of all MDS cases. It is expected that other 
genes involved will be identified soon.
P12.132  motor chip: a cGH microarray for neuromuscular 
disorders
G. Piluso1, M. Dionisi1, A. Torella1, F. Del Vecchio Blanco1, S. Aurino1,2, V. 
Nigro1,2;  
1Seconda Universita di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2TIGEM, Napoli, Italy.
Neuromuscular disorders are a highly heterogeneous group of geneti -
cally determined diseases in which at least 245 different genes have 
been involved (www.musclegenetable.org).
We developed a specific array CGH assay, called the “Motor chip”. 
The Motor chip includes 465 genes selected for (i) their involvement 
in Mendelian neuromuscular disorders (245), (ii) their involvement in 
muscle specific metabolic pathways and/or functions (97), (iii) their 
muscle-specific expression level (48), or (iv) the putative interaction of 
their protein product with LGMD genes (75).
The selected genes correspond to 42,665,641 bp of genomic sequence 
and to 3,543,193 bp of coding sequence that was covered by selecting 
38,481 specific 60 bp long probes (coverage 99.8%). The design was 
developed using the Agilent platform and the 8X60K format, represent -
ing the most cost-effective option. The free surface of the array was 
randomly filled with probes from Agilent Human Genome 44K CGH 
array, covering the whole human genome.
Validation experiments were carried out using DNA samples from dys -
trophic patients in which deletions/duplications had previously been 
identified in different genes (DMD, CAPN3, and SGCG). All the aber -
rations were correctly addressed.
We next tested 24 samples from LGMD patients for which no muta -
tion was found. The Motor chip identified one patient with two complex 
SGCG gene deletions, one patient with a DYSF gene duplication in -
volving the first 5 exons and other minor aberrations. A second gen -
eration of the Motor chip is currently under development. We consider 
that this tool may be very useful for the diagnosis of all unknown neu -
romuscular disorders.
P12.133  Analysis of cOL1A1 gene in Osteogenesis imperfecta 
patients in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia
D. Nadyrshina , R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Academy 
of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically and genetically heteroge -
neous disorder of connective tissue. We carried out the analysis of 
COL1A1  gene in 36 patients from 30 families with OI from Bashkor -
tostan (Russia). Two nonsense mutations (Arg361X and Arg415X) in 
COL1A1  gene have been detected using SSCP analysis. Both muta -
tions convert CGA which encodes arginine to TGA that results in a 
premature stop codon (causes a 50% reduction of collagen produc -tion). In literature this mutation was described as the cause of mild OI 
type I with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. In our sample 
this Arg361X mutation resulted in severe OI type III. The c.1243 C>T 
mutation (Arg415X) also causes premature termination codon. Three 
polymorphisms in the promoter region (- 1997G /T, +1245G/T and -
1663indelT ) of COL1A1 gene were shown to be associated with the 
bone mineral density. Analysis of -1997G/T polymorphism revealed 
statistically significant differences in genotype frequencies distribution 
between the patients with OI (29) and the control group (150): -1997G/
T genotype was shown to be the factor risk of fracture development 
(OR=2.38, 95%CI 1.06-5.34). While -1997G/G genotype might be 
considered as protective one (OR=0.4, 95%CI 0.19-0.98). Statistically 
significant differences were demonstrated with respect to genotype 
combinations of COLIA1  polymorphisms -1997G/T, -1663indelT and 
+1245G/T between individuals with OI and control group. Genotypes 
combination - 1997G /T+-1663I /D+1245G /T was associated with high 
risk of fracture development (OR=11.84, 95%CI 2.06-68.09), whereas 
combination - 1997G /G+-1663I /I+1245G /G - was shown to be protec -
tive (OR=0.45, 95%CI 0.22-0.95).
P12.134  V851M mutation in the CLCN1 gene causes recessive 
myotonia congenita
V. Adir1, H. Furman1,2, A. Shalata1, Z. U. Borochowitz1,2;  
1The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2Technion 
Institute of Technology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel.
Myotonia Congenita (MC), one of the most common forms of non-dys -
trophic types of myotonia, may show both dominant (Thomsen dis -
ease) and recessive (Becker disease) modes of transmission, both of 
which may be caused by mutations in CLCN1 (7q35), which encodes 
a chloride channel that is present in skeletal muscle. In this study we 
describe 2 Arab families with MC, from two different villages in north -
ern Israel. The first family was referred to genetic counseling because 
of an undefined myotonia in a child. The family tree showed a reces -
sive pattern of heredity. The entire CLCN1 gene was sequenced and a 
change in the coding region of exon 22 was found. The 2551G>A sub -
stitution causes a missense mutation V851M, located in the conserved 
CBS2 domain in the C terminus of the CLCN1 channel. All of the af -
fected children in the extended family were found to be homozygous 
to the V851M mutation, while their parents and the healthy siblings 
were found to be heterozygous to the mutation. The second family was 
previously described by us (Muscle Nerve. 2009 Aug 20). In this family 
a novel missense mutation [568GG>TC (G190S)] was found in twelve 
members which transmitted the condition in an autosomal dominant 
manner with incomplete penetrance.
P12.135  Myotonia congenita: identification of new mutations in the cLcN1 gene
I. Torrente1, E. Pisaneschi1, A. Modoni2, M. Lo Monaco2, L. Merlini3, B. 
Dallapiccola4, E. M. Valente1;  
1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 
2Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy, 3Muscle Unit, Medical Genetics Section, Department of Experimental 
Diagnostic Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 4Bambino Gesù 
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
Myotonia congenita (MC) is a hereditary muscle disorder character -
ized by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary contrac -
tion (myotonia) that can be inherited either as an autosomal-dominant 
(Thomsen Disease, OMIM 160800) or recessive trait (Becker Disease, 
OMIM 255700). The clinical features of the two conditions are very 
similar but can be distinguished by severity and inheritance pattern. 
Both disorders are caused by mutations in the CLCN1  gene on chro -
mosome 7q35, encoding the skeletal muscle chloride channel ClC-1. 
In the general population, the incidence is reported as 1:23.000 live 
births for the dominant form and as 1:50.000 for the recessive form. 
To date 137 mutations have been described in literature. In the pres -
ent study, we analysed for mutations the CLCN1  gene in a panel of 
101 clinically well-characterized unrelated patients originating from dif -
ferent countries (69 males and 32 females). Detailed clinical charts 
were collected for each patient. Mutation analysis was conducted by 
DHPLC screening of all coding exons followed by direct sequencing. 
We identified 54 different mutations in 67 patients (66%), of which 27 
were novel. The mutation spectrum in our analysis was composed of 
31 missense, 12 non-sense, 6 splicing and 5 frameshift mutations. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders0
Among the 101 investigated patients 45 (44%) were homozygous or 
compound heterozygous for two CLCN1 mutations, 22 (21%) were 
heterozygous for one mutation and 34 (33%) were negative. The pres -
ent study expands the CLCN1  gene mutation spectrum and will con -
tribute to further understand the molecular basis underlying the MC 
phenotypic variability.
P12.136  myotonic dystrophy type 2 in Russian families
N. Galeeva , G. Rudenskaya, E. Dadaly, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Myotonic dystrophy (dystrophia myotonica, DM) is genetically hetero -
geneous. Along with ‘classic’ widespread DM1 caused by expansion of 
CTG-repeats in DMPK  gene there exists an infrequent DM2 caused by 
expansion of CCTG-repeats in zink finger protein 9 gene ( ZNF9 ) and 
found exclusively in European populations. DM1 and DM2 share main 
features though DM2 has some distinctions: mean age of onset is 48 
yrs, muscle weakness is predominantly proximal in contrast to distal 
myopathy in DM1, myalgia is a characteristic feature, cardiomyopathy 
is rare and cognitive disorders are not seen while other extramuscular 
features are similar to DM1; anticipation is not typical, and congenital 
forms do not exist, but reverse anticipation is possible. We present first 
Russian DM2 cases. In one family the mother and the daughter were 
affected at the age of 21 and 15 accordingly. Daughter at the age of 21 
had weakness only in muscles of brush. Mother at the age of 60 had 
hypotrophy of muscles of brush and footstep. In the second family a 
55-year-old woman was an only patient. Weakness became apparent 
in 50 yrs, myopathy was predominantly distal in upper and diffuse in 
lower limbs, myotonia was mild, intractable myalgia was a prominent 
symptom, extramuscular features were cataracts and hearing loss.
We developed a new system composed of 3 primers for identify ex -
pansion. One of primers was complimentary for CCTG-repeats and 
for another FAM-marked primer. This enabled to record signal by se -
quencer. Thus we detected expansion in our patients and confirmed 
clinical diagnosis.
P12.137  impact of sequence interruptions on PcR based 
molecular testing of myotonic dystrophy type 1
J. Radvansky1, A. Ficek1, P. Resko1, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,2;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, Institute of Molecular Physiology and 
Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common autosomal 
dominant neuromuscular disorder of adults associated with unstable 
expansions of a (CTG)n repeat tract in the 3´-untranslated region of 
the DMPK  (Dystrophia Myotonica Protein Kinase) gene. Conventional 
fluorescent PCR and triplet-repeat primed PCR (TP-PCR) represent 
widely used methods for detection of normal range and expaned al -
leles. In our study, we focused on recently described unusual sequence 
interruptions inside the CTG tract and their effect on these PCR based 
testing methods. In our assay, both complementary strands of the 
amplicons produced by conventional fluorescent PCR were labelled 
with different fluorescent dyes. In addition, TP-PCR was performed in 
both forward and reverse direction. According to our results, the pres -
ence of the unusual (CCGCTG)n containing repeat motifs may lead 
to mistyping and false results both in conventional and in TP-PCR. In 
amplifiable alleles using conventional PCR the presence of sequence 
interruptions may lead to abnormal electrophoretic mobility of one of 
the complementary strands. In TP-PCR they may lead to discontinu -
ous or even prematurely terminated signal. Since the results obtained 
by our combination of methods complemented each other, the simulta -
neous use of bi-directionally labelled conventional PCR and TP-PCR 
performed in both directions seems to be advantageous for increasing 
of the reliability and accuracy of the DNA based DM1 diagnostics.
P12.138  The distribution of homozygous deletions of exons 5 of 
the NAiP gene in subjects with different diseases
D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, I. 
Popa2, S. Stanilescu2, A. M. Craciun3, C. Serafinceanu3;  
1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic 
Diseases “N. Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania.
The NAIP gene (5q13.1) is involved in the inhibition of apoptosis and 
the innate immune response. The alteration of balance between these processes may represent a component of physiopathology of some 
common human diseases.
Aim. To test the possible distribution of homozygous deletions of exons 
5 of the NAIP gene in patients with obesity, diabetes, breast cancer, 
colorectal cancer and spinal muscular atrophy.
Subjects: Clinical data and blood samples were collected from unre -
lated obese subjects (n=150), T1DM (n= 150), T2DM (n=150), breast 
cancer (n=100), colorectal cancer (n=70) and spinal muscular atrophy 
patients (n=90). We selected healthy subjects (n=150) with normal 
BMI (<25 Kg/m2) as a control group.
All samples were investigated for NAIP exon 5 homozygous deletion 
by duplex PCR.
Results: The homozygous absence of NAIP exon 5 was detected in 
obese subject (n=2), T1DM (n=2), T2DM (n=3), breast cancer (n=3), 
colorectal cancer (n=5), spinal muscular atrophy (n=38) and in the 
control group (n=4). We have observed that the higher frequency of 
deletion was present in spinal muscular atrophy patients (42.2%), OR 
= 26.67, 95%CI= 9.0779<O.R.<78.3722, p<0.00001. The incidency of 
deletion in the control group (2.66%) is higher compared with data 
reported in other population.
Conclusion: The homozygous deletion of NAIP was simmilar in all lots, 
excepting spinal muscular atrophy group, and seems to be at most a 
weak contributor to investigated pathology with the mentionned excep -
tion.
Study supported by grant PN2,42-161/2008
P12.139  Familial isolated cardiomyopathy caused by amutation 
in the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase
E. Mohammad1, A. Levitas2, G. Harel Levy1, V. Chalifa Caspi3, E. Manor4, J. C. 
Beck5, A. Saada6, V. Sheffield5, R. Parvari1,7;  
1Dept Gen & Virology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 
2Division of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva 84105 and Faculty 
of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 
3National Institute of Biotechnology Negev, Ben Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 4Institute of Genetics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer 
Sheva 84105 and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the 
Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 5Dept. of Pediatrics - Division of Medical Genetics; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States, 6Deparment of Human Genetics and Metabolic Diseases. Hadas- sah-
Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7National Institute of 
Biotechnology Negev, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Cardiomyopaties are the most common disorders resulting in heart 
failure. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a disorder characterized by 
cardiac dilatation and reduced systolic function, is the most frequent 
cause. However, recessive neonatal isolated dilated cardiomyopathy 
has scarcely been associated with a mutation. A defect of the human 
succinate dehydrogenase(SDH) is a rare condition in human, repre -
senting 2% of respiratory chain(RC) deficiencies. Its clinical presenta -
tion is highly variable, ranging from early onset encephalomyopathies 
to tumor susceptibility in adults. We present the association of a muta -
tion in the SDHA gene with the clinical manifestation and interfamil -
ial variability of 15 patients diagnosed with dilated and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. The cardiomyopathy is presumably caused by the 
significant specific reduction of the SDH enzymatic activity in heart 
muscle whereas substantial activity is retained in skeletal muscle and 
lymphoblastoid cells. Identification of the SDHA as the mutated gene 
was hindered since patients with a similar clinical presentation belong -
ing to the same enlarged family proved to have mutations in another 
gene and a father homozygous for the mutation is not affected. The 
same mutation was previously reported to cause a multi-systemic fail -
ure leading to neonatal death and to Leigh syndrome. Thus this study 
highlights the extreme variability that results from homozygosity of the 
same mutation in a nuclear encoded respiratory complex.
P12.140  mapping of the neurodegenerative disease PHARc
T. Fiskerstrand1, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim2,3, S. Johansson1, A. M’zahem4, 
B. I. Haukanes1, N. Drouot2, J. Zimmermann5, A. J. Cole6,7, C. Vedeler1,8, C. 
Bredrup1, M. Assoum2, M. Tazir9, T. Klockgether5,10, A. Hamri4, V. M. Steen1,8, H. 
Boman1, L. A. Bindoff1,8, M. Koenig2, P. M. Knappskog1,8;  
1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2CNRS-INSERM-Universite 
de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 3CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Centre 
Hospitalo-Universitaire Ben Badis, Constantine, Algeria, 5Universitätsklinikum, 
Bonn, Germany, 6Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders1 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders
7Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 8University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway, 9Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Mustapha, Algiers, Algeria, 
10Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrangungen (DZNE), Bonn, 
Germany.
PHARC: Peripheral neuropathy, Hearing loss, Ataxia, Retinitis pig -
mentosa, and Cataract,  is a progressive autosomal recessive, neuro -
degenerative disease that was initially ascertained as a phenocopy for 
Refsum’s disease . Recognition of the first symptoms is typically in the 
teens and cataract, hearing loss and a predominantly demyelinating 
peripheral neuropathy are present in all adult patients. Retinitis pig -
mentosa typically starts in young adult life and progresses slowly. The 
onset and severity of ataxia are variable. Patients with this disease do 
not manifest abnormalities of peroxisomes, and we embarked on ge -
netic characterisation on the assumption that this would provide new 
insights into the pathology of such complex neurological syndromes. 
PHARC was originally mapped to a 16 Mb region on chromosome 
20 in a Norwegian family. Subsequently, we have narrowed down the 
candidate region using SNP-arrays in a further 19 patients from four 
different countries. In these patients, we have identified four loss of 
function mutations in a recently characterized gene, two of which rep -
resent founder events in Norway and Algeria, respectively.
P12.141  clinical and genetic study in an italian family with 
neurofibromatosis type 1
A. L. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. 
L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Di Palma1, L. Citrigno1,3, W. Sproviero1,4, A. 
Gambardella1,4, M. Muglia1;  
1ISN-CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Paediatrics, University 
of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and 
Anesthesiological Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4Institute of 
Neurology, University ‘Magna Graecia’, Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant 
disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 3,500 births. Clinically, it 
is characterized by cafe-au-lait (CAL) spots, neurofibromas, freckling 
of the axillary or inguinal region, Lisch nodules, optic nerve glioma, 
and bone dysplasias. NF1 is caused from inactivating mutations of the 
17q11.2-located NF1 gene. To date, more than 1000 different germline 
NF1 mutations ranging from single nucleotide substitutions to large 
genomic rearrangements have been identified. We present a clinical 
and molecular study of an Italian family with Neurofibromatosis type 1. 
The proband, 10-years-old, showed large cafè-au-lait (CAL) spots and 
freckling on the axillary region and only a plexiform neurofibromas on 
the right side. His father, 47 year old, showed in addition to the similar 
signs, numerous neurofibromas on the thorax, abdomen, back, shoul -
der of the various size. Other two family’s members ( a brother and a 
sister) presented only little cafè-au-lait (CAL) spots. The mutational 
analysis of the NF1 gene revealed a novel frameshift insertion muta -
tion in the exon 4c (c.654 ins A) in all affected members of the family. 
The segregation of the mutation with the affected phenotype and its 
absence in the 200 normal chromosomes suggest that it is responsible 
for the NF1 phenotype.
P12.142  Identification of SPRED1  mutations (Legius syndrome) 
in patients clinically suspected of having Neurofibromatosis 
type 1
O. Abad , B. Campos, J. Gardenyes, P. Fàbregas, V. Volpini;  
Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) – IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200] is a common dominant 
autosomal disorder, affecting 1 in 3500 individuals, and caused by mu -
tations in the NF1 gene at 17q11.2. Clinical diagnosis of NF1 requires 
the presence of at least 2 of 7 criteria defined by the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH), being the most distinctive features the café-au-lait 
spots and neurofibromas.
Recently, germline loss-of-function mutations in the SPRED1  gene, 
located at 15q14, have been related with the Legius syndrome or NF1-
like syndrome [MIM 611431]. This condition belongs to a group of dis -
orders with overlapping phenotypes known as neurocardio-facial-cuta -
neous syndromes, caused by mutations in genes of the RAS signalling 
cascade. Most of patients with a SPRED1  mutation fulfil NIH criteria 
for NF1, although they usually have a more moderate phenotype than 
those with a NF1 mutation.
In this study, we screened for mutations  of SPRED1 gene in 145 un -related patients suspected of having NF1 and which resulted negative 
for NF1 mutations. Using direct cDNA sequencing approach, we identi -
fied six novel changes: one splice error, two frameshift mutations, two 
missense changes and a presumed polymorphism.
In conclusion, we strongly recommend molecular analysis of the 
SPRED1  gene in patients with clinical criteria of NF1 and without an 
identified causative NF1 mutation, in order to increase the sensibility of 
diagnosis and to offer a specific genetic counselling.
P12.143  concurrence of germline mutations in the NF1 and 
BRCA1  genes in a family with Neurofibromatosis type 1 and 
Breast cancer
J. Gardenyes1, B. Campos1, O. Díez2,3, O. Abad1, P. Fàbregas1, I. Valenzuela4, 
N. Gadea4, J. Balmaña4, V. Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain, 2Oncogenetics Laboratory, Vall d‘Hebron University Hospital, 
Barcelona, Spain, 3Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 
4Medical Oncology Department, Vall d‘Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common dominant autosomal dis -
order caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. Its clinical manifestations 
and severity are highly variable, even between members of the same 
family. The main manifestations of NF1 are café-au-lait spots, neurofi -
bromas, intertriginous freckling, Lisch nodules, and malignancy, includ -
ing peripheral nerve sheath tumors, central nervous system gliomas, 
and a variety of other tumours not so clearly defined. The association 
between NF1 and breast cancer or other gynaecologic malignancies 
seems uncommon and has been scarcely referred in the literature. 
However, a recent population study suggested that NF1 females have 
a five-fold risk of breast cancer diagnosed <50 years of age.
We have observed a family with two females affected by both NF1 and 
early-onset breast cancer, and a male with NF1. Taking into account 
that the family presented criteria of the two hereditary syndromes we 
evaluated whether the concomitance of both disorders could be at -
tributed to a NF1 mutation and its supposed increased risk of breast 
cancer or to the concurrence of two germline mutations, one in the 
NF1 gene and the other in a BRCA1/2  gene. Mutation analyses of 
NF1 and BRCA1  were carried out in one of the females affected by 
both diseases. We identified a frameshift mutation in BRCA1  and a 
nonsense mutation in NF1.
Our findings strengthen the importance of considering all phenotypic 
features in families with both NF1 and malignant tumours, analysing 
cancer predisposing candidate genes, to offer a specific risk assess -
ment and management of both conditions.
P12.144  High-resolution melting analysis helps to speed up 
mutation scanning in the NF1 gene
D. Brigger, F. Joncourt , S. Gallati;  
Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland.
Neurofibromatosis type1 is the most common tumor-predisposing dis -
order in humans. The large size of the NF1 gene and the fact that 
pathogenic changes, mostly point mutations, are dispersed through -
out the entire gene with no evidence of mutational hot spots, makes 
mutation detection quite laborious and costly. In order to speed up 
mutation scanning and reduce workload and costs we implemented 
NF1 analysis by High-resolution melting on a LightCycler® 480. PCR-
conditions for amplification of all 60 coding exons including adjacent 
intronic splicing regions were optimized. Amplification products were 
checked by PAGE for absence of by-products and sequenced in order 
to ensure specificity. Validation was performed by testing DNA from 28 
patients with mutations previously detected using PCR-SSCP-analy -
sis. Compared to wild-type controls all 28 mutations yielded a clearly 
distinguishable melting curve visible on a difference plot. In addition 
heterozygosity for 7 of the most frequent SNPs was also easily de -
tected. Since in the yet limited group of patients tested to date no false 
negatives were observed, sensitivity was judged to be close to 100% 
as required for such a test. A small number of false positives were 
also found. Analysis of a sufficient number of DNA samples in order 
to estimate the rate of false positive calls is ongoing. In conclusion, 
High-resolution melting has proven to be a suitable method for rapid 
and cost effective mutation scanning in the NF1-gene.2
P12.145  t wo de novo  Gc donor splice sites abolishing the 
authentic site in NF1 gene in patients with clinical features of 
Neurofibromatosis type 1
B. Campos1, X. Roca2, J. Gardenyes1, O. Abad1, P. Fàbregas1, V. Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain, 2Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 
United States.
Accurate pre-mRNA splicing is crucial for gene expression. Splicing 
involves the recognition of conserved elements at both exon-intron 
boundaries. The 5’ splice site (5’ss) comprises the last three nucleo -
tides of an exon and the first six of an intron, and the ‘GU’ dinucleotide 
at the 5’ end of introns is almost invariable.
Genomic variants in both coding and non-coding sequences can 
cause unexpected deleterious splicing defects. Mutations in the neu -
rofibromin 1 ( NF1) gene, located at 17q11.2, cause Neurofibromatosis 
type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200], an autosomal dominant disorder affecting 
1 in 3500 individuals worldwide. Over the last decade, NF1 mutation 
screening strategies at both DNA and RNA level revealed that a sig -
nificant proportion of mutations affected splicing, even when canonical 
splicing sequences were unaffected.
Here, we report two novel genomic variants (one translationally silent 
and one missense) in NF1 exon 43 in five patients from two unrelated 
families with clinical features of NF1. These mutations create two dif -
ferent de novo  GC 5’ss, abolishing use of the intact authentic GU 5’ss. 
The effects of both mutations on splicing in patient cells were recapitu -
lated using minigene constructs transfected into mammalian cells. It is 
remarkable that two  de novo  GC 5’ss are found within the same exon, 
because naturally-occurring GC 5’ss are rare (<1%) and there are very 
few cases of cryptic or de novo  GC 5’ss.
Our findings highlight the importance of studying mutations at DNA 
and RNA level in order to clarify their pathological effect and to provide 
adequate genetic counselling.
P12.146  t wo novel mutations in the NF2 gene in patients with 
neurofibromatosis type 2.
M. J. García-Barcina1, E. Sarasola-Díez1, L. Madariaga2, L. Rodeño2, C. Ruiz-
Espinosa2, M. A. Fernández-Cuesta2;  
1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / 
Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Pediatría del Hospital 
Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, 
Spain.
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a rare dominantly inherited syn -
drome caused by inactivating mutations in the NF2 tumour suppressor 
gene on chromosome 22. Vestibular schwannomas, usually bilateral 
(BVS), and intracranial meningiomas (IM) occur in 90% and 50% of 
patients, respectively.
In this study we present 4 cases that have been seen in our hospital in 
the last year (Table 1)
We report two novel mutations: c.641T>C, p. Leu214Pro, a missense 
mutation in exon 7 and c.810+1dupG, a splice site mutation in the in -
tron 8 donnor site. Missense mutations (case 2) predominantly cause 
mild phenotypes with an statistically greater survival than nonsense 
and frameshift mutations. Phenotype is more variable in patients with 
splice-site mutations (case 4). Furthermore, it is described that carriers 
of splice site mutations in exons 1-9 are significantly younger at onset 
of symptoms and have significantly more mengiomas than those with 
other mutations.
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4
Age of onset 50 55 45 14
Presentation ImbalanceHearing loss 
25 years agoHeadache Neck tongue syndrome
Finding BVSBVS 
IM: ponto-
cerebellar 
angleBVS 
IM (fronto-
temporal)Bilateral VIII and 
III schwannomas, 
IM (Meckel cavum, 
posterior cranial fossa
NF2 molecular 
study (Sequencing 
and MLPA)No mutation c.641T>C No mutation c.810+1dupGP12.147  A mild phenotype of autosomal dominant cmt2K 
disease caused by a new mutation in the GDAP1 gene
J. Pilch1, D. Kabzińska2, A. Kochański2;  
1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 
Poland, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
Hereditary neuropathies are highly heterogeneous group of neuro -
logical diseases. The most frequent inherited peripheral neuropathy 
in humans is Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). It can be classi -
fied based on clinical, electrophysiology and nerve biopsy morphologi -
cal analyses. Severity of CMT phenotype is determined by mutated 
gene and type of mutation. Initially CMT4C4 disease was reported as 
a hereditary sensory neuropathy inherited as an autosomal recessive 
trait caused by mutations in the GDAP1 gene. In 2005 two GDAP1 
mutations (Arg120Trp and Thr157Pro) were reported in CMT families 
with autosomal dominant trait of inheritance (CMT2K). To date over 
30 mutations were identified in the GDAP1 gene, only 4 of them are 
inherited in autosomal dominant trait. The authors present a family (3 
affected patients), with a new Ala156Gly mutation in the GDAP1 gene 
which was transmitted as dominant trait. Phenotype is characterized 
by a pure axonal sensory-motor neuropathy with a marked involve -
ment of the lower limbs, associated with additional features (cardiac 
arrhythmia).
We conclude that: (i) CMT2K disease is a mild form of sensory-motor 
pure axonal neuropathy, (ii) GDAP1 gene analysis should not be lim -
ited only to AR-CMT cases.
P12.148  Molecular diagnostics of neurofibromatosis type 1 
(NF1) in slovak patients based on analysis of entire coding 
region of the NF1 gene and mLPA
A. Rybarova1, M. Nemethova2, D. Ilencikova3, K. Hlinkova3, A. Hlavata1, L. 
Kovacs1, L. Kadasi4,2, A. Zatkova4,2;  
12nd Pediatric Department of the Faculty of Medicine and University Children‘s 
Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular 
Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 
3Department of Cancer Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, 
Slovakia, 4Laboratory of Genetics, Institute of Molecular Physiology and 
Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1;1:3500) is caused by mutations in RAS 
negative regulator- neurofibromine 1. Molecular diagnostics requires 
analyses of the entire NF1 gene. mRNA-bases screening protocols 
are preferred since approximately one third of the pathological NF1 
mutations affect mRNA splicing, out of which 30% would remain un -
detected when only methods based on the analysis of DNA are used. 
Complex analysis of the NF1 gene has not been routinely available in 
Slovakia yet. We introduced and employed diagnostic protocol based 
on the sequencing analysis of complete coding region of NF1 as de -
veloped by Messiaen and Wimmer (2008), as well as MLPA analysis 
employing P122, P081 and P082 sets (MRC-Holland). Screening in 37 
Slovak NF1 patients was completed at the time of abstract submission. 
cDNA sequencing uncovered the presence of small NF1 mutations in 
29 patients: 18 frameshift, 4 misssense, 3 stop mutations, 3 typical 
splicing changes, and one in-frame deletion in exon 39. No mutation 
was found in 8 patients. Detailed clinical data review showed that 4 of 
them did not fulfill clinical criteria, thus diagnosis of NF1 was excluded. 
MLPA analysis was performed in remaining 4 patients that lack small 
NF1 mutations. Type I deletion of the entire NF1 gene and surrounding 
region was identified in 2 of them (6,3%), and the intragenic deletion 
of 5 continuous NF1 exons was uncovered in one additional patient 
(3,1%). Thus, our protocol enabled us to identify disease causing mu -
tations in 32 out of 33 clinically confirmed NF1 patients (97%).
P12.149  NmD-chip, a European consortium for next generation 
genetic diagnostics by DNA arrays
The NMD-Chip Consortium ;  
INSERM, Marseille, France.
Inherited NeuroMuscular Disorders (NMDs) form a very large and het -
erogeneous group of genetic diseases, that can be split in Duchenne/
Becker (DMD/BMD), limb girdle (LGMD), or congenital muscular dys -
trophies (CMD), and Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT). Their 
overall prevalence is estimated around 1 out of 1000 people.
The current diagnosis is based on a differential molecular genotyp -
ing by a complex and time consuming gene by gene approach. As a Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders
consequence, about 30 to 40 % of patients remain devoid of a precise 
genetic diagnostic.
The aim of the NMD-Chip project is to design, develop and validate 
high throughput DNA arrays to efficiently diagnose NMD patients. The 
new tools originating from this project will allow assessing all known 
genes implied in a group of disease in one shot. Besides, the project 
will also allow to identify new disease causing mutations by using ex -
tensive candidate genes exploration.
Indeed, 4 types of chips are being designed, 2 for known NMD genes, 
and 2 for candidate genes testing. In each case, both CGH arrays to 
detect CNV, as well as Sequence Capture for massive re-sequencing 
(point mutation detection), are set up. We use the new generation of 
HD2 12-plex chips (Roche-Nimblegen).
The NMD-Chip Consortium comprises 13 European laboratories 
strongly involved in molecular diagnostics from 8 countries. The proj -
ect has been funded by the European FP7 Health call for a 2.9 millions 
of euros, and has started from October the 1st, 2008. The commercial 
version of the chips should emerge by the end of year 2011.
P12.150  SOS1 mutation analysis in Noonan syndrome and 
associated isolated congenital heart defects
F. Lepri1, A. De Luca1, C. Rossi2, G. Baldassarre3, F. Pantaleoni4, V. Fodale4, 
M. Dentici1, M. Bonaguro2, P. Daniele1, M. Digilio5, G. Zampino6, A. Selicorni7, 
F. Stanzial8, F. Faravelli9, I. Kavamura10, G. Neri11, M. Faienza12, A. Pilotta13, M. 
Silengo3, G. Ferrero3, B. Dallapiccola14, M. Tartaglia4;  
1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 
2Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 
Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, Italy, 4Dipartimento 
di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Rome, Italy, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Istituto di Clinica Pediatrica, Università Cattolica 
del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 7Clinica Pediatrica I, IRCCS, Fondazione 
Policlinico Milano, Italy, 8Servizio Multizonale di Consulenza Genetica, 
Ospedale di Bolzano, Italy, 9S.C Genetica Umana, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, 
Italy, 10Medical Genetics, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 
11Instituto di Genetica Medica, Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy, 12Department of Biomedicine of Developmental Age, University of Bari, 
Bari, Italy, 13Auxoendocrinologia, Ospedale Pediatrico, Brescia, Italy, 14Bambino 
Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is genetically heterogeneous and mutations in 
the PTPN11 , KRAS , SOS1 , RAF1 , BRAF , MEK1 , SHOC2  and NRAS  
genes have been identified in up to 75% of cases. Here, we screened 
a large cohort of PTPN11  and KRAS  mutation-negative NS patients 
for SOS1  mutations and found 6 distinct pathogenic SOS1  mutations 
in 26 independent cases, and one rare unclassified variant. Seven 
SOS1  mutations were novel. Among the new mutations identified, we 
observed 5 missense mutations and one small in-frame deletion. De -
tailed clinical evaluation of SOS1  mutation-positive subjects confirmed 
the occurrence of a distinctive phenotype characterized by ectodermal 
anomalies and congenital heart defects (CHDs), particularly pulmonic 
valve stenosis and atrial septal defects, with lower prevalence of short 
stature and cognitive impairment. Two individuals developed tumors. 
One had mandibular giant cell granuloma (MGCG), while the other 
had multiple tumors (MGCG, abdominal rhabdomyosarcoma, cerebral 
glioma and granular cell tumors of the skin), providing further molecu -
lar evidence of the linking of these tumors to the RAS-MAPK signaling 
pathway. Possible involvement of germline SOS1  mutations in isolated 
CHD commonly encountered in individuals with SOS1  mutations ( i.e., 
atrial [23 patients] and ventricular [15 patients] septal defects, and pul -
monic valve stenosis [21 patients]) was also explored. None of the 
patients with isolated CHD was found to carry a functionally relevant 
change in the entire SOS1 coding sequence, excluding a major contri -
bution of the gene in the pathogenesis of the investigated CHDs.
P12.151  Identification of a new Jnk-activating familial SOS1 and 
a de novo RAF1 mutations in a Noonan syndrome patient
M. Longoni1, S. Moncini1, M. Cisternino2, I. Morella3, S. Ferraiuolo4, S. Russo4, 
C. Paola2, R. Zippel3, M. Venturin1, P. Riva1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, 
Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, 
Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e 
Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 4IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano, Milano, Italy.
Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic disease char -
acterized by congenital heart defects, short stature and characteristic 
facial features. Mutations in PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1, KRAS, and NRAS 
are responsible for 60-75% of the cases, thus additional genes, are ex -
pected to be involved in Noonan syndrome pathogenesis. The geno -
type/phenotype correlation has been hindered by the relatively few re -
ported genotyped cases. Expanding the case numbers will benefit the 
clinical community. A mutation analysis has been performed on RAF1, 
SOS1 and on the SOS1-interacting GRB2, in twenty-four NS patients 
previously found to be negative for PTPN11 and KRAS mutations. We 
identified four mutations in SOS1 and one in RAF1, while no GRB2 
variants have been found. Interestingly the RAF1 mutation was pres -
ent in a patient also carrying a newly identified p.R497Q familial SOS1 
mutation, segregating with a typical NS SOS1 cutaneous phenotype. 
The new SOS1 mutations have been predicted to dysregulate the pro -
tein activity by bioinformatics. Functional analysis demonstrated the 
R497Q-SOS1 mutation leads to Jnk activation, but had no effect on 
the Ras effector Erk1. We propose that this variant might contribute 
to the onset of the peculiar ectodermal traits displayed by the proband 
amidst the more classical NS presentation. The characteristic cutane -
ous traits, frequently shown by NS patients carrying SOS1 mutations, 
might be associated to the activation of both Jnk/Erk pathways. To our 
knowledge, this is the first reported case of a NS patient harbouring 
mutations in two NS genes, allowing us to propose a genotype/pheno -
type correlation in the family.
P12.152  A novel missense mutation in the NDP gene in a child 
with Norrie disease
V. P. Fedotov1, N. N. Vasserman2, E. P. Povalyaeva1, A. V. Polyakov2;  
1Genetic counseling, Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian 
Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Norrie disease (ND) MIM 310600 is a X-linked recessive disorder char -
acterized by very early childhood blindness due to degenerative and 
proliferative changes of the neuroretina. Norrie disease is caused by 
mutation in the gene encoding norrin (NDP; 300658).
We reported three generations Russian Norrie disease family. The pro -
band was a ten years old boy which was normal except for lens opaci -
ties found at initial examination at 3 months of age. He had atrophic 
irides and the fundus was filled with a proliferating retrolental yellowish 
mass. At 12 months of age, the left eye was enucleated on suspicion 
of retinoblastoma. Histologic examination showed a hyperplasia of 
retinal, ciliary, and iris pigment epithelium, hypoplasia and necrosis of 
the inner layer of the retina, cataract, and phthisis bulbi. CT imaging of 
the eyes showed small lenses attached to the cornea, opacification of 
the lenses, corneal opacities. Pars plana vitrectomy and lensectomy 
was performed.
NDP gene was localized at Xp11.4 and consist of 3 exons, coding 
exons are exons 2-3. We identified a novel missense mutation Cys -
128Trp at exon 3 at proband, his mother and aunt were carriers of this 
mutation. There were performed two prenatal diagnostics in this family. 
One fetus was ill male, and the second was healthy female.
P12.153  A novel frameshift mutation at codon 66 (HBB:
c.del201A) in the beta-globin genes
H. Kim1, Y. Cha1, E. Park2;  
1laboratory medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2internal medicine, Seoul, 
Korea, Republic of.
Thalassemias are hereditary anemias. In beta-thalassemia (beta-thal), 
beta-globin synthesis is either deficient or absent. Smaller, but sig -
nificant concentrations of beta-thal are present throughout the Middle 
East, India, Pakistan and China, while sporadic cases have been re -
ported in most ethnic groups. Over 200 beta-thal mutations have been 
described so far. We report here a novel deletional variant beta-thal 
allele in an ethnic Korean patient, hitherto unreported in the literature. 
The deletion spans exon 2 at nt -201 causing a frameshift and the pre -
mature appearance of a stop codon. A frameshift mutation in exon 2 of 
the beta-globin gene [codon 66 (-A)], was associated with a beta-thal 
phenotype. We report on a 41-year-old woman, of Korean origin, and 
born out of nonconsanguineous union. She had a history of transfusion 
dependent anemia since 4 years age. Analysis of her red blood cell 
parameters and hemoglobin showed microcytic normochromic anemia Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders
with severe anisopoikilocytosis and an elevated unknown Hb band lev -
el of 10.4%. This mutation was detected with a polymerase chain reac -
tion (PCR) and direct sequencing method, using a primer designed to 
detect mutations in total 3 exon. Identification of new mutations will be 
helpful in better management and counseling for the family regarding 
prenatal diagnosis in future pregnancies..
P12.154  consortium for Osteogenesis imperfecta mutations 
in the Helical Region of t ype i collagen: analysis of genotype-
phenotype relationship using an updated list that doubles the 
number of previous reported mutations.
A. Forlino1,2, A. M. Barnes2, W. A. Cabral2, J. D. San Antonio3, D. J. Prockop4, 
A. De Paepe5, F. H. Glorieux6, A. M. Lund7, H. Hartikka8, K. Kuurila-Svahn9,10, D. 
H. Cohn11, R. Dalgleish12, L. San Giorgi13, G. Pals14, A. Lebre15, M. Mottes16, O. 
Ljunggren17, Y. Xu18, P. H. Byers19, J. C. Marini2;  
1Department of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Bone and 
Extracellular Matrix Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Department of Medicine, 
Hematology/Cardeza Foundation, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA, United States, 4Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
LA, United States, 5Center for Medical Genetics, Universiy Hospital Ghent, 
Ghent, Belgium, 6Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, 
QC, Canada, 7Department of Cinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 8Collagen Research Unit, Biocenter and Department of Medical 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oulo, Oulo, Finland, 
9Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Headand Neck Surgery, Vaasa Central 
Research Unit Hospital, Vaasa, Finland, 10Department of Otorhinolaryngology-
Head and Neck Surgery, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 11Medical 
Genetic Institute, Steven Spielberg Pediatric Research Center, Cedars-
Sinai Research Insitute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 12Department of 
Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 13Medical Genetic 
Department, Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, Bologna, Italy, 14Department of 
Cinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Netherlands, 15Department 
of Genetics, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 16Department 
of Mother and Child, Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy, 17Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppala, Sweden, 
18Department of Chemistry, Hunter Collage, City University of New York, New 
York, NY, United States, 19Department of Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is caused predominantly by mutations in 
COL1A1  and COL1A2 , encoding  the proα1(I) and proα2(I) chains of 
type I collagen, respectively. The Consortium has assembled 1574 in -
dependent mutations, of which 1273 result in glycine substitutions in 
the triple helical region and 301 alter splice sites. Doubling the number 
of previously reported mutations (Marini et al. Hum Mut 2007) does 
not alter prior findings that mutations at the N-terminal end of both 
chains have a non-lethal outcome and that distinct genotype-pheno -
type relationships can be drawn for each chain. About 40% of glycine 
substitutions in α1(I) are lethal and the two exclusively lethal regions 
(aa.691-823 and 910-964) aligning with Major Ligand Binding Regions 
(MLBR) remain well defined, suggesting crucial interactions of colla -
gen with extracellular matrix proteins. Currently, 80% of glycine sub -
stitutions in α2(I) are non-lethal. Refining the Regional Model yields 9 
lethal clusters and correctly predicts the outcome of 89% of cases in 
α2(I). Lethal regions align with proteoglycan binding sites, suggesting 
a role in fibril-matrix interactions. About 20% of mutations alter splice 
sites, and are mainly associated with a non-lethal outcome. The Tm of 
the triplet carboxyl to the mutation predicts over 70% of non-lethal out -
comes for Ser substitutions in α1(I) and Ser and Cys substitutions in 
α2(I), but does not apply to lethality predictions. Salt bridge disruption 
due to Gly substitutions in KGE/D triplets in α1(I) are associated with 
lethal outcomes. The expanded mutation database supports different 
roles for each chain in collagen stability and matrix organization.
P12.155  Absence of cyclophilin B causes Recessive Osteogenesis imperfecta but Does Not impair t ype i collagen 
Peptidyl-Prolyl isomerization
J. C. Marini1, A. M. Barnes1, E. M. Carter2, W. A. Cabral1, M. Weis3, W. Chang1, 
E. Makareeva1, S. Leikin1, C. N. Rotimi4, D. R. Eyre3, C. L. Raggio2;  
1NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Hospital for Special Surgery, New 
York, NY, United States, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder characterized by 
bone fragility. Recessive forms of OI are caused by mutations in the 
three genes coding for the collagen 3-hydroxylation complex. This 
complex post-translationally hydroxylates α1(I)Pro986 and residues 
on types II and V collagen. Null mutations in CRTAP  or LEPRE1  lead 
to severe/lethal forms of OI with white sclerae and rhizomelia. Fibro -
blast collagen has minimal Pro986 hydroxylation, but is overmodified, 
indicating delay in collagen folding. In Senegalese siblings, we identi -
fied a homozygous mutation in the start codon of PPIB , which encodes 
cyclophilin B (CyPB) the third member of the 3-hydroxylation complex. 
These children have moderate OI and white sclerae, but not rhizo -
melia. Proband fibroblast RNA had 55% of normal PPIB  transcripts. 
On Western blot, no CyPB protein was detectable, while both CRTAP 
and P3H1 levels were reduced. Immunofluorescence microscopy 
confirmed these findings in vivo . CyPB is a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans  
isomerase and thought to be involved in the rate-limiting step of type I 
collagen folding. Surprisingly, proband collagen was not overmodified 
and had normal levels of lysyl and 4-prolyl hydroxylation, in contrast 
to collagen overmodification by cells with recessive defects in CRTAP  
or LEPRE1 , or with PPIB  mutations which lead to misfolded CyPB. 
Pro986 hydroxylation was also normal in proband collagen, indicat -
ing that the complex can 3-hydroxylate collagen in absence of CyPB. 
Therefore, complete absence of CyPB does not appear to delay colla -
gen folding, strongly suggesting a redundancy for collagen isomeriza -
tion, or CyPB may not be the major type I collagen folding isomerase.
P12.156  PARK2 mutations are rare among Polish patients with 
Parkinson disease.
D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, D. Koziorowski2, R. Tataj1, A. Friedman2, J. Bal1;  
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
Parkinson disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative dis -
order, affecting more than 1% of the population above the age of 60. 
Mutations in the PARK2 gene result in early-onset PD (EO-PD). The 
frequency of the PARK2 mutations as a cause of EO-PD is a matter of 
a debate now. According to the early studies up to 18% of EO sporadic 
PD carry PARK2 mutations. In familial cases this frequency was up 
to 50%. The last years’ studies show the data overestimation. For the 
Polish EO-PD patients the frequency of PARK2 mutations in both al -
leles was estimated at the level of about 2.5%.
The aim of presented study was to analyse the frequency/type of 
changes in PARK2 gene in PD patients.
The group of patients consisted 160 subjects (104 EO-PD, 56 LO-PD), 
mainly sporadic but also familial. Mutation analysis of all PARK2 exons 
was performed by direct sequencing and dosage analysis.
The detected variability in PARK2 in - 3.1% alleles (without coding poly -
morphisms p.S167N, p.V380L, p.D394N, p.R402C) included exon de -
letion and duplication (Ex4,5,6,7 del, Ex2 dup, Ex 2,3,4,5 dup) as well 
as point mutations (c.203_204 AG del/p.Q34Xfs, c.346C>A/p.A82E, 
c.478_479 CAC ins/p.P133dup, c.734A>T/p.K211N, c.924C>T/
p.R275W). Only c.203_204AG del was a recurrent mutation (frequen -
cy 0.94%), the remaining represented singe cases (0.31%).
Mutations of two alleles of the PARK2 gene were identified only in 3 
EO-PD patients - 1 familial (AR inheritance) and 2 sporadic cases. 
Heterozygous mutation carriers were identified among EO and LO-
PD patients (Ex2dup and p.R275W and p.A82E, c.478_479 CAC/
p.P133dup respectively).
P12.157  Whole Exome sequencing in Parkinson patients
D. Böhm1, T. Scheurenbrand1, C. Schulte2, M. Sharma2, O. Stephan3, L. 
Bertram4, T. Gasser2, S. Biskup2,1;  
1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, Tübingen, Germany, 3Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany, 
4Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Dept. Vertebrate Genomics, Max-Planck-
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Genetic factors have been identified as risk factors for the develop -
ment of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Overall these genes only explain 
a minority of PD cases. It has recently become possible to sequence 
all coding exons in one single experiment. PD is a late onset complex 
disease with several known pathways being central to the disease. 
Here we used whole exome sequencing as the most suitable approach 
to identify novel high penetrance PD genes.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders
Genomic DNA was enriched by NimbleGen on array and Agilent in so -
lution enrichment. Sequencing was performed on the SOLiD platform. 
Each sample was sequenced on four Quads generating a minimum of 
60 million 50 base pair reads per exome.
With the Agilent protocol 97.73% of targeted exons were represented 
by reads (versus 89.89% with NimbleGen). In total, 95% of reads were 
on target using Agilent versus 65% of reads for NimbleGen. Nimble -
Gen enrichment is designed for the 454 platform which might explain 
off target reads. Using an end depletion protocol to remove NimbleGen 
adaptors the percentage of reads on target did not improve. Overall, 
95% of targeted exons were covered 10X with a maximum coverage 
reaching 1500. With sufficient coverage for SNP calling, approximately 
60000 variants were identified per patient. In total, 5234 variants within 
a 20 basepair window of exons could not be found in dbSNP and Hap -
Map databases. We are in the process of analysing these SNPs with 
respect to potential pathogenicity.
P12.158   
molecular analysis of the parkin and PiNK-1 genes in patients 
with early-onset Parkinson disease
L. de Jorge1, J. Corral1, H. San Nicolás1, D. Genís2, V. Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM)-IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain, 2- Dep. of Neurology. Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta., 
Girona, Spain.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen -
erative disorder where genetic as well as environmental factors are 
implicated in its etiology.
Mutations in the parkin  and PINK1  (PTEN-induced putative kinase) 
genes have been identified as the most common causes of autosomal 
recessive early-onset Parkinson disease (EOPD).
We performed the mutational screening in thirty-four clinic patients with 
a mean age: 40,2 years, including both familial ( n=6 ) and sporadic ( 
n=28 ) cases for parkin  and PINK1  mutations.
Over sporadic cases, we found five variants in parkin  gene: homozy -
gous deletion of exon 3 was found in one patient and homozygous mis -
sense mutation (Cys212Tyr) in another index case. A compound het -
erozygote genotype was detected (Del154A in exon 2 and Thr415Asn 
in exon 11) and two heterozygous carriers with deletion of exon 6 and 
a missense mutation in exon 3, respectively.
We detected a heterozygous individual with a nonsense mutation (Gl -
n456X) in PINK1 gene.
All of variants were previously reported as aetiology of the disease. 
No mutations were found in patients with a positive familial history. 
Mutations in DJ-1 (Park 7) are also associated with EOPD but are less 
frequent.
In conclusion, mutations in the studied genes account for 17.64% of 
our casuistic. We show a wide variety of different mutations that are 
associated with EOPD.
Interestingly, in three early onset cases we have detected only one 
mutation with putative dominant effect which suggests that heterozy -
gous cases of parkin  and PINK1  genes could be penetrant depending 
on the type of mutation.
P12.159  LRRK2 mutation analysis in a cohort of Parkinson’s 
Disease patients with a dominant pattern of inheritance from 
southern italy 
V. Scornaienchi1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1,2, F. 
E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1,2, V. Greco1, A. Gambardella1,3, A. Quattrone1,3, G. 
Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Piano 
Lago di Mangone, Italy, 2Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and 
Anaesthesiology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, 
University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
Mutations in the LRRK2 gene (locus PARK8) have been associated 
both in PD patients with a dominant pattern of inheritance and patients 
which appear to be sporadic. In most populations studied, LRRK2 
gene mutation frequencies range from 1.7 to 13% among familial 
cases, and from 0.4 to 2.7% in sporadic cases. Reported frequen -
cies may be lower limits because only particular exons or mutations 
were screened in most studies. Although many variations have been 
identified in LRRK2, assessment of association with the PD phenotype 
has not been clear-cut because of incomplete penetrance and lack of 
segregation data for many of the familial cases. Mutations affecting residues p.G2019 in exon 41 and p.R1441 in the exon 31 are common 
confirmed disease-associated variations. The frequencies of these 
mutations are highly population dependent as well as the putative risk 
factor variations R1628P (exon 34) and G2385R (exon 48).
We hereby present the preliminary results of mutation screening of ex -
ons 31, 34, 35, 38, and 48 of LRRK2 gene in 80 autosomal dominat PD 
patients from Southern Italy. Mutation analysis was performed by PCR 
and sequencing. Our cohort was negative for alpha-synuclein gene 
mutations and LRRK2 exon 41 mutations (p.G2019S, p.I2012T and 
p.I2020T). Until now we screened 35 patients for these five LRRK2 
exon. We identified three described polymorphisms (IVS47-9 del(T), 
A7155G in exon 48; IVS35+23T→A intr 36) but no mutations in these 
patients. Preliminary data showed a low mutation frequency of LRRK2 
gene in our Southern Italy PD cohort.
P12.160  Exon 41 LRRK2 point mutation analysis in italian 
patients with Parkinson disease.
F. Sironi1,2, T. Brambilla1,2, P. Primignani1, L. Trotta1,2, D. A. Coviello1, S. Tunesi3, 
L. Mariani4, S. Tesei4, G. Pezzoli4, S. Goldwurm4;  
1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute - Istituti Clinici di 
Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Parkinson Institute - Istituti Clinici di 
Perfezionamento,, Milan, Italy.
Mutations in LRRK2  gene (OMIM 607060) have been found in a large 
number of Parkinson’s disease patients. LRRK2  encodes a large pro -
tein of 2527 amino acids with multiple domains, including a non-recep -
tor tyrosine kinase-like domain, a Ras-like small guanidine triphospha -
tase family domain (Roc), and several ankyrin, leucine-rich, and WD40 
repeats. Several mutations in different functional regions of LRRK2 
occur at a high frequency both in familial and sporadic PD (sPD). Of 
these, the p.Gly2019Ser mutation laying in exon 41 has been reported 
to account for 5-6% of familial PD and 1.6% of sPD in Europe.
In this study we screened LRRK2  exon 41 by DHPLC and/or direct se -
quencing to examine whether p.Gly2019Ser, the most common point 
mutation, was present in our cohort of 1348 PD patients with different 
ages of onset. All samples derived from the „Human genetic Bank of 
patients affected by Parkinson disease and parkinsonisms“ (http://par -
kinson.it/dnabank.htlm) Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan-Italy. 
A total of 42 patients were found to carry exon 41  LRRK2  mutations/
variants/polymorphisms:
34 p.Gly2019Ser heterozygotes
1 p.Gly2019Ser homozygote
1 p.Gly2019Ser - IVS41+30 A>G compound heterozygote
1 p.Ile2020Leu heterozygote
1 p.Pro2036Arg heterozygote
1 p.Tyr2018Tyr heterozygote
1 p.Pro2007Pro heterozygote
2 IVS40-39 A>G heterozygotes
According to previous European studies we found that the most fre -
quent amino acid change in the LRRK2 gene is the p.Gly2019Ser. 
Meanwhile other aminoacid changes have also been identified. We 
speculate that some of them may also be pathogenic for the LRRK2 
protein kinase activity.
P12.161  Influence of paraoxonase 1 status on age at onset and 
progression of LRRK2 -linked Parkinson’s disease.
A. S. Drozdova1, V. V. Miroshnikova1, E. Y. Zakharova2, T. I. Rodygina1, A. F. 
Yakimovskii3, S. N. Pchelina1,3;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 ( LRRK2 ) gene are the 
most frequent cause of the familial Parkinson’s disease (PD). The vari -
ability in age at disease onset (AAO) and neuropathology in LRRK2 -
linked PD patients suggests that genetic and environmental factors 
may influence the course of the disease other than mutation itself. 
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a detoxifying enzyme of human’s blood 
plasma which protects from the influence of potential neurotoxins (or -
ganophosphates such as pesticides, etc.). The 54M PON1  allele vari -
ant and the reduced activity of paraoxonase 1 were associated with an 
increased risk of PD. We studied the influence of PON1 status (L54M Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders
PON1  polymorphism, activity of the enzyme) on AAO and disease pro -
gression of LRRK2 -linked PD. Eleven LRRK2 -linked patients (8 pa -
tients patients with G2019S mutation, 2 - V1613A, 1 patient - R1441C; 
average age 67.6±10.3), patients with sporadic PD (sPD) (average 
age 70.6±5.3) and individuals of control group (average age 67.1±8.2) 
were taken into analyses. L54M PON1  genotyping was carried out by 
PCR with the following restriction digestion analysis. Paraoxonase 1 
activity was measured comparatively to the paraoxon substrate on the 
spectrophotometer “SmartSmecPlus“. We didn’t reveal any significant 
differences between studied groups (p>0,05) (Table 1). Thus, the para -
oxonase 1 status doesn’t influence the development of LRRK2 -associ -
ated PD.
LRRK2 -
linked PD 
AAO<60 
yearsLRRK2 -
linked PD 
AAO≥60 
yearsLRRK2 -
linked PD 
with rapid 
progressionLRRK2 -
linked PD 
with slow 
progressionsPD 
(n=15)Controls 
(n=15)
Frequency of 
54M PON1  
allele0.50 
(n=5)0.58(n=6) 0.33 (n=3) 0.63 (n=8) 0.33 0.40
Paraoxonase 1 
activity27.89± 
15.91 
(n=3)25.67± 
11.86 
(n=4)43.50 (n=1)23.78± 11.00 
(n=6)29.19± 
9.0929.32± 
9.85
P12.162  t o facilitate automatic variant pathogenicity 
assessment gene variant databases need to provide structured 
general disease information
P. Taschner , J. den Dunnen;  
Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands.
Gene sequence variant databases (Locus-Specific DataBases, LS -
DBs) store DNA variants in genes involved in hereditary disease, the 
way they were detected and by whom (a reference). Details on the 
associated clinical phenotype and the potential disease-causing effect 
(pathogenicity) are rare or absent. Recently, prediction of the patho -
genic effect of sequence variants by computational means has be -
come feasible. Clinicians and researchers working in DNA diagnostics 
check LSDBs frequently to classify and evaluate the effect of a spe -
cific variant in a particular carrier. Most LSDBs provide links to OMIM 
disease information, but not much information about the mechanism 
causing a particular disease (disease etiology). As a consequence in -
sufficient disease information is presented to allow correct interpreta -
tion of the pathogenic effect of variants and this may lead to incorrect 
interpretation of individual risks. This may cause distress in patients 
and their families accessing variant data in web-based databases. In 
addition it prevents large-scale automatic pathogenicity assessment of 
variants identified by genome-wide re-sequencing. We propose that 
LSDBs add general disease information to their homepages to support 
correct individual risk prediction by computational means. For each as -
sociated phenotype, the minimal information necessary for risk predic -
tions includes a.o: inheritance pattern, locus heterogeneity, imprinting 
and known additional genetic and environmental factors involved in 
disease etiology. In the near future, these details should be accessible 
through webservices for automated analysis by specific reasoners.
Funded in part by the European Community‘s Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the 
GEN2PHEN project.
P12.163  mutation analysis of the gene PMP22  in a cohort of 
slovak patients with charcot-marie-t ooth disease and hereditary 
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies
P. Resko1, J. Radvansky1, M. Baldovic1,2, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,3;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Comenius University, University Children‘s Hospital, Bratislava, 
Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
The aim of our study was to identify the spectrum of mutations and 
their frequencies in Slovak patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
type 1A (CMT1A) and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure 
palsies (HNPP), which are the two most prevalent inherited peripheral 
neuropathies. Both of them are caused by distinct mutations of a single 
gene encoding peripheral myelin protein 22 ( PMP22 ), duplication and 
deletion of the whole gene being the most frequent underlying muta -
tions. The rest of CMT1A and HNPP patients harbour point mutations in the same gene.
In the present study we screened 121 unrelated families indicated with 
unspecified CMT and 2 unrelated families indicated with HNPP for 
causative mutations in PMP22 . We detected the CMT1A duplication 
in 41 families, whereas the HNPP deletion was present in 8 families of 
which 7 were originally diagnosed as CMT. Further screening identi -
fied one family with an already described point mutation in exon 5, 
namely c.327C>A (Cys109X). Our results suggest that the spectrum 
and frequency of mutations in Slovak patients with CMT and HNPP is 
similar to that seen in the global ethnic population. Altogether, mutation 
analysis of the PMP22  gene revealed the underlying cause of disease 
in 40,65% of examined families.
P12.164  the coexistence of the PmP22 gene deletion and the 
EGR2 gene mutation in background of patients with cmt 1/a 
hereditary sensomotor neuropathy 
V. Remenyi1, A. Szabo2, A. Gal1, F. Mechler2, G. Bathori1, M. Molnar1;  
1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary, 22Department of Neurology, Debrecen University, 
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background: A number of genetic defects may cause hereditary neu -
ropathies. The most frequent form of HMSN is CMT disease. The de -
myelinating form of CMT1a is caused by a 1.5MB duplication of the 
PM22 gene in 70% of the cases. The genetic defect of the EGR2 gene 
may result in also autosomal dominant neuropathy.
Methods : Above a thorough clinical examination, ENG, EMG, sural 
nerve biopsy and genetic testing has also been performed. Quanti -
fication of the PMP22 gene was carried out by Real-Time PCR. The 
coding exons of the MPZ and EGR2 genes where sequenced using 
the ABI Prims 3100 sequencing machine. The obtained sequence was 
compared with the human reference sequence.
Results : The first symptoms of the 44 and 48 year old brothers ap -
peared in their early twenties with distal type muscle atrophy and pa -
resis. ENG showed severe demyelinating polyneuropathy. Segmental 
demyelination could be seen in the sural nerve biopsy of the younger 
patient. Genetic testing found a deletion of the PMP22 gene in the old -
er brother, who had more severe symptoms. In both brother a patho -
gen substitution c. 1142 G>A (Arg381His) was revealed in exon 4 of 
the EGR2 gene.
Discussion : It is the first report about the coexistence of PMP22 gene 
deletion and a pathogen mutation of the EGR 2. The coexisting 2 mu -
tations did not aggravate the clinical symptoms. Previously the c. 1142 
G>A (Arg381His) mutation was shown to be associated with cranial 
nerve involvement, which was not present in our patient.
P12.165  study of Peutz- Jeghers syndrome patients in Poland
M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, D. Nowakowska3, B. Kozak-Klonowska4, M. 
Teisseyre5, S. Pieczarkowski6, K. Ilnicka-Borowczyk2, E. Czkawanianc7, A. 
Plawski1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University 
of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Genetic Counseling Unit Cancer Center 
and Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland, 4Regional Oncology Center, 
Kielce, Poland, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Immunology. 
The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, Poland, 6Institute of 
Pediatrics, Polish-American Children‘s Hospital, Kraków, Poland, 7Department 
of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial, Lodz, 
Poland.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is rare, genetically conditioned dis -
ease. PJS is heredited in autosomal dominant manner and is charac -
terized by occurrence of hamartomatous polys. The hamartomatous 
polyps are manifested during second or third decade of life. The polyps 
can be located throughout digestive tract. Occurrence hamartomatous 
polys in PJS may cause of many gastrointestinal discomforts. Although 
in PJS patients the risk of malignant transformation is lower then oth -
ers hereditary neoplastic disease, an increased risk to development 
malignancies such as the pancreas, the breast, female and male re -
productive organs is observed. The second characteristic manifesta -
tions of JPS are brown, dark or blue spots. PJS is caused by muta -
tions in the LKB1 (STK11) on chromosome 19. LKB1 gene encodes 
a serine/threonine protein kinase participating in very important cell 
signaling pathways. The PJS diagnosis of 20 patients was based on 
presence of two or more polyps, or one polyp and typical pigmented 
lesions, or one polyp and a family history of PJS. Mutations screen -Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders7
ing analysis reveled seven mutations and one polymorphism. These 
mutations are located in different position in gene. With the Multiplex 
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) - assay we detected 
additional genomic mutations. For our screening we used the SALSA 
P101 STK11 kit which contains MLPA probes for most STK11 exons. 
In seven patients we identified exonic deletions or duplications range 
from one to five exons.
The study was financed by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher 
Education, project no. N402 481537
P12.166  the mutational analysis of the PAH gene in families 
with phenylketonuria
V. L. Akhmetova , M. A. Bermisheva, R. R. Valiev, I. R. Gilyazova, E. K. 
Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a common autosomal recessive genetic 
disorder caused by a large variety of mutations in the phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene ( PAH).
We have carried out the mutational analysis of the PAH gene in 174 
families with PKU from Bashkortostan Republic, North Caucasus 
and Kazakhstan. Consequently we revealed 32 various mutations 
that spectrum was specific for each region. Our results indicated that 
R408W  mutation accounted for 54.27% PKU in Bashkortostan and 
42.5% in Kazakhstan. Mutation R261X  of the PAH gene is found out 
only in patients from the North Caucasus with frequency of 38.16 % 
whereas mutation R408W  in the given region is revealed with frequency 
of 13.16 %. In addition we identified mutations R261Q , c.1315+1g>a , 
c.1066-11g>a , R158Q , R252W  and P281L  of the PAH gene with fre -
quencies from 9.77 to 1.72 % on the average. Using SSCP analysis fol -
lowed by sequencing of the PAH gene we have detected 19 mutations 
with frequencies from 1.72 to 0.29%: c.663-664delAG , S349P , L48S , 
c.441+5g>t , c.47-48delCT , Y414C , c.208-210del3bp , E390G , A300S , 
P211T , R413P , c.168+5g>a , R243X , R243Q , E280K , c.1089delG , 
D415N , c.509+5delg  and R111X . Six new mutations were revealed 
as well: R252P , c.116delT , Y206X (c.618TAC> TAA), c.1315+del4  in 
PKU patients from Bashkortostan, F331S  - from North Caucasus and 
S350Y  - from Kazakhstan.
80.5% of the studied families with PKU have appeared completely in -
formative for direct DNA-diagnostics, 17.8% - partially-informative, and 
1.7% - absolutely not informative.
Thus the data of mutational analysis may be used for prenatal diag -
nostics and carrier screening in PKU families.
P12.167  X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: mutational 
analysis of PHEX  gene in an italian cohort
B. Toschi1, A. Michelucci1, A. Fogli1, F. Baldinotti1, P. Simi1, G. I. Baroncelli2;  
1U.O. Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, Dipartimento Materno-Infantile, 
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, PISA, Italy, 2U.O. Pediatria II, 
Dipartimento Materno-Infantile, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, 
PISA, Italy.
Phosphate (P) plays a key role in bone and mineral metabolism. 
Among various causes of hypophosphatemia are inherited disorders 
of P homeostasis, including X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), au -
tosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), and autosomal 
recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHR). Affected patients show similar 
clinical features, such as short stature, bowing of the legs, and signs of 
rickets, and typical biochemical findings (hypophosphatemia, reduced 
TmPO4/GFR, high-normal PTH with low or normal 1,25(OH)2D con -
centrations).
XLH, ADHR and ARHR are caused by mutations in PHEX , FGF23  and 
DMP1  genes, respectively.
We describe a cohort of 22 pedigrees with clinical, biochemical and ra -
diological diagnosis of HR: 9 were familial cases and 12 were sporadic 
cases. Using DHPLC (denaturing high-performance liquid chromatog -
raphy), MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) and 
sequence analysis, we screened all affected individuals for mutations 
in PHEX gene: 21 mutations were identified (95%), 14 of which are 
novel. The mutations include 5 missense (23.8%) and 5 nonsense mu -
tations (23.8%), 3 small deletions (14.3%), 2 small insertions (9.5%), 
3 splice-site mutations (14.3%), and 3 gross deletions (14.3%). One 
patient did not have a PHEX  mutation. She was subjected to muta -
tional analysis of both the untranslated regions (5’ UTR and 3’ UTR) 
of PHEX , as well as was screened for FGF23  and DMP1  genes muta -tions; no mutation was found in those regions.
Genetic testing is useful to confirm the diagnosis of HR, to identify 
mild forms of HR in family members, and for appropriate genetic coun -
selling. Our data indicate that there is no single predominant PHEX  
mutation XLH.
P12.168  Molecular studies of the PANK2  gene in patients with 
PKAN
F. Annesi1, M. Doco-Fenzy2, G. Lesca3, P. Tarantino1,4, E. V. De Marco1, 
D. Civitelli1, F. E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1,4, V. Greco1, V. Scornaienchi1, A. 
Gambardella1,5, A. Quattrone1,5, G. Annesi1;  
1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Service de Génétique, 
Hopital-Maison Blanche, CHU-Reims, 45 rue Cognacq Jay, 51092, REIMS, 
France, 3Service de Génétique moléculaire et clinique, CHRU de Lyon - 
Hôpital Edouard Herriot, 5 Place d‘Arsonval, 69437, Lyon cedex 03, France, 
4Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University 
of Messina, Messina, Italy, 5Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is an 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive dystonia, 
rigidity, choreoathetosis, spasticity, retinitis pigmentosa, optic atrophy, 
parkinsonism and iron accumulation in the brain. Clinical data suggest 
two forms of PKAN: a classic form characterized by early onset and 
rapid progression and an atypical form with later onset and a more 
slowly progressive course. Many patients with classical and atypical 
PKAN have mutations in the gene encoding pantothenate kinase 2 
(PANK2 ) and a specific magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pattern 
called eye-of-the-tiger.
In this study we performed a mutational analysis of the PANK2  gene 
in 10 PKAN patients from Italy and France. Brain MRI examinations 
were not available for all the patients. The entire coding region (seven 
exons) was investigated for point mutations by sequencing analysis; 
furthermore, we used PCR real time to identify any possible exonic 
rearrangements. In 9 patients no PANK2  mutations were identified; 
only one patient showed an already described point mutation, but in 
the heterozygous state.
Our results excluded PANK2  point mutations and exonic rearrange -
ments in our patients, both in atypical and classic forms. This confirms 
the genetic heterogeneity in PKAN and therefore the importance of 
investigating the role of other responsible genes.
This work was partially supported by a Grant from the Province of 
Cosenza, Italy
P12.169  mutations in the PKHD1  gene at autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease in patients from Russian Federation.
N. N. Vasserman , A. L. Chuhrova, N. V. Poltavets, N. V. Punina;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD, MIM 263200) 
is a severe disorder with variable clinical spectrum. It is an important 
cause of renal-related and liver-related morbidity and mortality. 30-
50% of affected babies die shortly after birth in respiratory insufficiency 
because of pulmonary hypoplasia. Due to the poor prognosis there is 
a strong demand for prenatal diagnosis. ARPKD gene was mapped to 
chromosome 6p21 and prenatal diagnosis was performed with poly -
morphic microsatellite markers from this region. But sometimes mate -
rial from the dead baby was not available. That is why very important 
to looking for gene mutations in materials of the parents. PKHD1  gene 
(MIM 606702) has the longest open reading frame that is encoded by 
a 67-exon transcript. Mutations were found to be scattered throughout 
the gene without evidence of clustering.
For DNA analysis we select 11 exons where were found according to 
literature more than one mutation in more than one family. We ana -
lyzed DNA samples of babies and parents from 49 families. We found 
12 mutations on 28 chromosomes for 21 families. There were iden -
tified 6 previously unknown mutations: G130A, C1427A, 3797delC, 
G5908A, A8864G, 10585_10588delGAAT and 6 previously described 
mutations. There were no mutations identified in 28 families. It could 
be because of genetic heterogeneity or assumed diagnosis of ARPKD 
might be incorrect in some cases. Mutation analysis in PKHD1  gene is 
very important for the confirmation of the ARPKD diagnosis and for the 
genetic consultation with following prenatal diagnosis.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 7 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
P12.170  the study of PAH Gene (classic PKU) in iranian 
Patients
M. Dehghan Manshadi , O. Aryani, M. Houshmand;  
special medical lab, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency results in intolerance 
to the dietary intake of the essential amino acid phenylalanine and 
produces a spectrum of disorders including phenylketonuria (PKU), 
non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia (non-PKU HPA), and variant PKU. 
Classic PKU is caused by a complete or near-complete deficiency of 
phenylalanine hydroxylase activity; without dietary restriction of phe -
nylalanine, most children with PKU develop profound and irreversible 
mental retardation
PAH deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At con -
ception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% 
chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Prenatal diagnosis of 
PAH deficiency is possible in pregnancies at 25% risk either when mo -
lecular genetic testing has revealed the disease-causing mutations in 
the PAH gene in an affected family member, or when linkage analysis 
has identified informative markers.
The PAH gene, located on chromosome 12q22-24, consists of 13 ex -
ons and spans 90 kilobase.
Our laboratory uses PCR-based sequencing technology to identify 
mutations among the 13 exons. This method identifies approximately 
99% of mutations.
30 patients investigated for PAH in this study .6 mutations were fund;
969+5 G>A in 3 patients , 1089 del G in 2 patients , 782 G>A in 2 pa -
tients , 843-5 T>C in 1 patient , 168+5 G>C in 1 patient , 441+1 G>C 
in 1 patient.
P12.171  Screening for phosphomannomutase deficiency in 
samples of foetuses and newborn infants with congenital 
malformations
B. Pérez1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, E. Bermejo2, E. Quintana3, A. Vega1, A. Navarro3, 
F. Leal1, M. Martínez-Fernandez2, M. Sánchez-Izquierdo2, A. Soler3, R. Acosta4, 
L. Desviat1, E. Gratacos4, P. Briones3, M. Martínez-Frias2, M. Ugarte1;  
1Centro de Biología Molecular, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2CIAC, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3IBC, CDB, 
CIBERER Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, 
CIBERER Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
Phosphomannomutase (PMM2) deficiency is the most frequent glyco -
sylation disorder affecting the N-glycosylation. The clinical manifesta -
tion spans from severe hydrops fetalis, fetal loss and multisystemic 
disorders and central nervous system involvement in infancy. The 
aim of this work was to investigate the presence of PMM2 deficiency 
in a cohort of 228 foetal samples and 230 dried blood samples from 
newborns, all with congenital malformations. We have identified ten 
samples with PMM2  changes in heterozygosity. We have identified 
four previously described nucleotide changes (p.R141H, p.R123Q, 
p.C241S and p.T237R) and three novel ones (p.R238H, p.F157S and 
IVS3-5T>C). The most frequent disease-causing mutation p.R141H in 
the PMM2  gene was identified in four independent alleles (4/460 al -
leles). This fact was not surprising according to the high allelic frequen -
cy reported in the general population (1/79). The rest of the variant 
changes were identified in only one allele each. In addition, no aber -
rant transcripts or deletions have been detected using whole genome 
SNP array (Illumina610K) and transcriptional profiling analysis in two 
samples bearing p.R141H and p.R238H, respectively. Expression 
analysis in a prokaryotic expression system of the changes p.R123Q, 
p.F157S, p.C241S and p.R238H showed 1%, 0%, 60% and 100% 
PMM 2 residual activity, respectively. These results suggest that all the 
changes detected in the PMM2  gene are disease-causing mutations 
with the exception of p.R238H that might be a non-synonymous SNP.
These findings are clearly in disequilibrium with the reported frequency 
of PMM2-CDG-Ia and require further genetic and functional analysis to 
provide more insight about these interesting results.P12.172  molecular investigation of PmP22 gene in Russia cmt1 
patients: comparison of different methods
T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, V. P. Fedotov2, E. L. Dadaly1;  
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC 
genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, also known as hereditary motor 
and sensory neuropathy, is among the most frequent hereditary disor -
ders of the nervous system.
225 unrelated patients with clinical and electrophysiological data of 
CMT1 were observed by us. In the first time the most common muta -
tion - duplication at the chromosome 17p11.2-12 locus - was investi -
gate by polymorphic (CA)n repeats that flanking PMP22  gene. At 121 
patients duplication was educed. Next time multiplex ligation-depen -
dent probe analysis (MLPA) was carried out for all patients without 
mutations. We created two systems: the first - using a probes were 
designed to evaluate all PMP22  coding exons and four control genes: 
TBP, SIRT3, USP3 and B2M , the second - using a probes were de -
signed to evaluate first, second, third and fifth PMP22  exons and four 
control genes: TBP, SIRT3, USP3 and B2M. At three patients dele -
tion of the second PMP22  exon was educed and at one patient the 
disease-cause tetraplication of 17p11.2-12 region was detected. In 
the absence direct sequence analysis of the all PMP22  exons 1-5, 
including their intron/exon boundaries was undertaken. At one patient 
Leu147Arg mutation was detected.
Accordingly the part of CMT1A compose 56% in all cases of CMT in 
Russia and the necessity of use complex access at the diagnostics of 
CMT1A was shown.
P12.173  molecular and cytogenetic investigations of patients 
affected with premature ovarian failure.
M. Rajkiewicz1, K. Szlendak-Sauer2, A. Sulek1, W. Krysa1, S. Radowicki2, J. 
Zaremba1;  
1Instiute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2University Hospital of 
Princess Anna Mazowiecka, Warsaw, Poland.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a heterogeneous disorder, defined 
also as premature menopause or hypergonadotropic ovarian insuffi -
ciency. Clinically, it is manifested by the secondary amenorrhea for at 
least four months in women under 40 years of age with elevated level 
of follicle-stimulating hormone FSH > 40 IU/l and decreased level of 
estradiol E2 < 20 IU/L. Investigations involving cytogenetic tests have 
shown that POF occurrence may be associated with aberrations local -
ized mainly in the long arm of chromosome X or premutation in FMR1 
gene.
The material used in this study comprised 40 DNA samples from pa -
tients with clinical symptoms of POF.
The cytogenetic analysis of the material revealed two X/autosome 
translocations, whereas DNA analysis showed FMR1 gene premuta -
tion in three patients. The frequency of X/autosome translocation in 
this material was 2/40 (5.0%) and FMR1 gene premutation was 3/40 
(7.5%). Overall the applied genetic tests allowed the identification of 
the cause of POF in 5 per 40 cases (12.5%).
P12.174  Identification of a chromosomal loci associated with 
recessive Primary ciliary Dyskinesia in a Bedouin family
M. Mazor1,2, R. Parvari1,2, S. Alkrinawi3, M. Aviram3;  
1Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2The National Institute for 
Biotechnology in the Negev, Israel, 3Pediatric Division Soroka medical Center, 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare genetic disorder, autosomal reces -
sive, caused by inherited defects of ciliary structure and function. The 
clinical features reflect the distribution of dysmotile cilia and include 
neonatal and chronic respiratory distress due to lack of coordinated 
ciliary movement. In approximately half of the PCD patients, there 
is apparent randomization of left-right axis development, or situs in -
versus totalis proposed to result from defective function of embryonic 
nodal cilia.
We have characterized a consanguineous Bedouin family from the Ne -
gev, who has two siblings diagnosed with situs inversus and respira -
tory symptoms. Numerous healthy siblings making the family suitable 
for positional cloning of the affected genes.
Linkage to the 13 known genes associated with the disease was ne -
gated.
Genome wide linkage analysis using the Affymetrix GeneChip map - Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
ping 250K array was performed on two patients and their parents from 
the family.
Homozygosity mapping identified a chromosomal region larger than 
16cM. Genotyping the region by analyzing polymorphic markers to all 
family members has defined a locus of 30Mb on chromosome 18q.
Prioritizing genes for search of the mutation and initial sequencing, 
was preformed according to databases of proteome collections, and 
derived from evolutionarily distant organisms which combines inde -
pendently assembled ciliary, basal body and centrosome.
Identification of additional genes involved in cilia function will provide 
new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the cilia and help to 
develop novel techniques to diagnose subjects with PCD.
P12.175  Identification and characterization by MLPA and aCGH 
of a whole PROP1 deletion in a girl with pituitary mass and 
combined pituitary hormone deficiency
T. Akcay1, O. Zurita2, K. Heath2, D. Kirac3, K. Ulucan4, A. Campos- Barros5;  
1Sisli Etfal Education and Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics, 
Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, and CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 
3Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 4Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Medical 
Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5MInstitute of Medical & Molecular 
Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, and CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, 
Spain.
Introduction: Mutations in at least five genes encoding pituitary specific 
transcription factors (PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, HESX1) result 
in combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), characterized by 
proportionate growth deficit, due to impaired production of growth hor -
mone and one or more of the other five pituitary hormones. Recessive 
mutations in PROP1 are the most frequent defect detected in CPHD.
The girl, born to a consanguineous relationship, first presented at the 
endocrinology clinic at the age of 8.8 yr with growth failure (height 
108.8 cm, -3.48 SDS). She was diagnosed with CPHD after hormonal 
evaluation. MRI of the pituitary gland showed a suprasellar mass. She 
did not have diabetes insipidus, neuro-ophthalmologic complaints or 
visual fields abnormalities. We decided to undertake PROP1 mutation 
screening.
Methods: PROP1 mutation screening included MLPA (Salsa P216, 
MRC Holland) and array CGH of chromosome 5 (Nimblegen).
Results: A homozygous deletion of the entire PROP1 was detected in 
the girl. Both parents were shown to be heterozygous for this deletion. 
The deletion was delimited to at least 7.3kb upstream of PROP1 and 
more finely to ~907bp downstream from the stop codon.
Conclusion: We describe the third CPHD case with a complete PROP1 
deletion in homozygosity. The 5´ breakpoint appears to lie in a highly 
repetitive region, rich in Alu sequences. The 3´ breakpoint lies within 
an AluSx repeat suggesting that the deletion may have arisen through 
non-allelic homologous recombination. In the presence of CPHD and 
pituitary mass, PROP1 analyses should be considered before referring 
the patient to a neurosurgeon.
P12.176  Nevoid basal carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome) 
and pronounced androgenic alopecia in a female with a novel 
mutation p.Leu 1159fsX32 of the PTCH gene.
S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, P. Willems2, M. Kosmadaki3, E. Leze1, C. Vrettou1, E. 
Kanavakis1, A. Katsarou3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2GENDIA (GENetic 
DIAgnostic Network), Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Dermatology, 
University of Athens, «Andreas Sygros» Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome(NBCCS) or Basal cell nevus 
syndrome (BCNS)(OMIM109400) or Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal 
dominant disorder with complete penetrance. Prevalence varies form 
1:57,000-1:256,000 with no sexual predisposition. PTCH1 gene has 
been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 9(q22.3-q31), and con -
sists of 23 exons (34kB) enconding a transmembrane protein. Data 
suggests that PTCH1 gene functions both as a tumor-suppressor gene 
and as a developmental regulator of normal tissues. More than 284 dif -
ferent type mutations have been reported in patients with NBCCS with 
over 80% resulting in truncation of the coded protein and haplo-insuf -
ficiency. We report a 55-year-old woman with multiple(>80) BCCs all 
over her body, mostly of the nodular type, appeared as done-shaped 
papules with telangiectatic surface and a pearly translucent border, some of which were crusted or ulcerated and firm. A heterozygous 
c.3475delC mutation in exon 21 of PTCH was found. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is a novel mutation, which due to its truncating nature, 
it is most likely disease-causing. Outstandingly, she presented also 
pronounced androgenic alopecia. It is not currently known whether 
PTCH plays a role in male pattern alopecia but PTCH  protein is in -
volved in Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling required for the initiation of 
anagen phase of the hair follicles. Thus, we postulate that epidermal 
cells lacking normal PTCH function may exhibit a defect in responding 
to Shh during the hair cycle. This is the first case in the relative litera -
ture of pronounced androgenic alopecia in female patient with Gorlin 
syndrome.
P12.177  R408W mutation among PKU patients of Leningrad 
province
I. F. Nikiforova1, M. O. Mkheidze2,1, I. A. Ivanov1, I. M. Andreeva1, S. E. 
Khalchitsky1;  
1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical 
Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder arising 
from the deficiency of some enzymes which catalyze the essential 
conversion of Phe to Tyr. In the majority of cases PKU is caused by 
the mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. More than 
500 mutations have been described worldwide. The incidence of this 
inborn error of metabolism in the population of Leningrad province was 
estimated to be 1:6400 - 1:10266. R408W is one of the most frequent 
mutation in St. Petersburg population. In present study we have iden -
tified the mutant allele R408W in 57 patients revealed according to 
the data of neonatal screening in Leningrad province. Identification of 
R408W allele in the dry spot samples was done with PCR method. 
21 probands were found to be homozygous (R408W/R408W). 36 
probands were shown to be compound with R408W as one mutant 
allele. There were 68,4% of R408W allele among chromosomes in -
vestigated
P12.178  Homozygosity Mapping in Consanguineous Spanish 
Families with Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa
A. Avila-Fernandez1, M. I. Khan2,3, R. W. Collin2, D. Cantalapiedra1, R. 
Fernandez-Sanchez1, M. I. Lopez-Molina4, A. Estrada-Cuzcano2, F. P. M. 
Cremers2, C. Ayuso1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-CIBERER, Madrid, 
Spain, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Biosciences, COMSATS 
Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 4Department of 
Ophthalmology, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain.
Purpose: To identify the genetic defect in Spanish pedigrees affected 
by autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP).
Methods: A total of 14 patients from five consanguineous Spanish 
families with typical RP was included in this study. After exclusion of 
the known mutations using the arRP and LCA genotyping microarray 
chips (Asper Biotech), whole-genome SNP genotyping combined with 
homozygosity mapping was performed to find the causative genetic 
defect. In significant homozygous regions, microsatellite markers were 
used to confirm and narrow down the linkage intervals. Direct se -
quencing of candidates genes in these regions was performed to find 
the causative mutations.
Results: In two out of five families studied (RP0055 and RP0285), ho -
mozygous regions encompassing the EYS gene were identified. Direct 
sequencing of EYS revealed a homozygous c.5928-2A>G mutation in 
all affected members of the RP0055 family, producing an alteration 
in the splice site. In family RP0509, the largest and second largest 
homozygous regions included ABCA4  and CNGB1  respectively. For 
the RP1190 family the two largest regions overlapped with the RP22 
locus  and CNGB1  whereas for family RP0371, homozygosity mapping 
and microsatellites analysis revealed a novel locus  with a significant 
LOD Score (2.12).
Discussion: Homozygosity mapping is a useful tool as a first step to 
identify the genetic cause in Spanish RP families. In four out of five 
families studied, our results suggested that mutations in known RP 
genes are implicated in this retinal disorder. We present the first splic -
ing defect in EYS and furthermore identified a novel arRP locus.0 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 0
P12.179  Identification of two novel CDKL5 mutations in 
Hungarian patients with Rett syndrome phenotype
N. Polgar1, K. Hadzsiev1, J. Bene1, J. Karteszi1, K. Hollody2, G. Kosztolanyi1, B. 
Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, 
Pécs, Hungary.
In our study we screened 159 individuals for MECP2 mutations with 
Rett phenotype. A total of 22 different known mutations were identified 
in 40 subjects: 8 frameshift-deletions, 4 nonsense mutations, 10 mis -
sense mutations. Among the pathologic mutations the most frequent 
were the Arg133Cys (9.8%), Thr158Met (9.8%), Arg255Stop (7.8%), 
and Arg294Stop (7.8%) changes. We also detected the missense 
C925T (Arg309Trp) mutation in an affected patient; however, the role 
of this alteration in Rett pathogenesis is still unknown according to mu -
tation databases. As a unique variant, we detected an inherited 18bp 
deletion, 1162_1179del18 in a patient who carried the frameshift-as -
sociated mutation of 276insG.
In all patients (n=108) having no MECP2 defects detectable by direct 
sequencing, we screened for mutations of CDKL5, a serine-threonine 
kinase gene recently identified in patients with Rett phenotype. We 
discovered two novel nonsense mutations: G607T that results in a 
premature termination codon at amino acid position 203 disrupting 
the catalytic domain of the CDKL5 protein, and G1708T leading to 
a premature stop at amino acid position 570 of the C-terminal region 
involved in either the catalytic activity or the subcellular localization.
Our results suggest the need of screening for CDKL5 mutations in pa -
tients with Rett phenotype tested negative for MECP2 mutations.
P12.180  Mutational analysis of the MECP2 gene in Tunisian 
patients with Rett syndrome: a novel double-mutation
N. Fendri1,2, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1,2, D. Moall1,2, N. Belguith1,2, N. Louhichi1,2, R. 
Zemni3,2, F. Slama3,2, C. Triki4,2, F. Fakhfakh1,2;  
1laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, 
Tunisia, 2Tunisian network on mental retardation (PRF: Projet de Recherche 
Fédéré)., Tunisia, 3Unité d’immunologie. Faculté de Médecine de Sousse, Sfax, 
Tunisia, 4Service de Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax, Tunisia, 
Sfax, Tunisia.
Rett syndrome is a severe disorder characterized by loss of acquired 
skills after a period of normal development in infant girls. Purposeful 
hand use is often lost and replaced by repetitive, stereotypic move -
ments. This X-linked dominant disorder is caused mainly by mutations 
in the MECP2 gene. In this report, we performed a mutational analysis 
of the MECP2 gene in 7 Tunisian patients with classical Rett syndrome. 
The results showed the presence of a double-mutation: p.R306C and 
the c.1461+98insA which create a new hypothetical polyadenylation 
site in the 3’UTR of the MECP2 gene. We also detected a new variant 
c.1461+92C>G in the 3’UTR located previous to 34 bp from the poly -
adenylation site with a score of 4.085. This variation is located in a hy -
pothetical splicing enhancer with a score of 1.96277 according to the 
ESE finder program. We also found 2 common mutations: p.T158M 
(57.14 %) and p.R168X (14.28 %).
P12.181**  RFX6 mutation in a newborn with congenital diabetes 
and hemochromatosis
J. Désir1, N. Taleb2, D. Martinovici3, V. Ransy3, S. Vanden Eijnden3, C. 
Ridremont3, A. Pardou3, M. Cassart4, F. Avni4, C. Donner5, P. Lingier6, A. 
Mathieu7, B. Gulbis8, V. De Brouckère9, M. Cnop9, C. Polychronakos2, M. 
Abramowicz1;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 
2Departments of Paediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, 
QC, Canada, 3Neonatal Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 
4Radiology Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 5Fetal 
Medicine Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 6Pediatric 
Surgery Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 7Pathology 
Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 8Clinical Biology 
Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 9Endocrinology 
Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium.
A newborn from consanguineous parents was referred prenatally for 
intrauterine growth retardation and anomalies of the digestive tract. 
The prenatal work up included an in utero MRI, which showed ab -
normalities consistent with hemochromatosis, intestinal atresia, and 
gallbladder aplasia. These diagnoses were confirmed postnatally. Dia -
betes was present since birth. Interestingly, both parents, and many of their first- and second-degree relatives had diabetes or glucose 
intolerance. This infant contributed to the identification of the RFX6 
winged helix transcription factor as the cause of the Riley-Mitchell syn -
drome of digestive tract malformation and congenital diabetes, by a 
strategy of homozygosity mapping and high-throughput sequencing. 
In early stages of mouse development, RFX6 is broadly expressed in 
the endoderm, and is restricted to the pancreas and some gut foci in 
later stages. In the adult it is essentially expressed in the pancreatic 
islets. The infant we report here was homozygous for the Arg181Gln 
mutation, which abolished binding of RFX6 to its cognate DNA site. It 
is unclear to what extent the Riley-Mitchell syndrome differs from the 
Martinez-Frias syndrome. Our observation suggests that congenital 
hemochromatosis might be a feature of the RFX6 defect.
P12.182**  The RIN2 syndrome: a new autosomal recessive 
connective tissue disorder caused by deficiency of Ras and Rab 
interactor 2 (RiN2)
D. M. S. Syx1, F. Malfait1, L. Van Laer1, J. Hellemans1, T. Hermanns-Lê2, A. 
Willaert1, A. Benmansour3, A. De Paepe1, A. Verloes4;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of 
Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium, 
3Pediatrician, Oran, Algeria, 4Department of Genetics, AP-HP Robert Debré 
University Hospital and INSERM U676, Paris, France.
In 2005 we reported a new recessive EDS-like syndrome with fleshy 
swelling of facial tissues and severe scoliosis in a consanguineous 
Algerian family with three affected siblings. Recently, a homozygous 
1-bp deletion in the RIN2 gene, encoding the Ras and Rab interactor 
2, was shown to be involved in a similar phenotype, termed MACS 
(Macrocephaly, Alopecia, Cutis laxa and Scoliosis) syndrome. Impor -
tant phenotypic overlap between our EDS-like family and the MACS 
family prompted us to re-assess our family and perform molecular 
analysis of RIN2 .
The most striking clinical features included progressive facial dys -
morphism and (kypho)scoliosis, sparse hair as well as skin- and joint 
hypermobility. Ultrastructural studies of the skin revealed important 
abnormalities in the collagen fibril morphology. Fibroblasts exhibited 
a dilated endoplasmic reticulum and an abnormal Golgi apparatus 
with rarefied and dilated cisternae. Molecular analysis of RIN2  identi -
fied a novel homozygous 2-bp deletion in all affected individuals. The 
c.1914_1915delGC mutation introduces a frameshift and creates a 
premature termination codon. The resulting aberrant mRNA is prone to 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, probably resulting in loss-of-func -
tion of the corresponding protein.
Our findings show that RIN2  defects are associated with a distinct 
autosomal recessive genodermatosis of which the progressive facial 
coarsening, gingival hypertrophy and scoliosis are the most striking 
features. Although, the current family displays considerable pheno -
typic overlap with MACS syndrome, the skin phenotype belongs to 
the Ehlers-Danlos, rather than the cutis laxa spectrum. This study un -
derscores the involvement of RIN2 and associated intracellular traf -
ficking pathways in the pathogenesis of heritable connective tissue 
disorders.
P12.183  Molecular investigation for Rett Syndrome in female 
patients with severe mental retardation.
C. Sofocleous1,2, S. Psoni1, V. Economakis1, H. Fryssira1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, J. 
Traeger-Synodinos1, E. Kanavakis1;  
1Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Athens University, Aghia Sophia , 
Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Research Institute for the Study of 
Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, St Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental 
disorder affecting mostly girls. RTT is characterized by normal early 
development, followed by psychomotor regression and gradual onset 
of microcephaly. Most RTT cases (70-95%) are caused by mutations 
in MECP2 gene, while recently another gene, CDKL5 has also been 
correlated with the RTT phenotype. This study reports on the inci -
dence and spectrum of MECP2 gene alterations, in female patients 
referred for variable phenotypes within the RTT spectrum. During the 
last five years, 159 girls - of which only 35 completed the RTT scoring 
system- underwent molecular investigation for severe developmental 
delay/ mental retardation (MR). Of those, 56 requested analysis for 
RTT (group 1) and 103 analysis for RTT and Angelman syndrome 1 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 1
(AS) (group 2). Molecular analysis with ECMA (Enzymatic Cleavage 
Mismatch Analysis) and direct sequencing of exons 3 and 4 of the 
MECP2 gene was performed in 135 subjects allowing detection and 
characterization of disease causing mutations.RTT was confirmed in 
41/159 subjects [29/56 (group 1) and 12/103 (group 2)] where com -
mon mutations, novel alterations and previously reported disease re -
lated polymorphisms were detected. Silent polymorphisms were also 
revealed and remain under investigation. Three patients carried altera -
tions of the CDKL5 gene and were also classified as having RTT. In 
addition, alterations of the 15q11-13 region were disclosed in three 
girls classified as AS.MECP2 gene alterations should be considered 
as a cause of MR. Clinical evaluation using the RTT scoring system 
would improve the diagnosis and research of RTT especially in respect 
to phenotype-genotype correlation.
P12.184  A rare un-explained case of Sandhoff disease among 
iranian population
H. Aryan1, O. Aryani1, M. Houshmand1,2;  
1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Sandhoff disease is a rare, genetic, lipid storage disorder resulting in 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder and caused by a deficiency 
of the enzyme beta-hexosaminidase (HEX), which results in the ac -
cumulation of GM2 gangliosides in the brain and other organs of the 
body. Sandhoff disease is a severe form of Tay-Sachs disease. Weak -
ness begins in the first 6 months of life. Inheritance pattern is autoso -
mal recessive with multiple alleles and compounds. Mutations occur in 
HEXB, encoding the β-subunit, cause the neurodegenerative condi -
tion, Sandhoff disease. This gene contains 14 coding exons that lo -
cated on chromosome 5q13. The proband was a one year old boy with 
progressive muscle weakness and psychomotor retardation. Biochem -
istry analyses of hexosaminidase A and B showed HEXB deficiency 
in the patient. This case admitted with muscle weakness, seizures, 
myoclonus, visual impairment and cherry-red macular spots. Molecu -
lar assessment revealed a homozygote missense mutation „K 121 R“ 
in exon 2 of this gene and his parents showed a heterozygote state 
in this region. In spite of the Banerjee report (1991) such a mutation 
converted „K 121 R“, as a polymorphism since it also occurs in some 
normal subjects, our finding from whole gene sequencing suggest that 
this mutation can cause the disease in homozygote condition. How -
ever, more functional study is needed to clarify this molecular aspect 
of the disease.
P12.185  Identification of seven novel HGSNAT mutations in 
eleven Sanfilippo C patients: characterization at the enzyme 
activity and RNA levels, and analysis of the origin of frequent 
mutations
I. Canals1,2, M. J. Coll3,2, A. Chabás3,2, S. C. Elalaoui4, A. Sefiani4, I. C. Jaouad4, 
M. Szlago5, D. Grinberg1,2, L. Vilageliu1,2;  
1Universitat de Barcelona, Departament de Genética, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 
2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Spain, 4Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National 
d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 5Laboratorio Dr. Chamoles, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
Mucopolysaccharidosis III (MPS III), or Sanfilippo syndrome, include 
four autosomal recessive diseases characterized by a deficient hepa -
ran sulphate degradation. Clinical symptoms are similar for all types of 
MPS III, including progressive and severe deterioration of the central 
nervous system during childhood. HGSNAT is the gene responsible of 
MPS IIIC, which encodes the acetyl CoA:α-glucosaminide N-acetyl -
transferase, a lysosomal membrane protein.
In this study we have identified all the mutant alleles in eleven patients, 
seven Spanish, three Moroccan and one Argentinean. Nine different 
changes have been found. Seven of them were novel: two splice-site 
mutations (c.633+1G>A and c.1378-1G>A), four missense mutations 
(c.161C>T, c.338T>C, c.1271G>T and c.1334T>C, and one 19-nucleo -
tide intronic deletion. The deleterious effect of latter was demonstrated 
by a minigene assay. Splicing defects were all confirmed at the RNA 
level. Heterologous expression analyses in COS-7 cells of HGSNAT 
cDNAs bearing missense mutations showed negligible enzyme activity 
for all of them.
The two most frequent mutations, c.234+1G>A and c.372-2A>G, had 
been previously described. Mutation c.234+1G>A was always found in a double-mutant allele with p.P237Q, as described for Moroccan patients. 
Interestingly, we found p.P237Q in 3 alleles from 118 Moroccan healthy 
individuals. These data, together with expression results, confirm that 
it is a low frequent polymorphism. A haplotype analysis was performed 
using a novel polymorphism and 14 previously described SNPs. The 
results are consistent with a single origin for each one of these two 
frequent mutations. Mutation c.234+1G>A seems to have a common 
origin, due to founder effect, in Moroccan and Spanish patients.
P12.186  Several SCA17 minor expanded CAG/CAA alleles with 
incomplete penetrance and variable expression coexist with other scA1 and scA3 expansions.
H. San Nicolás1, J. Corral1, M. Calopa2, D. Genís3, J. Gámez4, L. De Jorge1, V. 
Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. de Bellvitge - IDIBELL, 
L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. Josep Trueta, 
Girona, Spain, 4Dep. of Neurology. Hospital General Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, 
Spain.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is an autosomal dominant 
neurodegenerative disease characterized principally by ataxia, py -
ramidal and extrapyramidal signs, cognitive impairments, psychosis 
and seizures. It is caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the TATA-
box binding protein gene ( TBP gene) (6q27), which is translated into 
a polyglutamine tract. The disease threshold goes from 43 to > 60 
CAG/CAA repeats, with reduced penetrance in lower alleles (43 to 48). 
In one pedigree we found one 65 years female carrying a 44 CAG/CAA 
allele but without any symptoms of the disease. Surprisingly, also has 
an allele of 44 repeats in SCA3 locus (14q24), in pre-mutation and low 
penetrance range. She has transmitted the SCA17 expansion twice 
to their offspring: a daughter has inherited an expanded allele of 44 
repeats and suffers disartria, dementia and cerebellum atrophy; and a 
soon also with 44 repeats but minor psychiatric symptoms and without 
cognitive impairments or ataxia. We present also four SCA17 affected 
cases with 43 CAG/CAA repeats with several particular clinical features 
as ataxia, vertigo, axonal neuropathy and in one case camptocornia 
(to our knowledge the first description of this symptom associated with 
an expanded allele in the TBP gene). Interestingly, two of these indi -
viduals show also expanded alleles from SCA1 (6p23) (48 CAG) and 
SCA3 (41 CAG). Our results show the eventual penetrance of minor 
SCA17 alleles of 43 repeats, the great clinical variability expression 
in SCA17 affected cases and the unexplained coexistences between 
SCA17 and other SCA repeat expansions as SCA1 and SCA3.
P12.187  SCA8 and other SCA or FRDA expansions coexist in 
members of several pedigrees with ataxia.
J. Corral1, H. San Nicolás1, D. Genís2, M. Calopa3, L. De Jorge1, V. Volpini1;  
1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. Josep Trueta, Girona, 
Spain, 3Dep. of Neurology. Hosp. Univ. de Bellvitge - IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain.
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) are 
a group of neurodegenerative diseases in which several genes have 
been cloned: SCAs 1-3 , SCAs 6 -7, SCA12 & SCA17  with dominant in -
heritance;  and FXN (frataxin) for FRDA, a recessive disorder. In SCAs 
the mutation usually consists in a CAG or CTG (for SCA8) triple nucle -
otide repeat expansions, which normally localize in exonic regions and 
codifies for a polyglutamine tracts of respective proteins. In FRDA the 
mutation is a triple nucleotide GAA great expansion in the first intron 
of FXN gene. In a Spanish sample of N = 166 unrelated index cas -
es, 6.02% were SCA1; 26.51% SCA2; 34.94% SCA3; 7.23% SCA6; 
6.02% SCA7; 15.06% SCA8; 1.20% SCA17; and 3.01% DRPLA. We 
present here five pedigrees in which SCA8 coexists with other SCA 
expansions in affected index cases or in relatives. In three pedigrees 
SCA8 expansions coexist respectively with SCA2, SCA3 and FRDA 
in the respective index cases. In relatives of each mentioned families 
the expansions segregates independently one from each other, as we 
could expect between loci belonging to different chromosomes. Other 
family shows SCA8 and SCA1 expansions in several members, but 
none joint both. The same occurs in a pedigree with SCA6 and SCA8. 
More unexplained SCA8 coexistences have been reported, involving 
other neurodegenerative disorders as Parkinson or Alzheimer’s dis -
eases. These coexistences could be due to high population prevalence 2 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 2
of SCA8 non penetrant expanded alleles of moderate size. More evi -
dences should be addressed to propose alternative hypothesis about 
cause - effect relationship.
P12.188  Mutation spectrum in the SMARCB1  and NF2 genes of 
sporadic and familial schwannomatosis patients.
A. Piotrowski , A. Poplawski, S. Yao, L. Messiaen;  
Medical Genomics Lab, Department of Genetics; University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
Schwannomatosis is a genetic disorder which is characterized by mul -
tiple peripheral nerve schwannomas and, in contrast to NF2, absence 
of VIII cranial nerve tumors. Schwannomatosis patients carry muta -
tions in the SMARCB1  or NF2 genes, of which the former has been 
reported as the main casual factor of Schwannomatosis.
Here we report the results of comprehensive SMARCB1  mutation 
screening in sporadic and familial Shwannomatosis cases. We identi -
fied a group of 18/55 patients, including four familial cases, who had 
germline mutations in the SMARCB1  gene (one nonsense, two mis -
sense, two duplications, four frameshift and nine splice site mutations). 
We have also identified a cohort of 37/55 patients (characterized by 
absence of vestibular schwannomas by MRI and presence of multiple 
schwannomas) with no germline mutation in the SMARCB1  and NF2 
gene, including 6 familial cases.
In 15/55 patients, we analyzed at least 1 tumor sample besides the 
peripheral blood (a total of 22 distinct tumor lesions were analyzed from 
15 patients). We found SMARCB1  or NF2 mutations in 14/22 tumors. 
Deletions encompassing both SMARCB1  and NF2 genes were the 
most prominent change in the tumors.
Our results strengthen the hypothesis that there is another, as yet un -
identified factor behind the pathogenesis of Schwannomatosis. This 
casual factor might be shared between Schwannomatosis and AT/RT 
phenotypes as cases of both disorders were diagnosed in different rela -
tives in one of the families from our study.
Arkadiusz Piotrowski and Andrzej Poplawski contributed equally.
Correspondence to: lmessiaen@genetics.uab.edu
Sources of support: CTF Young Investigator Award, Grant ID: 2009-
01-004
P12.189  Molecular analysis of the SCN1A gene in patients with 
severe myoclonic Epilepsy of infancy 
F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, G. Provenzano1,2, E. V. De Marco1, P. Tarantino1,2, 
V. Greco1, D. Civitelli1, V. Scornaienchi1, G. Tortorella2, A. Gambardella1,3, G. 
Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Departement 
of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, 
Italy.
Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), or Dravet syndrome, 
is a severe autosomal dominant epileptic encephalopathy mainly 
caused by de novo mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel 
gene (SCN1A). Most of these mutations are nonsense or frameshift; 
missense mutations are also common. Recent studies have already 
reported that about 12% of mutation-negative SMEI patients have mi -
crochromosomal abnormalities involving SCN1A. However, the rates 
of detection of SCN1A mutation in SMEI patients range widely in the 
different populations. To investigate the frequency of SCN1A muta -
tions in our population, we analyzed 19 SMEI patients (10  males and 
9 females) from Southern Italy, who fulfilled the strict clinical definition 
of SMEI. Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing; the 
genomic anomalies were screened using multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA). Six different heterozygous coding vari -
ants were found in 6 unrelated SMEI cases (31.5%): 4 novel muta -
tions (Thr1289Ile, 3840insT, IVS7+4delA, Glu1021X) and 2 previously 
described (IVS24-2A/G, Ser1505X). Using MLPA assay we identified 
a deletion of exons 1-25 in one of the 13 patients without SCN1A point 
mutations (8%). The 3840insT and IVS24-2A/G mutations were de 
novo; the parents of the other patients were not available. The fre -
quency of SCN1A mutations is lower in our SMEI patients in com -
parison to other populations. Our results confirm the importance of 
screening the coding regions with both direct sequencing and a quan -
titative method and suggest that further genetic studies are needed to 
determine the causative mutations and genes involved in the remain -
ing SCN1A-negative patients.P12.190  characterization of four familial sHOX duplications by 
mLPA
B. Hernandez Charro , A. Bengoa, M. Artigas, S. Moreno, R. Narvaiza, M. 
Ramos-Arroyo;  
Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain.
SHOX duplications limited PAR1 region appear to be very rare and the 
presence of long range transcriptional enhancers (ECS) located 3´and 
possibly 5´of the SHOX gene makes complicated phenotype-genotype 
correlations and the clinical significance of the only four cases report 
is unclear (Thomas et al, 2009). That study concluded that only larger 
duplications including the transcriptional enhancers represent a poten -
tial cause in cases of idiopathic tall stature.
In our study we describe the clinical and MLPA characterization of four 
familial duplications (table 1). MLPA analysis was carried out using 
SALSA P018D1 SHOX MLPA(MRC Holland), which includes probes 
for each exon of SHOX and promoter and regulation regions.
All duplications are between, at least 50kb and 460kb, and contain all 
the SHOX coding sequence but different amounts of flanking sequence 
(table 1). In two cases (family 3 and 4) duplication encompasses sev -
eral ECS including two shown to have transcriptional activity, but in 
only one case is associated with tall stature - macrosomy (family 4). All 
duplications were transmitted from one of their parents.
These results do not seem to support an association between the pres -
ence of transcriptional ECS in duplicated region and tall stature, nor 
identify any potential phenotypic consequences of SHOX duplications. 
Anyway, it would be interesting to perform another specific analysis 
with these cases (more probes, microsatellites, aCGH) to specify size 
of duplications.
Table 1:
cases: Phenotype / Karyotypesubtelom  
(mLPA)size of sHOX 
duplication. PAR1 
region map(scale kb)
Family 1Speech delay and 
macrosomy  (8 yrs. W: >p95 
H: >p95 and OFC: 1,3 SD). 
46,XYP036/070  
Dup X/YpDuplication >=50 kb (MLPA 
P018C)
Family 2Short stature (2 yrs. W, H and 
OFC <p3). 46,XXDuplication between. 390-680 
kb (MLPA P018-D1)
Family 3Speech delay and learning 
disabilities (7 years. W: p50, H: 
p75 and OFC: 2SD). 46,XYP036:  
Dup X/YpTwo duplications: first between 
185-500kb and second between 
560-695 kb (MLPA P018-D1)
Family 4Psychomotor retardation and 
macrosomy  (14 mths. W: 
p75-90, H: p97 and OFC >2SD). 
46, XYP036/070:  
Dup X/YpDuplication between 460-730 kb 
(MLPA P018-D1)
P12.191  PAR1 deletion/duplication in patients with 
dyschondrosteosis or idiopathic short stature
A. Baxova , V. Kebrdlova, R. Solc, P. Lnenicka, M. Florianova, J. Stekrova, R. 
Mihalova, K. Vesela, K. Hirschfeldova;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st FM and GTH, Charles University 
in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mutations or deletions affecting production of the short stature homeo -
box-containing gene (SHOX) are found in subjects ranging from iso -
lated short stature (ISS) to Léri-Weill (dyschondrosteosis), and Langer 
syndromes.
Our sample was made of 42 unrelated probands in charge of the De -
partment of Medical Genetics (GTH and 1stFM, Charles University in 
Prague). Eleven of them were diagnosed as patients with dyschon -
drosteosis and 30 of them as ISS. All probands were analysed using 
the MLPA kit P018 that covers PAR1 pseudoautosomal region (includ -
ing SHOX gene) and neighbouring X specific sequences. Overall, ten 
unique PAR1 rearrangements were detected, eight in the group with 
dyschondrosteosis (73%), and two in the ISS group (7%). As for the 
dyschondrosteosis group, seven deletions were indicated as casual 
what was not the case of found duplication outside the SHOX gene. 
In the ISS group, one casual deletion spanning SHOX gene, and one 
duplication outside the SHOX gene, with ambiguous effect, was ob -
served. In addition, a frequent small deletion was traced in one subject 
with dyschondrosteosis (9%) and in seven individuals with ISS (23%).
Our study indicates that small PAR1 rearrangements are quite fre -
quent in Czech population.
This work was supported by Grant No. IGAMZCR NS/ 10327-3/2009. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
P12.192  A case of homozygous sickle cell disease in a patient 
from senegal.
C. Curcio , C. Lodrini, C. Melles, A. Biasi, D. A. Coviello;  
Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
A patient from Senegal was referred to our center with suspected sick -
le cell disease; he was in good general health conditions and never 
transfused. The haematological data showed an increased rate of HbF. 
We confirmed the homozygosity for HbS with Reverse Dot Blot (RDB) 
for the β globin gene. The clinical manifestation were not in agreement 
with molecular result so we analysed the α and γ globin genes. The α-
RDB showed the -4,2 deletion in the α gene and sequencing analysis 
an heterozygous point mutation in the promoter of γG gene (-158 C>T). 
We confirmed this mutational framework by familiar analysis to define 
the reproductive risk of the parents.
The father genotype was heterozygous both for HbS and the γ muta -
tion but in addition he presented two defects in the α gene (- 4.2 dele -
tion and triplication of α genes ααα). The mother was heterozygous for 
the HbS and the γG mutation and negative regarding α gene. The sister 
was heterozygous for HbS and the γG mutation. She also inherited the 
ααα from the father. The brother presented only the ααα.
We can now fully explain the phenotype of the proband by the pres -
ence of the α and γ defects. In addition we defined the reproductive 
risk of the family: for the parents in case of an homozygous HbS fetus 
with co-inheritance of the ααα; for the sister and the brother, in case of 
a β carrier partner of having an affected fetus with respectively severe 
or mild clinical manifestation.
P12.193  multilocus hypomethylation in silver-Russell 
syndrome: does tissue-specific distribution of epigenetic 
mosaicism explain the phenotype?
M. Begemann1, S. Spengler1, I. Leisten1, M. Baudis2, A. Haake3, D. Kanber4, S. 
Markus5, S. Fricke-Otto6, R. Siebert3, K. Buiting4, T. Eggermann1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute 
of Molecular Biology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Institute of 
Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Institute 
of Human Genetics, University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Praxis für 
Humangenetik, Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 6Helios Klinikum, Krefeld, 
Krefeld, Germany.
Aberrant methylation or mutations at specific loci are common find -
ings in all known congenital imprinting disorders. Interestingly, recent 
studies revealed that patients with transient neonatal diabetes mel -
litus and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) may carry multilocus 
hypomethylation (MLH). Additionally single BWS and Silver-Russel 
syndrome (SRS) patients have been reported carrying the same MLH 
pattern in blood lymphocytes affecting paternally as well as maternally 
imprinted genes. However, the reason why the same MLH patterns 
may either result in BWS or SRS is currently unclear.
We now report on the molecular findings in blood and buccal swab 
DNA in three SRS patients with hypomethylation of both imprinting 
center regions (ICRs) in 11p15.
Whereas this aberrant methylation affected both ICRs in leukocytes, in 
buccal swab DNA of two patients only the ICR1 hypomethylation was 
visible. One of these patients had a healthy monozygotic twin who also 
carried ICR1 and ICR2 hypomethylation in leukocytes but not in buc -
cal swab DNA. A third patient showed loss of methylation of both ICRs 
in 11p15 but also of the MEST locus on chromosome 7, this aberrant 
pattern could also be detected in buccal epithelium.
Screening of several factors involved in establishment and mainte -
nance of methylation marks including ZFP57 did not reveal the mo -
lecular clue for the MLH in our patients. However, our data provide 
evidence that in case of MLH the epimutation which is predominant in 
tissues others than blood is causative for the phenotype and therefore 
explains the clinical outcome.
P12.194  No evidence for hemochromatosis type 4 in hemizygous sLc40A1 deletion carriers
K. Spanaus1, J. Meienberg2, M. Rohrbach3, S. Neuenschwander4, C. Giunta3, 
S. Alonso2, C. Henggeler2, S. Azzarello-Burri5, B. Steiner5, W. Berger2, B. 
Steinmann3, G. Matyas2;  
1Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 
2Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of 
Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 3Division of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Functional 
Genomics Center Zurich, ETH and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 
5Division of Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics, University of 
Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland.
The SLC40A1 gene product, a protein called ferroportin 1, plays an es -
sential role in the regulation of iron levels in the body. Several hetero -
zygous mutations in the SLC40A1 gene have been described to date 
and were found to cause an autosomal dominant form of iron overload, 
known as hemochromatosis type 4 (HFE4) or ferroportin disease. The 
family described in our study carries the complete loss of one allele of 
the SLC40A1 gene due to a hemizygous deletion, leading to a-priori 
true haploinsufficiency. Blood samples from four members of this fam -
ily (three deletion carriers and one non-carrier as a control subject) 
were available for genetic and biochemical investigations. Thorough 
analysis of blood parameters revealed that none of the deletion car -
riers (15-year-old female, 18-year-old male, and 49-year-old male) 
developed hyperferritinemia. This finding is in contrast to the situation 
with heterozygous SLC40A1 mutations, which have been reported to 
cause an early increase in serum ferritin. Our study is the first descrip -
tion of a hemizygous deletion of the entire SLC40A1 gene (true hap -
loinsufficiency) and the corresponding normal phenotype, extending 
the molecular aetiology of HFE4. Potential mechanisms leading to the 
identified lack of association of SLC40A1 deletion/haploinsufficiency 
and HFE4 are discussed.
P12.195  Genotyping the survival motoneuron genes by an high-performance single-base extension: carriers and smA affected 
people identification plus prognostic evaluation of SMN2 copy number and sNPs.
S. Radovic1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau2, N. Passon2, M. Morgante1,3, I. R. 
Lonigro2,4;  
1Department of Agricultural and Enviromental Sciences, University of Udine, 
Udine, Italy, 2Department of Sciences and Biomedical Technologies, University 
of Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Applied Genomics Institute, Udine, Italy, 4Institute of 
Genetics, A.O.U. of Udine, Udine, Italy.
By combining the basis of quantitative genotyping assay and the guid -
ing principles of quantitative real-time PCR we developed a sensitive 
method with large dynamic range and the potential for high-throughput 
accurate quantification of allele-specific copy number and SNPs rec -
ognition.
We apply this method to the spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) carriers 
and affected people identification as well as to the allelic and SNP 
quantification of the disease modifier SMN2 gene. SMA is a severe 
neuromuscular disease characterized by degeneration of alpha motor 
neurons in the spinal cord, which results in progressive muscle weak -
ness and paralysis. The vast majority of SMA cases have a childhood 
onset and different disease severity and course being subdivided in 
different clinical groups. The primary SMA-determining gene is the 
SMN1 gene that in about 95% of affected patients is absent indepen -
dent of the type of SMA. A nearly identical gene, indicated as SMN2, 
can vary the allelic copy number per genome and has been shown to 
decrease the severity of SMA phenotype in a dose-dependent manner. 
Furthermore, a single base substitution (c859G>C), recently identified 
in SMN2 gene, seems to act as a further positive modifier of SMA 
phenotype. Our new genotyping method will be applied to an appropri -
ate cohort of patients, in a phenotype-genotype association study, to 
evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic potential of SMN2 copy num -
ber variation and single base substitution.
P12.196  Detection of heterozygous SMN1  deletions in smA 
families using a simple fluorescent multiplex PCR method
S. A. Kocheva1,2, S. Madzunkova1, G. D. Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, 
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Children‘s Hospital, 
Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
With a prevalence of 1/6000 live births, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) 
represents the second most common fatal autosomal recessive dis -
order. The heterozygote frequency has been estimated to be 1/40. 
TheSMA  locus has been mapped to chromosome 5q11.2-q13.3 within 
a region characterized by the large inverted duplication of a 500 kb 
element. However, the duplication of the SMA locus makes the detec -
tion of SMA carriers in the general population difficult, and this has  Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
hampered genetic counseling in affected families. Initial attempts to 
estimate the SMN  copy number were based on the measurement of 
theSMN1 /SMN2 ratios, but the broad variability of SMN2 copy num -
ber hinders reliable quantification. In the present study, we describe 
a method, which allows easy detection of heterozygous SMN1  dele-
tions in SMA carriers and SMA patients without homozygousSMN1  
deletions. We simultaneously amplified exon 7 of the SMN1and SMN2 
genes using a mismatch primer X7-Dra, which introduced a DraI re-
striction site into amplified SMN1 exon 7 and RB  exon 13 genes as 
a control fragment with a two copies of the gene. Digestion samples 
were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM 310 Genetic 
Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). The size of the peak is determined 
by measuring its peak area. Given that there are two copies of the 
RB gene, the relationship between SMN1/RB is used to determine the 
relative number of copies of SMN1-gene. Using this method, we found 
heterozygous deletion of exon 7 and/or 8 of 50 analyzed parents of 
children with SMA.
P12.197  Effect of copy number variation of SMN1  neighboring 
genes on smA phenotype in t unisian patients
A. Amara1, M. Gribaa1, L. Adala1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, O. Mamaï1, A. Mili1, T. 
Ben lazreg1, D. H’mida1, F. Amri2, N. Salem3, L. Boughammoura4, A. Saad1;  
1Laboratory of cytogenetics, molecular genetics and reproductive biology. 
CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of pediatrics, Hospital Ibn 
El Jazzar, Kairouan, Tunisia, 3Department of neonatology, University Hospital 
Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of pediatrics, University Hospital 
Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus -
cular disorder with an estimated incidence of 1 in 10,000 live births. 
SMA is characterized by destruction of α motor neurons of anterior 
horn cells of spinal cord, which leads to muscle weakness and atrophy. 
This disease is characterized by a high clinical variability. It has been 
classified into four types (type I: severe, type II: intermediate, type III: 
mild and type IV: adult). In 95% of cases, SMA is related to homozy -
gous deletion of exon7 of SMN1  gene localized on 5q13.
The main objective of this study was to determine a genotype-pheno -
type correlation between the copy number of SMN2, NAIP, p44, H4F5 
and occludin  genes localized in the same region  and the severity of 
the disease in SMA Tunisian patients. Twenty six unrelated patients 
affected by SMA were enrolled in the study. MLPA and QMPSF were 
used to measure copy numbers of these genes.
Our results showed that 31.3 % of type I patients carried one copy of 
SMN2 , while all patients of other forms had at least 2 copies. NAIP was 
absent in 87.5% of type I patients. Furthermore, all SMA type I patients 
had one copy of H4F5 . No correlation was found for p44 and occludin . 
We conclude that there is a close relationship between SMN2 , NAIP  
and H4F5 gene copy numbers and SMA disease severity, which is 
compatible with the previous reports.
P12.198  The assessment of influence of 5q13 locus genes copy-
number on the severity of spinal muscular atrophy in Russian 
patients.
V. V. Zabnenkova , E. L. Dadali, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder caused by the loss of a-motor neurons in 
the spinal cord. SMA patients are subdivided into types I-III accord -
ing to age of onset and achieved motor abilities. All three forms of 
proximal SMA are caused by mutations in SMNt  gene. About 95% of 
SMA cases are caused by homozygous deletion of the SMNt  gene or 
conversion events. The phenotype variability of the disease with such 
molecular homogenity can be explained by presence of phenotype 
modifiers. In this study SMNc  and NAIP  gene-copy number has been 
analyzed for establishing of the phenotype-genotype correlation in 130 
SMA patients with homozygous deletion of SMNt  gene (SMAI n=44, 
SMAII n=43, SMAIII n=43). Thereto, it had been developed a quantita -
tive assay based on Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification. 
Also, we studied phenotype-genotype correlation within the one type 
of SMA. SMAI patients were subdivided into two groups: SMA0 (inher -
ent, diminished fetal movements in utero, with asphyxia and severe 
weakness at birth) and SMAI (the classical form of severe spinal mus -
cular atrophy). Type III SMA was subdivided into two groups: SMAIIIa 
(onset below 3 years of age) and SMAIIIb (onset at the age ≥ 3 years). (Tab.1) These results confirmed the lower copy number of SMNc  gene, 
the higher the severity of disease.
Number of SMNc gene copies and 
the size of deletion in SMA region
SMNc gene-
copy numbern=2 n=3 n=4 n=5Absence of 
NAIP gene
SMAI SMA0 (n=20) 90% 10% 45%
SMAI (n=24) 58% 33% 9% 17%
SMAII (n=43) 56% 40% 4% 7%
SMAIII SMAIIIa (n=12) 50% 42% 8%
SMAIIIb (n=31) 39% 29% 29% 3%
P12.199  Expanding scN2A-associated phenotypes from 
neonatal epilepsy to episodic ataxia, myoclonus and pain
A. Anttonen1,2, Y. Liao3,4, E. Liukkonen5, E. Gaily5, S. Maljevic3,4, S. Schubert3, 
A. Bellan-Koch3, S. Petrou6, E. Ahonen2, H. Lerche4, A. Lehesjoki2;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, 
2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland, 3Neurological 
Clinic and Institute of Applied Physiology, University of Ulm, Germany, 4Dept 
of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute of Clinical Brain Research, 
University Hospital Tübingen, Germany, 5Epilepsy Unit, Department of Pediatric 
Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, 6Florey Neurosciences 
Institute, The Centre for Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
Inherited and de novo  mutations in sodium channel genes underlie 
a variety of epilepsy phenotypes. Mutations in SCN2A , encoding the 
brain sodium channel NaV1.2, have previously been reported to be 
associated with benign familial neonatal-infantile seizures, febrile 
seizures plus and intractable epilepsy of infancy. We evaluated the 
clinical characteristics in a patient with a neonatal-onset complex epi -
sodic neurological phenotype. We screened SCN2A  for mutations and 
carried out in vitro electrophysiological analyses to study the conse -
quences of the identified mutation. We studied the developmental ex -
pression of NaV1.2 in cerebellum by immunohistochemical analysis. 
The patient presented with neonatal-onset seizures and variable epi -
sodes of ataxia, myoclonia, headache and back pain after 18 months 
of age. The patient carries a de novo  missense mutation (p.Ala263Val) 
in SCN2A , which leads to a pronounced gain-of-function, in particu -
lar an increased persistent Na+ current. Immunohistochemical studies 
suggest a developmentally increasing expression of NaV1.2 in granule 
cell axons projecting to Purkinje neurons. These results can explain 
a neuronal hyperexcitability resulting in seizures and other episodic 
symptoms extending the spectrum of SCN2A -associated phenotypes. 
The developmentally increasing expression of NaV1.2 in cerebellum 
may be responsible for the later onset of episodic ataxia.
P12.200  A 134 kb duplication 0.5 mb upstream of sOX9 
associated with hermaphroditism in an XX male and autism in 
his XY brother
A. Brendehaug1, O. Bruland1, A. Molven2, G. Houge1;  
1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2The Gade Insttitute, UiB, 
Bergen, Norway.
In a sibship of six a 46,XX male hermaphrodite with ovotestes and no 
detectable SRY sequence had a brother with infantile autism without 
mental retardation. Both brothers had inherited an identical 134 Kb 
duplication of the regulatory genomic region 0.5 Mb upstream of SOX9 
from their mother. In another brother who had inherited the same ma -
ternal SOX9 haplotype, no upstream duplication was found, proving 
that the mother was a gonadal mosaic for the duplication. We hypoth -
esize that the duplication caused sufficient SRY-independent SOX9 
expression in the undifferentiated fetal gonads to promote testicular 
development. Apparently, this effect was tissue- and/or fetal-specific as 
no SOX9 expression was detectable in leukocytes and skin fibroblasts 
from any of the siblings. The observations in the family also suggest 
that such a SOX9 regulatory region duplication may predispose for 
autism in the presence of a Y chromosome, i.e. a SRY gene. This hy -
pothesis is supported by the SOX9 segregation pattern which as a less 
than 8,2 % probability of being a random event, and the unexplained 
general excess of autistic features in males. We therefore propose that 
an additional role of SOX9, directly linked to testicular differentiation, 
could be the promotion of male-specific brain development. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
P12.201  Validation of 7500Dx (Applied Biosystems) real time 
PCR instrument for the identification of spinal muscular atrophy 
(smA) healthy carriers.
R. Lomastro1, S. Fiori1, R. Petraroli2, M. O’Donoghue3, G. Neri1, C. Brahe1, F. 
D. Tiziano1;  
1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2Applied Biosystems, 
Monza, Italy, 3Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by degeneration of spinal alpha-motor neurons. On the basis 
of clinical severity, three forms of infantile SMA can be identified (type 
I-III). All forms of SMA share the same genetic defect: about 95% of pa -
tients have the homozygous absence of SMN1 gene, due to deletion 
or gene conversion. SMA is a relatively common condition, being the 
prevalence about 1/6000 and the frequency of healthy carriers around 
1/36. Due to the frequency of this condition, the identification of carri -
ers among relatives of patients is a common request to genetic clinics. 
A number of molecular assays for carrier testing have been developed 
so far, based on real time PCR or multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification assay (MLPA). In our Centre we have developed an as -
say based on real time PCR for SMA carrier testing by which we have 
analyzed almost 1000 individuals, using 7900 HT Fast Real Time PCR 
System (Applied Biosytems). Recently, in a collaborative project with 
Applied Biosystems we have validated the 7500Dx instrument for SMA 
carrier testing. To this aim, DNA samples from 50 consecutive individu -
als, relatives of SMA patients or their partners, afferent to the Genet -
ics Clinic at the Catholic University Hospital, were analyzed both by 
7900HT and 7500Dx instruments. The results were concordant among 
the two instruments in 100% of samples analyzed. Our data indicate 
that 7500Dx instrument is a powerful tool for the identification of SMA 
healthy carriers.
P12.202  spectrum of phenotypes associated with the SMN2  
c.859G>C variant in Spanish SMA patients.
S. Bernal1, L. Alias1, E. Also-Rallo1, R. Martínez-Hernández1, C. Hernández-
Chico2, F. J. Rodríguez-Alvarez2, J. M. Millan3, S. Borrego4, M. Baiget1, P. 
Fuentes-Prior1, E. F. Tizzano1;  
1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 
3Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus -
cular disorder caused by loss or deficiency of the telomeric copy of the 
Survival of Motor Neuron  (SMN) gene, SMN1 . A second, highly similar 
centromeric gene ( SMN2 ) can only partially compensate for SMN1  de-
ficiency because exon 7 is skipped from most SMN2  transcripts due to 
a single C-to-T transition, which results in a partially defective, unstable 
protein. Recent reports have indicated that the rare c.859G>C nucleo -
tide exchange in SMN2  is a positive modifier of SMA; patients with only 
two SMN2  copies present an unexpectedly mild phenotype, which is 
related to the enhanced inclusion of exon 7 in transcripts of the SMN2  
variant. We analyzed the prevalence of the c.859G>C base change 
in a cohort of 253 unrelated Spanish SMA patients and in six pairs of 
SMA discordant siblings; all patients had homozygous absence of the 
SMN1  gene. We identified the gene variant in 10 unrelated SMA pa -
tients. In contrast to previously reported cases, we find that c.859G>C 
is associated with a wide spectrum of phenotypes from typical type II 
patients who can only sit to adult walkers with type IIIb. Further, all 10 
patients share common alleles with multicopy markers linked to SMN  
genes, strongly suggesting that the variant originated from a common 
ancestor. Structural data support the view that the variant reduces af -
finity for the splicing repressor hnRNP A1, favouring the inclusion of 
exon 7 and increasing the amount of functional SMN protein.
Supported by GENAME Project, CIBERER and FIS08-0729.
P12.203  Quantification of SMN2 gene copy number for 
molecular diagnostics in Russian smA patients
G. Zheleznyakova1, A. Kiselev2, V. Vakharlovsky2, V. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is neuromuscular disorder caused by 
homozygous deletion of SMN1  gene in more than 90% patients. SMN2  
gene copy number, a nearly identical centromeric copy gene of SMN1 , 
correlates with SMA severity because SMN2  gene produces 10-20% 
of full-length SMN mRNA and functional SMN protein. Clinical trials of drugs that increase full-length SMN mRNA production by SMN2  gene 
are in progress. SMN2  gene copy number seems to be useful molecu -
lar marker for SMA diagnostics.
SMN2  gene dosage analysis was performed for 61 patients affected 
by II and III types of SMA (42 and 19 patients accordingly) by means of 
real-time quantitative PCR. Most of II type patients had 3 SMN2  copies 
(76.19%), 11.90% of patients had 2 SMN2  copies and 11.90% had 4 
SMN2  copies, none of them showed one copy. Most of III type patients 
possess 3 SMN2  copies (57.89%), 36.84% of patients had 4 SMN2  
copies and only one person showed 2 SMN2  copies. Also we found the 
family with SMN1-deleted son and his mother. Son was II type SMA 
patient whereas mother was unaffected. It was estimated that son has 
2 SMN2  copies while mother has 5 SMN2  copies. Our results confirm 
genotype-phenotype correlation between the SMN2  copy number and 
SMA severity. Extremely high SMN2  gene copy number may promote 
the development of asymptomatic phenotype. Thus we conclude that 
SMN2  gene copy quantification could be reasonable for precise SMA 
molecular genetic testing.
P12.204  smA carrier testing by real-time PcR quantitative analysis of smN1
M. L. Essawi, H. Ameen, H. N. Soliman ;  
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Background: Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the 
most common autosomal recessive diseases, where it has an estimat -
ed incidence of 1 in 6000-10000 live births and a carrier frequency of 
1 in 40-60. SMA patients are classified into three clinical types based 
on age of onset and severity of symptoms. Mutations in the survival 
motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1) are determinant for development of the 
disease, whereas the number of copies of SMN2 gene plays a role 
as a phenotypic modifier factor. Approximately 94% of patients have 
homozygous absence of the SMN1 whereas most carriers have only 
one SMN1 gene copy, this study aimed to establish SMA carrier de -
tection test through SMN1 quantitative analyses using real-time PCR 
technique.
Patients and methods: The study included twenty obligate heterozy -
gotes, ten patients with homozygous deletion of SMN1 and twenty 
normal controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood 
samples. Real-time PCR test for SMN1 gene was optimized and relat -
ed to that of albumin as a reference gene. The copy number of SMN1 
gene was determined by comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method.
Results: The homozygous SMN1 deletion ratio of patients was 0.00, 
the hemizygous SMN1 deletion ratio of carriers ranged from 0.39-0.59 
and about 0.84-2.19 in normal controls.
Conclusion: The study provided accurate and reliable test for SMA car -
rier detection, genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.
P12.205  Genetics of spinocerebellar ataxias in Portuguese 
patients: screening for SCA15, SCA28, and FXTAS
A. I. Seixas1, J. Vale2,3, C. Cagnoli4, A. Brusco4, J. Sequeiros1,5, I. Silveira1;  
1UnIGENE, IBMC-Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal, 
2Department of Neurology, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Faculty of 
Medical Sciences, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 4A.O.U. San 
Giovanni Battista, S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Department of Genetics, Biology, 
and Biochemistry, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 5ICBAS, University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
The autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a hetero -
geneous group of rare, late-onset neurological disorders caused by 
progressive neuronal degeneration, mainly affecting the cerebellum. 
More than 25 SCA loci have been mapped and 18 disease-causing 
genes identified to date. Mutation screening has allowed us to geneti -
cally characterize almost 200 Portuguese ataxia families. However, 
more than 100 families and an even larger number of apparently spo -
radic cases, remain without a genetic diagnosis. Here, we present the 
results of mutation screenings for two recently described SCA sub -
types, SCA15 and SCA28, in Portuguese patients clinically diagnosed 
with dominant ataxia, and the results of FMR1 premutation analysis 
in males with sporadic late-onset movement disorders. All SCA15 pa -
tients identified so far have deletions of at least several exons of the 
gene ITPR1. SCA28 is caused by point mutations in the gene AFG3L2. 
The fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is caused 
by intermediate expansions of CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene.
We carried out quantitative real-time PCR or direct sequencing of the  Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
exons of interest to screen for ITPR1 genomic deletions or SCA28 
mutations, respectively, and failed to find any pathogenic alterations. 
We detected one patient carrying a FMR1 premutation and presenting 
with a clinical and radiological phenotype compatible with a FXTAS 
diagnosis.
In conclusion, SCA15 and SCA28 mutations are very rare in the Por -
tuguese population of ataxia patients, while the frequency of FXTAS is 
very low. A substantial number of SCA genotypes likely remain to be 
found in the Portuguese ataxia patient population.
P12.206  the analysis of (cAG)n and (cA t)n repeats of the 
ATXN1  gene in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 patients from 
Bashkortostan Republic and populations of the Volga-Ural 
region of Russia.
I. Khidiyatova , E. Mingazova, R. Magzhanov, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is known to be the most com -
mon form of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (AD SCAs) 
in European populations, caused by expansion of (CAG)n repeats in 
the coding region of ATXN1  gene. Normal variation of gene contains 
6-37 CAG repeats, broken by insertion of 1-3 triplets, which serve as 
stabilizing factor for (CAG)n tract. The prevalence of SCA1 in Bashkor -
tostan Republic is 0,07 per 100000 population. The analysis of ATXN1  
gene revealed no (CAG)n alleles without CAT insertions in healthy 
individuals from Bashkortostan. The control DNA sample with known 
nucleotide sequence had 4 CAT insertions. Thus, in populations of the 
Volga-Ural region of Russia there is a combination of low SCA1 fre -
quency and absence (or extreme low frequency) of (CAG) n alleles of 
the ATXN1  gene without CAT insertions. Normal ATXN1  gene variation 
of (CAG)n repeats is investigated in 12 populations of the Volga-Ural 
region of Russia: significant heterogeneity of the studied populations is 
found. We found 13 allele variants with the number of triplets from 22 
to 35, the most frequent of them are from 28 to 31, which correspond to 
number of triplets in the most of European populations. Thus, (CAG)n 
repeats of the ATXN1  gene will contribute to diagnostic possibilities as 
informative genetic marker of populations.
P12.207  mRNA analysis revealed molecular defect of cFtR 
gene in uncharacterized cF patients
L. Costantino1, L. Claut2, V. Paracchini1, D. A. Coviello1, C. Colombo2, L. 
Porcaro1, P. Capasso1, D. Degiorgio1, M. Seia1;  
1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Cystic Fibrosis Center, Fondazione IRCCS 
Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
At present time, CFTR mRNA analysis represents more a research 
tool for the identification of unknown molecular defects of the CFTR 
gene in specific rare cases than a routine approach to complete a di -
agnostic procedure. In particular mRNA analysis may allow research -
ers to find sequence variations not yet defined like specific splicing 
defects. Molecular analysis of CFTR performed at DNA level on 800 
patients was not able to identify the defect in 101 (6%) CF alleles. In 
order to characterize these unidentified alleles, 36 cases out of 50 pa -
tients were re-contacted and a nasal epithelium sample was collected 
to analyze the mRNA.
The RNA defects were characterized in about the 30.5 % of analyzed 
patients. The cDNA analysis showed that 8 patients had a novel tran -
scription product: 4 patients carry an insertion of intron sequence of 
about 100bp near exon 6b, 2 patients carry a 104bp insertion located 
between exons 10 and 11; 2 patients presented at DNA level a nucleo -
tide variation described as polymorphism, which instead determines 
an aberrant splicing at RNA level.
In addition in 2 patients we observed a low level of mRNA product that 
will be analyzed by quantitative technique. The remaining patients are 
still under evaluation.
Our results confirm the efficacy of the CFTR analysis at mRNA level as 
a diagnostic method in characterizing mutations and in checking their 
effect on normal splicing processes and transcription rates.
P12.208  Sudden unexpected death and genetic analysis of LQTs 
genes
J. Kadlecová1,2, I. Valášková1,2, R. Gallyová1,2, T. Pexa3, T. Novotný4, M. Sepši4;  
1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dept., Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Fakulty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3St. Anne´s University Hospital Brno, Institute of Forensic Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 
4University Hospital Brno, Internal and Cardiological Dept., Brno, Czech 
Republic.
Background: The sudden unexpected death in young age is relatively 
rare and in some cases (4,3% to 50%) it remains unexplained even af -
ter autopsy (including toxicology and histology examinations). In these 
cases, we suppose a malignant arrhythmia to be the leading cause of 
death. Recent studies showed theat genetic disorders of ion channels 
are responsible for 22% to 28% of sudden deaths. Most commonly, the 
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is present, but also some other disorders, 
like catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) 
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) have been described.
The aim of the project is to apply genetic analysis (in these selected 
group we intended to perform mutation analysis of the following genes: 
KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1, SCN5A, KCNE2 and ANK2 genes ) in cas -
es of sudden unexpected deaths under 40 years of age, to discover 
the occurrence of particular genetic disturbances related to malignant 
arrhythmias (ion channels disesaes - LQTS and CPVT, HCM), and 
to perform clinical examination of surviving relatives aimed to identify 
the families endangered by sudden cardiac death. We suppose, that 
from all cases of sudden death without pathological findings, we will 
discover at least 20% to be caused by ion channel genetic disorder 
(LQTS, CPVT)
Conclusion: Combining the genetic examination of dead subjects with 
examination of first-degree relatives (ECG, echocardiography, exer -
cise ECG testing, clinical examination) is possible to identify the cause 
of 40% of sudden unexpected deaths.
This work was carried through the finnancial support of granr IGA MZ 
NR/10444-3.
P12.209  molecular analysis of cOcH gene in patients with 
superior semicircular canal dehiscence
N. Liaño1, E. Sarasola1, B. Santos1, M. Crovetto2, M. J. García-Barcina1;  
1Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA 
/ Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de ORL del Hospital 
Universitario de Basurto (OSAKIDETZA / Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, 
Spain.
Superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) was originally de -
scribed by Minor and colleagues in 1998, and it is characterised by 
the absence of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal, which 
creates a third labyrinthine window (with the oval and round windows). 
The consequence is the loss of acoustic energy and abnormal stimula -
tion of the vestibular system; the clinical manifestations include Val -
salva- and exercise-induced vertigo, sound-induced vertigo (tullio phe -
nomenon), and variable conductive hearing loss. It is important to de -
tect SSCD because it could be partially or fully corrected with surgery.
The genetics of SSCD have not been studied. On the contrary, au -
tosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss at the DFNA9 locus 
(characterised by vestibular dysfunction) is known to be caused by 
mutations in the COCH gene (chromosome 14q12), which encodes 
cochlin. Recently, an association between a mutation in the COCH 
gene and the presence of SSCD has been reported (Am J Med Genet 
2009; 149A: 280-5).
We performed complete sequencing of COCH gene in 3 patients with 
proven SSCD, previously diagnosed by CT and surgically corrected. 
We didn’t find any nucleotide change in the COCH gene sequence. 
The molecular basis of this rare disorder remains to be elucidated.
P12.210  Frequency of positive XmnI Gγ polymorphism and 
coinheritance of common alpha thalassemia mutations do not 
show statistically significant difference between thalassemia major and intermedia cases with homozygous iVsii-1 mutation 
M. Neishabury1, A. Azarkeivan2, H. Najmabadi1,3;  
11. Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare and 
Rehabilitation Sciences (USWR), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
22. Thalssemia Clinic, Research Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion 
Organization(IBTO), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33. Kariminejad and 
Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
From 362 thalassemia cases referred to Adult thalassemia clinic of the 
Iranian blood transfusion organization (IBTO) for genotyping and fur -
ther studies, 103 cases (28.5%) had a common primary disease factor, 
IVSII-1 mutation in homozygous state. 61 (59.2%) of these individuals 
represented thalassemia major and 42 (40.8%) thalassemia interme -7 Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 7
dia clinical phenotype. To re-evaluate our current diagnostic criteria, 
XmnI  Gγ polymorphism and coexistence of alpha thalassemia muta -
tions, frequently recalled as important factors modifying the clinical 
phenotype of homozygous beta zero thalassemia cases in our country, 
were examined in both groups. No statistically significant difference 
in the frequency of positive XmnI  Gγ polymorphism was observed be -
tween thalassemia intermedia and thalassemia major patients. Double 
gene deletion --Med was observed in only one thalassemia major case, 
while -a3.7 in heterozygous state (-a3.7/aa) was identified in 6 (9.8%) of 
thalassemia major and 8(19%) of thalassemia intermedia patients and 
-a4.2 was observed in only one thalassemia major case. No statistically 
significant difference in the frequency of coinheritance of alpha thalas -
semia was observed between the two groups. These results imply that 
other interacting mechanisms which modify the phenotype of thalas -
semia patients is still in the dark in our current diagnostic criteria of 
thalassemia.
P12.211  Development of the oral cavity : from gene to clinical 
expression in human
A. Bloch-Zupan1,2, V. Laugel2, R. Ripp2, A. Langer1, P. Choquet3, A. 
Constantinesco3, J. Marrie2, M. Schmittbuhl1,4, P. Dolle2;  
1Faculty of Dentistry University of Strasbourg, Reference Centre for OroDental 
Manifestations of Rare Diseases, HUS, Strasbourg, France, 2IGBMC; Inserm, 
U964; CNRS-UdS UMR7104, Illkirch, France, 3Service de Biophysique et 
Médecine Nucléaire, CHRU Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, 
France, 4INSERM U977, Strasbourg, France.
Pathologies or developmental anomalies of the oral cavity are one clin -
ical aspect, leading eventually to diagnosis, but often underestimated 
and considered, especially in their management, of genetic diseases 
or syndromes. Among more than 7000 known rare diseases, 850 have 
dental/oral/facial manifestations and more than 300 include in their 
clinical synopsis a cleft lip/palate.
This original research project offers to combine complementary and 
convergent approaches in bioinformatics, developmental biology es -
pecially through the study of genetically engineered mice, to improve 
the knowledge and understanding of the formation of the oral cavity 
and specifically of the palate and dentition. It uses the following ap -
proaches:
1) Selection of known genes responsible for rare diseases but for 
which expression and/or roles are insufficiently characterised.
(2) Identification of new candidate genes, through a systematic anal -
ysis of their craniofacial and dental expression patterns using the 
EURExpress mouse transcriptome-wide atlas (http://www.eurexpress.
org/ee/) and the “Odontogenesis” related database.
(3) A detailed analysis of the expression patterns of the most inter -
esting genes, is performed by in situ hybridisation techniques, in the 
mouse at various stages of odontogenesis.
(4) Animal models craniofacial and orodental phenotypes are detailed 
using an imaging platform (micro-CT)
(5) In vitro organ culture and manipulation
This work federates scientists and clinicians and should stimulate the 
implementation of science based evidence diagnosis and new thera -
peutic options (treatment of teeth agenesis by stimulation of odonto -
genesis in situ; tissue engineering) thus contributing to the wellbeing 
and orodental and general health care of the patient (Grants APIHUS, 
IFRO, UdS, MAEE PHC Thai).
P12.212  Identification of gross deletions in TCOF1 : Use of mLPA 
in the diagnosis of t reacher collins-Franceschetti syndrome.
M. A. Bowman1, R. Brekelmans2, A. Seller1, T. Lester1;  
1Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2MRC-
Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Treacher Collins-Franceschetti syndrome (TCS) is an autosomal dom -
inant craniofacial disorder characterised by midface hypoplasia, mi -
crognathia, downslanting palpebral fissures, eyelid coloboma, and ear 
deformities that often lead to conductive deafness. High inter- and in -
tra-familial clinical variability is observed, ranging from perinatal death 
due to a compromised airway to a phenotype that goes undetected by 
medical examination. TCS is caused by null mutations in the TCOF1  
gene.
The Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory provides a specialist mo -
lecular genetics service for rare craniofacial and skeletal disorders, 
which includes TCS. Our testing strategy is to sequence the 27 coding exons of TCOF1  which will detect point mutations, splicing mutations 
and small indels. Patients with classical TCS without a TCOF1  se-
quence variant may reflect genetic heterogeneity; however, no alter -
native genes have been identified. Alternatively, it may indicate that, 
due to incomplete gene screening, certain TCOF1  variants remain un -
detected. We therefore hypothesised that gene rearrangements may 
underlie a proportion of TCS cases without a molecular diagnosis.
We collaborated with MRC-Holland to develop an MLPA kit that tests 
TCOF1  for gene rearrangements. After test validation, patients re -
ferred for TCOF1  analysis but tested negative by sequencing were 
tested. Out of 53 patients tested, 5 (9.4%) were found to have a dele -
tion involving part of TCOF1 . This is the first report of gross deletions 
resulting in TCS, and indicates that gene rearrangements do account 
for a significant proportion of cases.
P12.213  A novel nonsense mutation in UNC1D  causing a 
severe form of Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis.
M. E. van Gijn1, E. Elstak2, D. M. W. M. te Loo3, K. Tesselaar4, J. Loeffen3, F. A. 
M. Hennekam1, J. J. Boelens5, P. M. Hoogerbrugge3, P. van der Sluijs2, L. van 
de Corput4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, 2Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Immunology, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatric 
Immunology, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital/University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHLH) is a life-threaten -
ing autosomal recessive disorder of immune regulation. It is character -
ized by severe hyperinflammation caused by the uncontrolled prolifera -
tion of activated lymphocytes and histiocytes. HLH is a heterogeneous 
disease with regard to genotype and phenotype. Four genes PRF1 , 
UNC13D , STX11 , and STXBP2  have been linked to the disease so far. 
Here we report the characterization of a novel nonsense mutation in 
the UNC13D  gene that was detected in three unrelated patients.
All three patients were admitted to the hospital at very young age (6, 8 
and 12 weeks old) and fulfilled the criteria of HLH, i.e. fever, cytopenia, 
(hepato)splenomegaly, hemophagocytosis in central nervous system 
(CNS), elevated levels of ferritin and soluble CD25. Treatment was 
given according to the HLH 2004 protocol, but all three infants de -
ceased at an age of 5 to 6 months. Homozygosity for the c. 2695C>T 
(p.Arg899X) mutation in exon 28 of UNC13D was shown in two pa -
tients. The third patient showed compound heterozygosity for the 
c.2695C>T (p.Arg899X) and another mutation in UNC13D. In patient 
tissues UNC13D mRNA was present. Further investigation revealed 
that the mutation resulted in a misfolded dysfunctional protein. Geo -
graphical clustering of the patient families and genealogical research, 
where two patients could be traced to a common link, suggests that 
a single ancestral founder might have introduced the mutation in the 
Netherlands. Conclusion; the novel c.2695C>T (p.Arg899X) mutation 
in UNC13D, which most likely originates from a common founder is 
associated with severe early lethal HLH.
P12.214  Genetics and clinical Aspects of Usher and Pendred 
syndromes in iranian Population
K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi tehrani1, N. Sadeghpour1, N. Bazazzadegan1, 
M. Mohseni1, K. Jalalvand1, s. Arzhangi1, S. Saketkhoo1, N. Meyer2, W. 
Kimberling3, R. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research 
Laboratories , Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery , 
University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3United States Boys Town National 
Hospital , Omaha , NE and University of Iowa Medical School, Iowa, Iowa, IA, 
United States.
Syndromic hearing impairment accounts for 30% of prelingual deaf -
ness.The two most common types are Usher and Pendred syndromes 
both of them have AR pattern of inheritance. Three different types of 
Usher syndrome USH I (50%), USHII (35%) and USH III (15%) have 
been recognized. Up to now 13 different loci and 8 genes have been 
identified. Also Pendred is characterized by congenital sensorineural 
hearing loss, goiter (40-60%) and inner ear abnormalities and impaired 
vestibular function test. The objective of this study was to identify the 
prevalence of USH loci in deaf-blind patients and PDS gene mutations  Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
in Iranian Population.
Thirty USH families and 120 families with Pendred syndrome were 
subjected to linkage analysis using STR markers. The sequencing for 
mutation screening was performed for the linked families.
eleven out of thirty USH families were linked to the studied USH loci 
which we identified the mutation in four of these families and muta -
tion screening in the other linked families is on the way. Also we were 
able to link fourteen autosomal recessive hearing impaired families to 
DFNB 4 locus and nine of them showed different types of PDS mu -
tations. In conclusion 33% of the families with USH syndrome were 
linked to one of the known loci, however additional study needed to 
determine the causative genes involve in the other families .We have 
also been able to determine Pendred syndrome as the second cause 
of hearing loss in our population.
P12.215  molecular characterization of iranian patients with type 
3 von Willebrand disease
S. Shahbazi1,2, R. Mahdian3, F. A. Ala4, J. M. Lavergne2, C. V. Denis2, O. D. 
Christophe2;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran,, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2INSERM U770, Faculte´ de 
Me´decine Paris-Sud, Universite´ Paris-Sud, IFR93, Le Kremlin-Biceˆtre, 
France, 3Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran,, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Iranian Comprehensive Haemophilia Care Centre 
(ICHCC),Tehran, Iran, Tehran,, Islamic Republic of Iran.
von Willebrand’s disease (VWD) type 3 is a rare but severe autoso -
mal-recessive inherited bleeding disorder with a prevalence higher 
in certain locations where consanguineous marriages are relatively 
frequent. The genetic defects causing recessive type 3 VWD in 10 
unrelated families from Iran have been investigated and the genetic 
heterogeneity among these patients was evaluated. All exons and 
their flanking regions of von Willebrand factor gene were amplified 
by PCR and sequenced using specific primers. Eight patients were 
fully characterized at the molecular level. Six different gene alterations 
were identified. All the mutations caused null alleles, three being non -
sense mutations (Q104X, Q793X and E1981X), two possible splice 
site mutations (2443- 1G>C and 1110-1G>A) and one small dele -
tion (3237delA). Three of them have not been described previously. 
Most patients were born from consanguineous marriages and all were 
homozygous for their mutations. The results confirm that molecular 
defects in type 3 VWD are heterogeneous with mutations arising ran -
domly within the entire gene.
P12.216  Dissecting the genetic heterogeneity in Walker-Warburg 
syndrome and related cobblestone lissencephalies
T. Roscioli , E. van Beusekom, J. van Reeuwijk, C. van den Elzen, E. 
Kamsteeg, H. Brunner, D. Lefeber, H. van Bokhoven;  
Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Walker Warburg syndrome (WWS; OMIM 236670) is an autosomal re -
cessive disorder characterized by muscular dystrophy, eye and neural 
migration defects and other structural brain anomalies, such as cerebel -
lar hypoplasia and hydrocephalus. Other WWS-like disorders include 
Fukuyama Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (FCMD, OMIM 253800), 
and Muscle-Eye-Brain disease (MEB, OMIM 253280). A common 
feature of these syndromes is neural overmigration during neocortex 
lamination, giving rise to cobblestone lissencephaly, disorganized ce -
rebral cortices and multiple coarse gyri with agyric regions. Mutations 
in six genes have been associated with cobblestone lissencephaly. 
Mutations in these genes commonly result in decreased O-linked gly -
cosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. The six known genes account for ap -
proximately 1/3 of cases of WWS, suggesting that there are significant 
number of genes yet to be identified. At least a percentage of these are 
hypothesized to be involved in O-linked glycosylation.
Genetic and functional genomics approaches are being applied to 
identify the remaining WWS genes. Homozygous regions in 30 con -
sanguineous and outbred families with one or more affected individu -
als have been identified by a homozygosity mapping approach. Our 
data are consistent with at least ten additional WWS genes being pres -
ent. Additional novel methodologies for gene identification include next 
generation sequencing and comparative expression profiling in fibro -
blasts from patients and unaffected siblings are in progress. We an -
ticipate that the results of the combined studies will identify additional 
genes that are crucial for glycosylation of dystroglycan, which will have an important impact on diagnostic testing and genetic counseling and 
increase our fundamental knowledge on this glycosylation pathway.
P12.217  Haplotype mapping of the Welander distal myopathy 
region on chromosome 2p13.
H. Örlén1, A. Melberg2, M. Entesarian1, J. Klar1, N. Dahl1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, UPPSALA, 
Sweden, 2Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, Uppsala University 
Hospital, UPPSALA, Sweden.
Welander distal myopathy (WDM) (MIM 604454) is an autosomal 
dominant inherited muscle dystrophy with late onset. The disorder is 
characterized by progressive weakening of the distal limbs with exten -
sor muscles in hands and feet first afflicted. Disease onset is usually 
around 40-60 years of age and the incidence is high in regions of Swe -
den and Finland. A candidate region on chromosome 2p13 flanked by 
marker D2S358 and D2S2835 has previously been reported (von Tell 
et al. 2003) but no disease causing mutation has been identified. Novel 
genome assemblies show that the candidate gene region is larger and 
contains more genes than first anticipated.
We investigated 26 non-related and affected individuals originating 
from Sweden and Finland. Affected individuals were genotyped us -
ing 13 microsatellites spanning the candidate region on chromosome 
2p13 confirming an association to WDM. All patients share a common 
haplotype between marker D2S358 and D2S291 spanning 2,1cM. The 
size of the shared region is 3,0 Mb containing 55 annotated genes. 
The conserved haplotype segregating disease suggests a founder ef -
fect with an estimated age of 95 generations (calculated as 2/g mor -
gans) (Boehnke 1994). We hypothesize that a large chromosomal re -
arrangement, e.g. an inversion, may explain the conserved haplotype. 
Such a rearrangement may also disrupt a gene at one of the inversion 
breakpoints. The haplotype segregating WDM is now being restricted 
in search for candidate genes.
P12.218  Strategy for mutation detection in Serbian patients with 
Wilson disease
V. S. Dobricic , A. Tomic, N. Kresojevic, M. Svetel, I. Novakovic, V. Kostic;  
Institute of Neurology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper 
metabolism resulting in pathological accumulation of copper in many 
organs and tissues. This condition is caused by mutations in the gene 
coding for a copper-transporting CPx-type ATPase ( ATP7B ). More than 
300 distinct mutations of ATP7B  are described, but in most populations 
majority of the WD cases are due to a small number of specific gene 
changes. In Central and Eastern Europe the most common mutations 
are located in exons 14, 8, 5, 13 and 15. That has already been con -
firmed for Serbian WD patients in pilot study realized in Italy. There -
fore, as the first step in establishing molecular genetic testing for WD 
in our country, we performed direct sequencing of those five exons of 
ATP7B  gene. We analyzed DNA samples of 34 unrelated Serbian WD 
patients using ABI 310 Genetic Analyzer. Total number of 43 mutated 
alleles were found (63.2%). 17 patients (50%) carried two mutations 
in ATP7B  gene (homozygous or compound heterozygous), while 9 pa -
tients (26.5%) carried only one ATP7B  mutation. In 8 patients (23.5%) 
no mutations were found. We detected 11 different mutations, one of 
which is novel. The most common mutations are: H1069Q (39.5%), 
2304_2305insC (25.6%), A1003T (11.6%), and R616Q (7%).
These results indicate that sequencing of exons 14, 8, 5, 13 and 15 
is good start strategy for mutation detection in WD patients in Serbia. 
However, mutation analysis of the remaining exons in ATP7B  gene 
should be developed.
P12.219  mutational analysis and genotype-phenotype 
correlation of Wilson disease patients in an isolated Romanian 
population
R. Cocoş , F. Raicu, L. C. Bohîlţea;  
“Carol Davila”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Wilson disease is a rare condition characterized by a defect in ex -
cretion of copper, due to a mutation of both alleles of ATP7B gene. 
The mutations in the ATP7B gene lead to intracellular accumulation 
of copper and severe hepatic and neurological abnormalities. The 
human ATOX1 protein is an metallochaperone that interacts directly 
with copper- transporting ATP-ase (ATP7B) and can regulate its cop -
per occupancy. We report the further results of an ongoing project  Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 
concerning the spectrum of mutations of ATP7B and ATOX1 genes 
in WD patients and their relatives (5 WD patients and 152 autoch -
thonous inhabitants to the third generation originated from the same 
village) from an isolated Romanian populations with high prevelance of 
WD. Patients‘ demographic, clinical and histopathological parameters 
were obtained. Direct sequencing of all 21 exons of ATP7B shown that 
four WD patients are hetreozygotes or compound heterozygotes for 
three mutations P767P-fs, H1069Q or K832R and one WD patient 
was homozygous for K832R. Mutation analysis of the four exons of 
the ATOX1 gene including the intron- exon boundaries revealed one 
known polymorphism (5’UTR -99 T>C) in 27 out of 157 autochthonous 
inhabitants. Based on the data of this study, no major role can be at -
tributed to ATOX1 in the pathophysiology or clinical variation of Wilson 
disease. Phenotype variation among subjects with the same ATP7B 
genotype suggests that modifying factors play an additional role in the 
pathogenesis of WD.
P12.220  Novel missense mutation in WisP3 gene associated 
with childhood onset progressive pseudorheumatoid 
arthropathy (c.667 t>G)
L. Kapur1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, J. Ramic1, I. Gavrankapetanovic2, K. Bajrovic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Clinic of Orthopaedics and Traumathology, Clinical University 
Center Sarajevo, Bolnička 25, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Childhood onset progressive pseudorheumatoid arthropathy 
(OMIM#208230) was first desribed by Spranger et al. (1983) as an 
arthropathy of childhood beginning at about age 3 to 8 years with pro -
gressive joint stiffness. This condition is characterized by that it first 
affects the hips with pseudorheumathoid manifestations i.e. morning 
stiffness and decreased mobility of the cervical spine. Hurvitz et al. 
(1999) described mutations in WISP3 gene family members as caus -
ative for the disease.
Here we report a novel familial mutation within WISP 3 gene most 
probably associated with the condition clinically recognized as spon -
dyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda with progressive arthropathy and sent 
for familial genetic testing.
Mutation was detected by gene screening approach using direct au -
tomatic sequencing. This information was utilized for development of 
PCR based assay for familial genotyping. Mutation in homozygous 
form in index-patient and as heterozygous in patients was confirmed 
implying the actual etiopathological basis for progressive pseudorheu -
matoid arthropathy in this family. For definite confirmation of this hy -
pothesis, functional analysis should be performed.
P12.221  A novel WT1 mutation identified in a patient with 
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome
O. Beltcheva1,2, A. Boueva3, E. Boiadjieva1, S. Marinova3, R. Kaneva1,2, V. 
Mitev1,2;  
1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Dept. of 
Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
3Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Idiopathic nephritic syndrome is the most frequent disease of the glo -
merular ultra-filter in children. The established treatment of the affected 
individuals includes corticosteroid administration, which, unfortunately, 
fails to give positive result in app. 10% of the cases and, as a result, 
the children often progress towards end-stage renal disease. Several 
genes have been shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of this ste -
roid-resistant form of nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Among those, most 
commonly affected are NPHS1, NPHS2 and WT1. Here, we report the 
identification of a novel WT1 mutation in a girl diagnosed with SRNS 
at the age of 2. The initial genetic screening revealed no mutation in 
the NPHS2 gene, which prompted us to look for defects in the WT1 
gene. A heterozygous nucleotide change, C1184T in exon 9, resulting 
in amino acid substitution Ser395Tyr was identified. In order to deter -
mine whether this novel variant is indeed a disease causing change 
we checked if it was present in healthy controls. The substitution was 
not found in any of the 240 chromosomes tested. The affected amino 
acid, Ser395, was found to be conserved among multiple species as 
diverse as Drosophila, Xenopus and human. It is located in zink-finger 
3, part of the DNA binding domain of WT1. The absence of the variant 
among healthy population controls and the fact that it involves residue 
located in a conserved part of the protein, allowed us to conclude that 
it is, indeed, the disease causing mutation in this case.P12.222  the t unisian experience in X linked mental retardation
l. ben jemaa1,2, i. rejeb3, f. maazoul1, r. mrad1,2, m. chaabouni1,2, m. trabelsi1, j. 
chelly4, h. chaabouni1,5;  
1service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis, Tunisia, 2faculté de 
médecine de Tunis, Tunisia, 3faculté de médecine de Tunis, tunis, Tunisia, 
4institut cochin de génétique moléculaire, paris, France, 5faculté de médecine 
de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
Mental retardation is the most frequent cause of handicap. Linkage 
studies followed by mutational analysis of known MRX genes localized 
within defined genetic intervals represent a good strategy to identify 
a genetic cause of the disorder. We report the Tunisian experience in 
X linked mental retardation. Our study of more than 10 families has 
concluded on three important families. The first one was the MRX54 
including 14 males which allowed us to identify a new mutation on 
the ARX gene a substitution of a leucine (CTG) with proline (CCG) 
on the amino acid number 33(L33P) .The second family shows mod -
erate mental retardation with behavioral symptoms, common dys -
morphic features. Linkage analysis showed that affected males and 
obligate carrier females share a common haplotype in the Xp21.31 
- Xq23 region that contains PAK3 gene. Sequencing of PAK3 allowed 
us to identify the first splice mutation in PAK3 gene located at the 5’ 
end of intron 6 (c.276+4A>G). The third family including 3 males with 
severe to mild mental retardation, short stature, lean body and mi -
crocephaly. The disease was mapped into an interval encompassing 
Xp21.1-Xq21.33 (maximum LOD score of 0.90). Mutation analysis of 
genes located here allowed us to identify a truncating mutation in the 
PQBP1 gene. This mutation is an insertion of a one adenosine residue 
in exon 5 (c.631insA). This frameshift insertion causes premature stop 
codon at amino acid position 226. This study shows that small families 
too must be explored despite their non informativity and mutations can 
be identified.
P12.223  molecular investigation of a novel clinical expression of 
Xeroderma Pigmentosum  in a t unisian family
O. MESSAOUD1, M. Ben Rekaya1, M. Zghal2, R. Kefi1, S. Chebel3, A. 
Boughammoura-Bouatay3, H. Bel Hadj Ali4, N. Gouider-Khouja5, J. ZILI4, M. 
Frih-Ayed3, I. Mokhtar2, S. Abdelhak1;  
1Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Dermatology Department, Habib 
Thameur Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Neurology Department, Fattouma Bourguiba 
Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 4Dermatology Department, Fattouma Bourguiba 
Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 5Neurology Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
Xeroderma Pigmentosum  is a rare genodermatosis predisposing to 
skin cancers. The disease is classified into eight groups. Among them, 
the Xeroderma Pigmentosum  group A (XP-A), which is characterized 
by the presence of neurological abnormalities in addition to cutaneous 
symptoms.
In the present study, we report on a particular XPA family where some 
members showed an atypical clinical presentation i.e. unlabelled neu -
rological abnormalities with discrete skin manifestations. Dermatologi -
cal examination showed a small number of monomorphic and discrete 
pigmented maculae, which were not evocative of the clinical diagnosis 
of XP.
Molecular investigation allowed identification of a novel XPA muta -
tion p.V241GfsX5. All patients with this novel phenotypic expression 
of XPA are compound heterozygous for (p.[R228X(+).V241GfsX5]) 
mutations.
Our report shows that mutations in the XPA gene could lead to other 
phenotypic expressions. We suggest that this phenotype should be 
considered as a novel clinical entity allelic to XP-A.
J12.1  molecular analysis of phenylketonuria in Belarus
J. Tsukerman , K. Mosse;  
National Center of Research and Applied Medicine “Mother and Child”, Minsk, 
Belarus.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by 
mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene (MIM#261600). 
PKU is the most common inborn error of amino acid metabolism in Be -
larus (1/6000). Nowadays more than 500 mutations are known in PAH 
locus. The major mutation in our country is R408W, which is routinely 
screened in PKU patients since 1992, having frequency 68%.
In order to explore the spectrum of mutations, we conducted the study 
of PKU chromosomes with previously unknown primary gene defect. 
At first step we performed RFLP analysis for the most common Eu -ropean mutations. The established frequencies were: R158Q - 6,6% 
(37/564), R261Q - 1,6% (9/564), IVS12nt1 - 1,2% (7/564), IVS10nt11 
- 0,4 % (2/564) and Y414C - 0,5% (3/564).
Sequencing of full coding region of PAH gene in patients with unidenti -
fied mutations is now in progress. Our research revealed that muta -
tions of the exon 7 cover about 6% of alleles in Belarusian PKU pa -
tients. We found 6 different nucleotide substitutions in 21 patient with 
following frequencies: E280K -1,7% (10/564), R252W - 1,2% (7/564), 
P281L - 0,5% (3/564), R243X - 0,4 % (2/564), R241C and G272X 
- 0,2% (1/564).
Identified mutations represent 82% of PKU alleles. Currently, prenatal 
diagnosis can be done in 97% of high-risk families by direct mutation 
analysis of the PAH gene and indirect analysis of STR and VNTR poly -
morphic sequences.
P13 metabolic disorders
P13.01  Segregation of four new STRs in 28 Tunisian patients 
affected by 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency
I. Ben Charfeddine1, M. Gribaa1, N. Kahloul2, L. Adala1, O. Mamai1, T. Ben 
Lazreg1, A. Mili1, F. AMRI2, F. Riepe3, A. Saad1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la 
Reproduction, Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie de CHU Ibn 
Eljazzar, Kairouan, Tunisia, 3Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department 
of Paediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
Eleven beta hydroxylase deficiency (11βHD), is the second most 
common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), accounting 
for 5-8%. It’s an autosomal recessive enzyme defect impairing the 
biosynthesis of cortisol. In Tunisia, the incidence of 11 β hydroxylase 
deficiency appears higher (17,5% of congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
etiology). The identical presentation of genital ambiguity (females) and 
pseudo-precocious puberty (males) can lead to misdiagnosis with 21 
hydroxylase deficiency. The clinical hallmark of 11β hydroxylase defi -
ciency is variable, and biochemical identification of elevated precursor 
metabolites is not readily available. To avoid these problems, genetic 
analysis of CYP11B1 gene  is an alternative diagnostic test.
In the present study, we performed a molecular genetic analysis of 
CYP11B1 gene in 28 Tunisian patients clinically affected by 11β hy -
droxylase deficiency. They belong to 26 families originate from the 
Center of the country. We studied four extra-genic microsatellites 
markers; MI8S501, MI8S502, MI8S302 and MI8S301, surrounding the 
CYP11B1  gene (localized on 8q21-22).
Our results showed 4 different haplotypes shared by all the families. 
They seem to come from one common ancestor. In addition, exons 
sequencing of CYP11B1  gene reveals a rare and presumably specific 
«G379V» mutation probably specific for Tunisian population.
P13.02  The prevalence of alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in a 
representative population sample from slovakia
S. Mikulova1, M. Baldovic1,2, L. Kadasi1,3;  
1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd Department of 
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, University Children‘s 
Hospital, Limbová 1, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, 
SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia.
AAlpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency is reported as one of the most 
frequent autosomal recessive genetic disorders in Caucasians. Aber -
rant A1AT protein leads to emphysema and chronic obstructive pul -
monary disease or prolonged neonatal jaundice, cirrhosis and can -
cer. Hence the primary aim of the present study was to screen entire 
coding sequence of A1AT gene for causative mutations in 24 affected 
patients in Slovakia. Three different deficient alleles were identified in 
the study: Mprocida (c.T693C, p.L65P) and S (c.A1362T, p.E288V) in 
single copy; and Z allele (c.G1595A, p.E366K) in 9 copies (only one 
homozygous state, estimated frequency 0.02). In order to assess an 
unbiased frequency of Z allele in Slovak population, we have designed 
rapid and cost effective BI-PASA PCR test method. In the population 
sample of 338 adult subjects 10 Z allele carrying heterozygotes have 
been identified, giving allele frequency to be of 0.0148. Therefore, the 
estimated prevalence of Z homozygotes in Slovakia is 1/4600; and 
thus expected number of subjects with severe A1AT deficiency in the 
whole population of Slovakia (5.5 millions) is about 1200. Considering 
less frequent pathogenic alleles (not tested in population in this study) and their combinations with Z allele the real frequency may be even 
higher. These findings underlie the need for genetic testing being intro -
duced into a common clinical practice.
P13.03  A mitochondrial DNA mutation (t4454c) in the tRNAmet 
Gene in iranian Patients with Brugada syndrome
M. Khatami , M. Heidari;  
Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Point mutations in mitochondrial tRNAs can cause severe multisys -
temic disorders and impaired mitochondrial function. Recently interest -
ing genetic data became available regarding the importance of mtDNA 
mutations in the etiology of arrhythmia and cardiac function. Brugada 
syndrome is clinically cause sudden death in young ages. We report 
here mutational analysis of mtDNA from 15 unrelated patients with 
Brugada syndrome and identified a homoplasmic tRNAMet 4454 T>C 
mutation in 8 cases with variable severity and 18- 41 years old. All of 
them have typical Brugada- type ECG changes. This sequence change 
is located in the T-stem loop of tRNA, a moderately conserved region. 
It was not found in 45 local controls and previously in other disorders 
reported as a polymorphism. It was considered non- pathologic but 
we suggest that the high level conservation in secondary and tertiary 
structures of this tRNA, make the tRNAMet as unique case because 
only one type of this tRNA encoded in the mammalian mtDNAs. Thus 
any changes in primary sequence may potentially pathologic in cardiac 
cells but further investigations necessary to clarify this correlation.
P13.04  Analysis of cYP21A2 gene mutations in iranian 
population
B. Rabbani1, N. Mahdieh2, R. Bagheri2, E. Zaridust3, B. Larijani4, M. Haghi 
Ashtiani5, F. Sayarifar3, M. Akbari1, A. Rabbani2,3;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Growth and 
Development Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Metabolic and Endocrine 
Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 5Molecular Genetic Lab, Children‘s Medical Center Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is comprised of a family of au -
tosomal recessive disorders leading to the defect in cortisol biosyn -
thesis. The 21-hydroxylase deficiency is the most common cause of 
CAH which accounts for 90% of the CAH patients. There are various 
phenotypes due to combination of different mutations. Eight common 
mutations in CYP21A2 gene, located on 6q21.3, have been reported in 
many populations around the world. We have studied the spectrum of 
CYP21A2 mutations including the most common mutations, rare muta -
tions, large deletions, duplications and gene conversions in Iranian pa -
tients affected by CAH. 30 CAH affected families were included in the 
study. Allele-specific amplification of CYP21A2 gene was performed 
to detect the common mutations. Dosage analysis of the affected in -
dividuals was done to find out deletions and duplications by multiplex 
ligation probe amplification (MLPA) method. Also, sequencing proce -
dure was applied for the remaining mutations. The allele specific am -
plification assay detected p.P30L, g.655A/C>G (I2G), p.G110_Y112, 
p.I172N, Cluster 6 (p.I236N, p.V237G, p.M239L), p.V281L, p.Q318X, 
and p.R356W. Some affected individuals carried partial gene con -
version, duplication and others were carrier of deletion resulting in a 
chimeric CYP21A1P-CYP21A2 gene. Due to high prevalence of con -
sanguineous marriage in Iran, the recurrence risk of the disease is 
high. Screening the heterozygotes of at risk families would help to di -
minish the psychological and economical stress these families would 
deal with through out their life. Moreover, these findings could be used 
for prenatal diagnosis and detecting the heterozygotes in non-related 
CAH families without having a previously CAH affected child.
P13.05  congenital adrenal hyperplasia in Alexandria, Egypt: 
A high prevalence justifying the need for a community-based 
newborn screening program
S. M. Tayel1,2, H. Ismael1,3, H. Kandil4, A. Abd Rabuh1, H. Sallam1,5,5;  
1Suzanne Mubarak Regional Centre for Women‘s Health & Development, 
Alexandria, Egypt, 2Clinical Genomic Centre, Alexandria Faculty of Medicine, 
Alexandria, Egypt, 3High Institute of Public Health, Alexandria, Egypt, 
4Consultant Pediatrician, Ministry of Health, Alexandria, Egypt, 5Obstetrics & Metabolic disorders 0Gynaecology Department, Alexandria faculty of Medicine, Alexandria, Egypt.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is one of the most common 
inborn endocrine disorders. Its prevalence ranges between 1:23,344 
(New Zealand) and 1:282 (Alaska). CAH is world-wide increasingly 
being included in newborn screening programs. Benefits of screening 
are avoidance of salt loss crises and early proper gender assignment 
in virilized girls. To determine the prevalence of CAH in Alexandria, 
Egypt, a total of 7254 samples from newborns at 5-7 days of age were 
screened by time resolved fluoroimmunoassay (DELFIA; PerkinElmer) 
for 17OHP determination from June, 2008 to May, 2009 at SMC, Al -
exandria, Egypt. Neonates with a value > 30 nmol/l were considered 
positive. Six cases were diagnosed as positive. Only one recall was 
made giving a very low recall rate (0.00014). Prevalence of CAH in Al -
exandria, Egypt was 0.08 % (1/1209) with a sensitivity of 100 %, speci -
ficity of 99.99 %, and a positive predictive value of 0.86. One affected 
female newborn had the simple virilizing form, 2 were salt wasting, and 
one had the non-classic (NC) form of the disease. One male died in the 
neonatal period from an adrenal crisis, and another male had the NC 
type of the disease. All the positive cases were reported to the ministry 
of health to start immediate treatment for salt loss and genital ambigu -
ity. Implementation of a community-based newborn screening program 
for CAH in Egypt is justified due to the efficiency of time resolved fluo -
roimmunoassay for screening in the neonates, and the high frequency 
of CAH and its serious complications if untreated.
P13.06  GROWtH FAct OR siGNALiNG PROmOtEs tUmOR 
mEtABOLism BY REGULA tiNG EXPREssiON AND ActiVitY OF 
KEY ENZYmEs
M. A. Iqbal , V. Gupta, S. Chattopadhyay, P. Baindara, R. N. K. Bamezai;  
National Centre of Applied Human Genetics School of Life Sciences Jawaharlal 
Nehru University, New Delhi, India.
Growth factor signaling promotes cellular proliferation. It does so by 
promoting anabolic metabolism in proliferating cells and hence it posi -
tively drives the metabolic needs of tumor cells. We have investigated 
how growth factor signaling promotes anabolic tumor metabolism by 
studying the effect of its inhibition on expression and activity of key 
enzymes- pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and transketolase like enzyme-
1 (TKTL1), known to be important for tumor metabolism. On inhibiting 
growth factor signaling, we have observed decreased mRNA levels of 
both enzymes but increased activity of PKM2 compared to control in 
treated cell lines as judged by quantitaive PCR and spectrophotometric 
assay respectively. Expression of high activity PKM2 form and down 
regulation of TKTL1 expression inhibits tumor metabolism as judged 
by decreased cellular proliferation. This correlates with previously re -
ported observation that expression of low activity PKM2 form and up -
regulation of TKTL1 is an important event in metabolic transformation. 
Our results demonstrate that inhibition of growth factor signaling has 
a negative effect on tumor metabolism by modulating expression of 
TKTL1 and expression/activity of PKM2.
P13.07  mtHFR c677t Polymorphism in Russian Patients with 
cystic Fibrosis
K. G. Buslov1, V. N. Kovalev1, E. M. Koroleva2, V. I. Larionova1, L. A. 
Zhelenina1, A. V. Orlov3;  
1Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Chemical-Pharmaceutical Academy, 
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St-Petersburg Medical Academy of 
Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
MTHFR C677T polymorphism has been recognized as one of key 
regulatory factors of both homocysteine level and oxidative stress re -
sponse. Objectives: (1) study on MTHFR C677T alleles distribution 
in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and (2) evaluation of correlation 
of MTHFR C677T polymorphism with clinical presentation (severity of 
the disease and exacerbations frequency during last six months) along 
with biochemical parameters (blood levels of glutathione, glutathione 
peroxidase, zinc, uric acid, and homocystein). Material and methods: 
CF patients group comprised 13 females (average age 11.0 yo) and 16 
males (average age 12.6 yo). Severity of the disease was estimated 
as a frequency of pulmonary exacerbations during last six months. All 
patients were tested for a presence of 21 mutations of CFTR (delF508, 
delI507, del21kb, 394delTT , R334X, R347P, G542X, G551d, R553X, 
N1303K, 2143delT, 2184insA, 2113delA, 2118del4, 2141insA, delE672, 
2176insC, 2183AA/G, 2183delAA, 2184delA, W128R). MTHFR C677T polymorphism was determined by PCR-RFLP analysis. Results: Eigh -
teen of 29 (62%) CF patients were homozygous for C-allele of MTHFR 
C677T, 8 (28%) had heterozygous CT genotype, and 3 (10%) were 
carriers of homozygotes for T-allele. Correlation analysis did not reveal 
any parameter, including homocysteine level, to be associated with 
MTHFR C677T status in CF patients. However, a difference in pulmo -
nary exacerbations frequency between carriers of delF508 mutation 
(n=23) and non-carriers (n=6) was noted (average 2.8 and 1.5, respec -
tively). Conclusion: This study failed to demonstrate an appreciable 
association of clinical presentation of CF and biochemical parameters 
with MTHFR C677T polymorphism.
P13.08  Clinical and molecular analysis of a large Italian cohort of cHi patients
F. Faletra1, E. Athanasakis2, F. Furlan3, C. Dionisi-Vici4, A. Burlina5, A. Ventura6, 
P. Gasparini1;  
1Medical Genetics-Department of Reproductive and Development Sciences, 
Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics-Burlo Garofolo Children Hospital, Trieste, Italy, 
3Pediatrics-San Geranrdo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 4Pediatrics-Bambino Gesù 
Children‘s Hospital, Roma, Italy, 5Pediatrics-University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 
6Pediatrcs-Department of Reproductive and Development Sciences, Trieste, Italy.
Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a common cause of hypoglycae -
mia in infancy. The prevalence of the disease is approximately 1/50000 
live births. Hypoglycaemia can cause systemic manifestations and 
symptoms in the CNS. Histologically there are primarily two forms: a 
diffuse form, responsible for 60-70% of cases and a focal form, respon -
sible for the remaining 30-40%. HH is caused by mutation in ABCC8, 
KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK and HADH genes. In addition to expressing 
the disease, patients with GLUD1 mutations have hyperammonaemia 
and those with HADH mutations showed raised plasma hydroxybutyr -
ylcarnitine and urinary 3-hydroxyglutarate. The CHI is most commonly 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and less commonly in an 
autosomal dominant manner. No really genotype-phenotype correla -
tions have appeared until now. In our study, we enrolled 34 patients 
from different Italian Hospitals, 27 patients having classical CHI and 
4 having hyperinsulinism / hyperammonaemia (HI/HA). Anamnestic 
data for all patients were collected. For all patients we analyzed all 
the genes CHI-related by direct sequencing. We found 16 mutations in 
13 patients with classical CHI (Detection Rate 48%) and 5 mutations 
in 7 HA/HI patients (Detection Rate 71%). Most of the mutations are 
missense mutations (62%), but also stop codon (14%), altered splicing 
site (5%), insertion (9,5%) and insertion-deletion (9,5%) were detect -
ed. All missense mutations involve aminoacid highly conserved across 
species and none of the 100 healthy controls analyzed DNAs showed 
the same variant. Finally, this is the first clinical and molecular analysis 
of a large Italian cohort of CHI patients.
P13.09  Linking cholesterol metabolism and human behaviour
C. du Souich1, K. McClarren1, R. Larstone1, R. Friedlander1, J. Livesley1, T. M. 
Severson2, D. W. Stockton3, F. L. Raymond4, M. A. Marra5, C. F. Boerkoel1;  
1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Nederlands Kanker 
Instituute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Wayne State University School of 
Medicine, Detroit, MI, United States, 4Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Introduction : The molecular bases of human behavior have largely 
eluded identification using standard diagnostic criteria. This likely 
arises because standard diagnoses are amalgams of symptoms and 
signs that are the product of several underlying causal mechanisms. 
In contrast, dissection of human behavior into unidimensional, homog -
enous traits should enable identification of coherent, causally active 
psychological entities.
Methodology : Testing this, we identified an X-linked disorder of cho -
lesterol metabolism with intellectual and behavioral abnormalities that 
establishes this link. Affected males have CK syndrome, a syndromic 
intellectual disability, whereas affected females segregate high levels 
of callousness, a component of psychopathy.
Results : Partial loss-of-function mutations of NSDHL  (NAD(P)H ste -
roid dehydrogenase-like) are responsible for this disorder.
Conclusion : Thus we establish a genetic link between human behavior 
and cholesterol metabolism and demonstrate that dissection of human 
behavior into homogenous traits allows ready identification of genetic 
factors modulating behavior.Metabolic disorders 1P13.10  Altered expression profiles of human clock genes
T. Ben lazreg1, M. gribaa1, w. naiija2, m. dogui3;  
1laboratoire de cytogénétique et de la biologie de reproduction CHU Farhat 
Hached, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 2service de réanimation CHU sahloul, SOUSSE, 
Tunisia, 3aboratoire de physiolgie et des explorations fonctionnelles du système 
nerveux faculté de medecine de monastir, SOUSSE, Tunisia.
Circadian rhythms in physiology and behavior are observed in all 
mammals, including humans. These rhythms are generated by circa -
dian clocks located in the hypothalamus and also in most peripheral 
tissues. Recently, clock genes were identified as the genes that control 
a vast array of circadian rhythms. In our study we investigated the 
circadian expression of clock genes ( PER1, PER,2, PER3, CLOCK, 
BMAL1,CRY1 ) in human whole blood cells of 10 patients following sur -
gery and exposed to a 24h artificial light. Clock genes were found to 
oscillate throughout the light-dark cycle. Severe disturbance of the en -
docrine rhythm as well as clock gene expression profiles in peripheral 
blood mononuclear were noticed. This deregulation might be the result 
of the direct effects of injury on the biological clock and the absence of 
synchronizer essentially light/dark rhythm.
P13.11  New mutations of cYP21 in t urkish population
N. Y. Kutlay1, F. Sadeghi1, M. Berberoğlu2, E. Çetinkaya3, Z. Aycan3, C. Kara4, 
H. Ilgın-Ruhi1, G. Ocal2, Z. Şıklar2, H. G. Karabulut1, T. Tuncalı1, V. Topcu1, A. 
Elhan5, A. Tukun1;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Ankara University faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Pediatric Endocrinology Department, Ankara University School of 
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 3Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Ankara Dışkapı 
Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Endogrinology, 
Dr. Sami Ulus Children‘s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Biostatistics, 
Ankara University faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal recessive dis -
ease and most frequently occurs as a result of deficiency in 21 hydrox -
ylase enzyme. Many mutations of steroid 21 hydroxylase enzyme gene 
(CYP21) have been reported before. A/C659G, 8bp deletion, com -
plete deletion of exon 3, P30L, I172N, exon 6 cluster (I236N, V237E, 
M239K), V281L, Q318X and R356W are most frequent mutations. 
Although incidence of the disease is not known in Turkey, frequency 
of these nine mutations among CAH patients with classic forms (clas -
sic salt-wasting and classic simple virilizing) was found as 75 %. 264 
patients diagnosed as CAH according to clinical and laboratory find -
ings were admitted to our department for genetic testing. These known 
nine mutations were tested by PCR and RLFP in peripheral blood DNA 
sample of these patients. We did not find any of these mutations in 
33 of 47 patients who have classic CAH phenotype. These mutations 
were found as heterozygous form in 14 of these patients. The alleles 
without any mutations were sequenced. The sequencing analysis re -
sults will be presented.
P13.12  Detection of the polymorphisms in the cYP2D6 gene and 
their influence on the metabolism of drugs
J. Zrůstová1, E. Flodrová2, J. Juřica3, R. Barteček2,4, T. Kašpárek2,4, R. 
Gaillyová1,2, A. Žourková2,4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Masaryk University Brno, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 
3Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital, Brno, 
Czech Republic, 4Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
The response to many drugs in common use varies greatly among 
patients. The cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is an enzyme respon -
sible for metabolism of many commonly used drugs such as antide -
pressants, neuroleptics, beta blockers and antiarrhytmics. The gene 
CYP2D6  (22q13.1-13.1) that encodes this enzyme is highly polymor -
phic and shows a great inter-individual and inter-ethnic variability. The 
polymorphisms lead to different individual responses which result in an 
increased risk of adverse drug reactions or the lack of the therapeutical 
response. According to the enzymatic activity the Caucasian popula -
tion can be classified into four subgroups - (1) poor metabolizers, who 
degradate the CYP2D6 substrates slowly and who are exposed to a 
greater incidence of side effects of therapy, (2) extensive metaboliz -
ers, their metabolism follows the presupposed mechanism, (3) inter -
mediate metabolizers, the subgroup between poor and effective me -
tabolizers, and (4) ultrarapid metabolizers, their metabolism is without 
adequate clinical response to common drug dosages. The influence of polymorphisms on paroxetine and risperidone treatment is studied 
at Department of Medical Genetics and Psychiatric clinic. Polymor -
phisms occuring in coding part of CYP2D6 gene are determinated by 
sequencing, Real Time PCR, High Resolution Melting analysis and 
agarose electrophoresis. This paper provides an overview of current 
technologies available for assessing CYP2D6 polymorphisms at De -
partment of Medical Genetics.
Supported by NS9676-4/2008
P13.13  Risk factors for cystic fibrosis liver disease
I. M. Ciuca1, L. Pop1, I. Popa1, Z. Popa2, L. Tamas3;  
1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic Fibrosis Centre, 
Timisoara, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction: Cystic fibrosis(CF) associated liver disease is the second 
cause of death in CF and may be the first disease expression in CF. It 
seems that many recognized risk factors like severe mutations history 
of meconium ileus and male gender could suggest the occurrence of 
the liver disease.
Aims & Methods: Aim study was to asses liver disease`s frequency and 
its correlation with recognized risk factors. Study was prospective for a 
five years period; 158 patients, with median age at diagnosis = 13.94 
years were followed up by clinical assessment, liver function tests 
(LFTs), abdominal ultrasound examinations (US) and CFTR tests. In 
some cases liver biopsy, MRI and elastogramme was performed.
Results: Cystic fibrosis associated liver disease (CFLD) was diag -
nosed in 51 patients (32.27%), slightly predominance of boys. The 
disease occurred more frequently in adult patients and among children 
age 7-14 years, most of cases being diagnosed after 10 years.
Class I and II mutation were present in 56.87% CFLD patients.
Meconium ileus was a risk factor (OR=1.12) for developing CFLD, be -
ing present in 21% from CFLD patients. Pancreatic insufficiency was 
strongly associated with LD, certified to be risk factor (OR=1.25). 
Conclusion : The frequency of CF associated liver disease is rising. 
CF children older then 10 year, with severe mutation, history of meco -
nium ileus, pancreatic insufficiency and are more likely predisposed 
to develop liver disease. In witch way the disease evolution or the risk 
factors control can be influence remain to be determine.
P13.14  Procalcitonin is a specific marker of diabetic 
complication process 
M. A. Soylemez ;  
Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: The procalcitonin (PCT) gene, referred to as Calc-1, is lo -
cated on chromosome 11p15.4 and was sequenced in 1989. The pro -
moter has sites for basal transcription factors but more interestingly, 
also has sites for Nuclear factor |[kappa]||[beta]| (NF|[kappa]||[beta]|) 
and activator protein -1 (AP-1), factors induced under inflammatory 
conditions. Diabetes Mellitus is associated with oxidative stress and 
elevation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGEs are pro -
duced by a non-enzymatic, maillard reaction between reducing sugars 
and either proteins or lipids. AGEs interacts with the receptor for ad -
vanced glycation end products (RAGE) and RAGE activation is caused 
by elevation of the transcriptional factors NF|[kappa]||[beta]| and AP-1. 
These factors induce PCT gene expression.
Aim: To determine whether serum PCT level is a specific marker in 
patients with diabetic complications .
Patients: Twenty patients with diabetic foot were studied along with 
age and sex matched normal non-diabetic subjects (10 males and 10 
females) Blood samples were taken for the measurement of serum 
PCT levels. Serum PCT levels were analized by a kryptor analizator 
using kryptor-PCT kit designed for KAIA
Results: Serum PCT levels were elevated in diabetic foot patients 
when compared with those of normal subjects (p<0.01).
Conclusions: It revealed a raise in serum PCT levels in patients with 
diabetic complications. Our study results and experimental design im -
ply PCT as an important mediator during the development of diabetic 
complications. This algorithmic mechanism was based on genetic ex -
pression of PCT. Thus, the results of this study show procalcitonin as 
a new marker for diabetic complications.Metabolic disorders 2P13.15  Quick evaluation and classification of alpha-
Galactosidase A mutants in Anderson Fabry Disease - Prediction 
of disease relevant mutations
J. Lukas1, U. Goelnitz2, A. Wree3, R. Köhling4, A. Rolfs1,2;  
11Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, University of Rostock, 
Rostock, Germany, 2Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of 
Anatomy, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 4Department of Physiology, 
University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
Fabry disease, a lysosomal storage disorder is based on the deficiency 
of α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity. Some amino acid exchanges might 
have only mild effects on enzyme activity reduction. Thus, we devel -
oped an in vitro model based on the overexpression of GLA mutants 
using a HEK293 cell system. Using fluorimetric enzyme activity assay, 
we are able to determine the activity of mutant enzyme. We tested 
over 100 mutations with regard to enzyme activity, protein stability and 
response to the Pharmacological Chaperone (PC) 1-Deoxygalactono -
jirimycine (DGJ). We raised the data in order to classify the mutations, 
find hints for the right therapy for the patients and make predictions on 
the importance of certain amino acids and their positioning inside the 
molecule by analysing partially novel and described mutations stretch -
ing along the whole gene.
P13.16  FBs vs. Osteogenesis imperfeeta.Report of an iranian 
Girl with a Private Novel mutation in GLUt2 gene
Y. Shafeghati1,2, P. Sarkheil1, T. Baghdadi3, F. Hadipour1, Z. Hadipour1, R. 
Santer4;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2University of Social Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, 
Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Imam 
Khomeini Hosp. Ped.Orthopedy Depart., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
4Universitatsklinikum, Hamburg-Ependorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Fanconi-Bickel Syndrome is a very rare hereditary metabolic disease, 
characterized by hepatomegaly due to glycogen storage, refractory 
hypophosphatemic rickets, marked growth retardation and proximal 
renal tubular acidosis. Recurrent bone fractures are one of the hall -
mark findings. It is a single gene disorder; the responsible gene is be -
longing to the facilitative glucose transporters family (GLUT2) gene or 
(SLC2A2). It was mapped to the q26.1-26.3 locus on chromosome 3, 
encodes the glucose transporter protein 2. This protein is expressed in 
pancreatic ß-cells, hepatocytes, renal tubules, and intestinal mucosa. 
Several mutations in the GLUT2 gene have been reported in different 
populations.
Herein we report an Iranian girl with a missed diagnosis of osteogen -
esis imperfecta. Proband was product of a normal pregnancy, an un -
eventful delivery, and product of a complex consanguineous marriage. 
She was referred with the history of frequent fractures, and severe 
motor delay. Following the case we detected refractory rickets instead 
of OI, sever growth failure, proximal renal tubulopathy and RTA, and 
enlarged kidneys by sono, progressive hepatomegaly, and GSD on 
liver biopsy. Glucose and galactose tolerance test confirmed abnormal 
carbohydrate metabolism. Diagnosis of FBS was suspected, and treat -
ment with corn starch, Rocartrol, and GH ameliorated her condition 
satisfactorily.
Molecular analysis on GLUT2 revealed a homozygous private novel 
mutation in exon 5; it was 15 nucleotide deletion and 7 nucleotide in -
sertion in the point c.685-707 of the gene. It is a frame shift mutation 
and a premature termination of translation (P.A229QFsX19).
P13.17  FoxP3 expression and regulatory t -cells on earlier and 
advanced stages of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
P. V. Apanovich1, T. V. Nikonova2, N. V. Apanovich1, M. V. Shestakova2, A. V. 
Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Endocrinological Research Center, 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We investigated FoxP3 expression and T-regulatory CD4+ CD25+ cell 
quantity on different stage of type 1 diabetes mellitus development and 
in control group. The T-regulatory cell quantity in the group of individu -
als positive on glucose tolerance test (pGTT) was not different from 
the control. FoxP3 expression level in this group was twice lower than 
in control. Among for the first time revealed type 1 diabetes mellitus 
patients (up to 1 year, early disease stage) FoxP3 expression was 
approximately as in pGTT group and significantly different from the control (P=0.005). In the same time, T-regulatory cell quantity was de -
creased for the first time revealed diabetes group in comparison with 
pGTT group (P=0.001). It is interesting that T-regulatory cells were 
decreased both among patients with remission (P=0.03) and without 
(P=0.0004) in comparison with pGTT although their quantity under re -
mission were 1.5 times more than without remission. The FoxP3 ex -
pression was changed in this proportion also. During 10 years after 
type 1 diabetes mellitus onset FoxP3 expression was decreasing and 
lower than in control (P=0.0006). In the group of patients through 6-10 
years after disease beginning FoxP3 expression was three times lower 
than in the group for the first time revealed diabetes. After 10 years of 
disease the level of FoxP3 expression was increased and was signifi -
cantly different from the control.
P13.18  THE GENETIC ORIGIN OF GALACTOSEMIA IN BELARUS
T. Dzemidovitch , E. Budzeika, T. Zimovina, N. Gusina;  
National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, 
Belarus.
A study of the most common mutations Q188R and K285N in the ga -
lactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) gene from 15 unrelated 
galactosemia families is reported here. Diagnosis was based on thin 
layer chromatography for galactosuria/galactosemia, galactose and 
galactose-1-phosphate determinations and assays of erythrocyte 
GALT activity. Patients were screened for the common K285N and 
Q188R transferase gene mutations, using PCR-based assays. All the 
patients showed markedly above-normal concentrations of galactose 
and galactose-1-phosphate and less than 10% activity of GALT. Ac -
cording to the laboratory findings K285N and Q188R alleles together 
represented 64% of detected mutations. We detected 11 alleles carry -
ing the Q188R mutation out of the analyzed 34 (32 % allele frequency). 
From these, 4 patients were found to be homozygous for the mutation 
and 3 to be heterozygous, 2 of them were compound heterozygous 
for the Q188R and the K285N sequence changes. K285N mutation 
was also identified in 11 alleles (32 % allele frequency), 2 patients ap -
peared to be homozygous. Our results support the idea about Slavic 
origin of K285N mutation and prove the assumption that the frequency 
of Q188R decreases from west to east across Europe. It is also sup -
posed that classical galactosemia shows low allelic heterogeneity in 
Byelorussian patients.
P13.19  Hemochromatosis gene (HFE) variants and risk of iron 
overload: a meta-analysis
A. M. Neghina , A. Anghel, I. Marincu, R. Neghina;  
Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Purpose: The incomplete phenotypic penetrance of HFE genotypes 
in relation to hemochromatosis poses a practical problem in the in -
terpretation of the genotyping results by clinicians. We performed 
meta-analyses of the associations between hemochromatosis geno -
types C282Y/C282Y, C282Y/H63D, C282Y/wild type, H63D/H63D, 
H63D/wild type, versus wild type/wild type and iron status. Methods: 
MEDLINE search was performed from 1997 to 2008. After reviewing 
3572 article titles and evaluating 92 articles in detail, odds ratios (OR) 
were pooled from 43 study populations using a random-effects model. 
Potential sources of heterogeneity were also explored. Results: A total 
of 9,986 cases and 24,852 controls were included in the meta-analy -
sis. The aggregate overall results showed that homozygosity for the 
C282Y mutation conferred the highest risk for iron overload (pooled 
OR, 1006.14 [95% confidence interval, 443.21 to 2284.08]) whereas 
H63D/wild type genotype was associated with the lowest risk of iron 
overload (OR, 1.68 [95% CI, 1.33 to 2.12]). The subgroup analyses 
performed showed strong associations between all genotypes and 
elevated serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, serum iron concentra -
tion, hepatic iron score, hepatic iron index, and mobilization of iron in 
phlebotomy, except for H63D/H63D homozygotes that were strongly 
associated with elevated hepatic iron index and mobilizable iron by 
quantitative phlebotomy. Conclusions: The present meta-analysis reli -
ably quantifies the effects of genetic risk on iron overload. It shows an 
important role for liver biopsy and assessment of mobilizable iron by 
quantitative phlebotomy in the diagnostic pathway of hereditary he -
mochromatosis. The results, mainly from case-control studies, cannot 
necessarily be extrapolated to the general population.Metabolic disorders P13.20  study of mutations in 9 exons of LDLR gene in possible 
familial hypercholesterolemia patlents in a province of iran
F. Shayesteh1, E. Farrokhi1, M. Modarresi2, M. Hashemzadeh1;  
1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Assistant professor , Animal Sci Dept, Islamic Azad Univ ,Khorasgan. Iran, 
isffahan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background and aim: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autoso -
mal dominant disorder caused mainly by mutations in the low-density 
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR).Until now, the molecular basis of FH has 
been demonstrated in detail in many populations , but there is still very 
limited molecular data concerning FH in Iran . The aim of this study 
was to investigate frequency of LDLR gene mutations in an Iranian 
population.
Method : in this descriptive -lab based study a total of 50 non-related 
possible FH subjects from Cheharmahal va Bakhtiari were studies .All 
samples were tested for presence of LDLR gene mutations in 9 exons 
of the LDLR gene including 2 , 4 , 6 ,7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 and 14 using 
SSCP technique. The shifted bands were detected on gels and con -
firmed by sequencing.
Result:.In this study after using SSCP technique and confirmed by se -
quencing we were found 4 Polymorphisms including 1413 G >A , 1725 
C >T , 1773 C >T and 2140 + 5G>A in %18 of population studied.
Conclusion: our data indicated that LDLR gene mutations have not 
contribution to FH in samples studied here. However, we examined 
for only 9 exons of LDLR gene in only 50 patients, and to determine 
the role of mutations of this gene in developing FH in Cheharmahal 
va Bakhtiari province, more FH samples/populations needed to be in -
vestigated.
P13.21  A novel mtDNA mutation in a child with Leigh-like 
syndrome
Y. S. Itkis , G. E. Rudenskaya, P. G. Tsygankova, E. Y. Zakharova;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
A case of Leigh syndrome with atypical manifestation caused by a nov -
el mtDNA mutation in a 2.5-year-old boy is presented. The delivery at 
36-37 weeks of gestation passed with no serious complications. Early 
motor development was moderately delayed, in 15 months the boy 
had lurch. In 1.5 years, after a gastrointestinal infection, the unsteadi -
ness increased dramatically. Since this episode the disease has an un -
dulating course with motor deteriorations triggered by common infec -
tions. In ‘good’ periods the boy walks unsteadily though independently 
and attempts to run. Speech and mental development is delayed but 
never worsened. Expressive language is poor but receptive language 
is satisfactory, emotions and behavior are adequate. There were no 
seizures, vision, hearing or somatic problems. On examination moder -
ate microcephaly (46 cm) was noted. MRI showed symmetric lesion 
of capsula externa and putamen. Leigh disease was supposed. Af -
ter SURF1 gene mutations were excluded, a search of mtDNA muta -
tions in blood cells was performed. A novel substitution m.8839G>C 
in mtATP6 gene was detected in homopasmic state in the child and 
heteropasmic state in the mother.
We proposed this substitution being pathogenic because the involved 
mtDNA region is highly conservative and a nucleotide replacement 
leads to substitution of aminoacid Ala to Pro. In 205 control DNA sam -
ples the same substitution was not found.
Thus, this case contributes to clinical variability of Leigh syndrome. 
Such cases prove the necessity of whole mtDNA sequencing, because 
very often there is no evidence of causative mutation, if frequent muta -
tions are excluded.
P13.22  First Brazilian case of lysinuric protein intolerance (LPi).
I. M. Furquim1, R. Honjo1, C. M. Lourenço2, T. Mauad3, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. 
Albano1, C. A. Kim1;  
1Unidade de Genética, ICr/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Departamento de 
Neurologia, FMRP/USP, Ribeirão Preto,, Brazil, 3Departamento de Patologia, 
HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil.
Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal recessive disease, 
relatively common in Finland. It is caused by defective intracellular 
transport of cationic amino acids, which leads to inefficient renal tu -
bular reabsorption and intestinal absorption of lysine, arginine and or -
thine, considered essential in urea cycle.
It is a multisystemic disease with a variety of clinical symptoms in -
cluding nausea and vomiting after protein ingestion, hepatoespleno -megaly, failure to thrive, muscle weakness. Renal insufficiency, lung 
involvement and hematological abnormalities are also found.
Mutations in SLC7A7  gene are responsible for this disease, but no 
genotype-phenotype correlations have been defined.
Treatment is based on low-protein diet and supplementation with oral 
citrulline.
Our patient is a 2 year-old boy, first child from consanguineous couple. 
Pregnancy and delivery was uneventful. By one month hepatomegaly 
was noticed. Invasive diarrhea and recurrent infections started after 
weaning. He evolved with pulmonary symptoms and chronic respira -
tory insufficiency by 1y9mo. Laboratorial investigations were: pulmo -
nary biopsy- pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; hepatic biopsy- steatosis 
and discrete cholestasis; quantitative amino acids analysis- elevated 
lysine and orothic acid in urine, elevated glutamine in plasma; hyper -
ammonia, elevated chitotriosidase; isoelectric focusing and filipin test 
in fibroblasts were normal. Molecular analysis of SLC7A7  gene was 
not done. Presently the patient is alive, 3y5mo, and improved respira -
tory distress with protein restriction diet.
This is the first Brazilian case of LPI. The diagnosis of LPI is often dif -
ficult due to unspecific symptoms with multisystem involvement over -
lapping with several other metabolic diseases. Molecular analyze of 
SLC7A7  gene should be performed to confirm the diagnosis.
P13.23  Benefit of inherited metabolic disorders screening in 
child with cardiomyopathy
S. Farshidi , S. Saber;  
Welfare Organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cardiomyopathy (Cm), a rare form of cardiac disease in infancy, is 
receiving increasing attention stimulated by the availability of endocar -
dial biopsy and new forms of therapy.
Through a survey ,we calculated the prevalence inherited metabolic 
disorders in children with unknown cardiomyopathy .
In accordance with these strict criteria, Our studies involved 87 patient 
.
In seventeen children symptoms were present between ages 10-25 ( 
mean 17 ) months with general loss of abilities and fallow by cardiac 
symptoms .
We measured their, lactate, pyrovate, carnitine profile& blood glucose 
and ketone body. Then we controlled organic acid, amino acid, mito -
chondrial respiratovy chain complex activity in skeletal muscle & acid 
-alfa - glucosidase activity was measured in infants whom have hyper -
trophic cardiomyopathy.
Result: The prevalence of metabolic disorders was :
Pompe disease (5) ,MPS (7) ,fatty acid - beta - oxidative 
defect(4)VLCHD, respiratory enzyme deficiency.
Conclusion :Search for inherited Metabolic disorders is better to be 
performed in all children with cardiomyopathy as the prevalence of 
metabolic disorders is high in this group and in our country because 
high incidence of consanguity marriage .In other hand it may help us 
for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis for families who have 
affected child .
P13.24**  Association between symptoms of depression and anxiety and metabolic syndrome: the modifying effect of c-
reactive protein gene ( CRP ) polymorphisms
D. Gaysina1,2, M. Pierce2, M. Richards2, M. Hotopf3, D. Kuh2, R. Hardy2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC Unit for 
Lifelong Health and Ageing, London, United Kingdom, 3King’s College London, 
Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom.
Depression is associated with the development of the metabolic syn -
drome (MetS) and both disorders with markers of systemic inflamma -
tion, such as C-reactive protein. We  examined associations between 
symptoms of depression and anxiety at age 13-15 years and at age 
36 years, and MetS at age 53 years in a large representative British 
birth cohort. We also investigated whether two CRP  polymorphisms 
(rs1205 and rs3093068) were associated with affective symptoms 
and the MetS, and whether the risk of the MetS in those with affective 
symptoms was modified by these CRP  gene polymorphisms. Those 
with depression/anxiety in adolescence (OR=1.30, 95%CI: 0.98, 1.74) 
and adulthood (OR=1.41, 95%CI: 0.97, 2.45) were more likely to have 
the MetS. These associations were stronger in women than in men. 
Although CRP  SNPs were not associated with affective status or the 
MetS, the association of adolescent emotional problems with the MetS Metabolic disorders was stronger in those who were homozygous for the major allele (C) 
of rs1205 (OR=1.83, 95%CI: 1.17, 2.86) than in carriers of the T al -
lele (OR=1.01, 95%CI: 0.66, 1.55) (p=0.05 for gene by affective status 
interaction). Adolescent-onset depression and anxiety may play an im -
portant role in the MetS risk later in life, particularly in those homozy -
gous for the major allele of CRP rs1205. These findings may highlight 
new ways of identifying depressed people at high risk of developing 
the MetS, which is of great importance for the treatment and clinical 
management of depressive patients.
P13.25  Proteomics reveals new insights into the causes of 
hyperammonemia in methylmalonic acidemia
R. J. Chandler1,2, D. Phillips3, E. S. Boja3, N. Carrillo-Carrasco1, L. Caldovic4, 
H. Morizono4, R. S. Balaban3, C. P. Venditti1;  
1National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC, United States, 3Laboratory of Cardiac 
Energetics and Proteomics Core Facility, National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Research 
Center for Genetic Medicine, Children‘s National Medical Center, Washington, 
DC, United States.
Methylmalonic Acidemia (MMA) is an inborn error of metabolism that 
is caused by a deficiency in the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase. Clinically, patients with MMA exhibit elevated levels of 
methylmalonic acid in their plasma and urine. During periods of illness, 
MMA patients can experience life-threatening metabolic instability with 
intermittent bouts of hyperammonemia; the underlying mechanisms of 
the pathology of these episodes are not well understood. Presently, 
the inhibition of N-acetylglutamate synthetase (NAGS) by propionyl-
CoA, a metabolite elevated in MMA, is thought to indirectly decrease 
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I (CPS1) activity causing hyperam -
monemia. To investigate possible mechanism(s) of pathology, we 
performed proteomic analysis of liver extracts from a mouse model 
of MMA using two dimensional f luorescence difference in-gel electro -
phoresis (DIGE) and quantitative analysis using iTRAQ labeling and 
tandem mass spectrometry. Proteomics of the liver from MMA mice 
revealed changes in the expression of the urea cycle (UC) enzymes 
CPS1, ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), argininosuccinate synthe -
tase 1 (ASS1), argininosuccinate lyase and arginase compared to con -
trols. MMA mice have decreased levels of plasma ornithine, but normal 
levels of urine orotate, plasma arginine and plasma citrulline. Limited 
CPS1 activity due to NAGS inhibition is consistent with low to normal 
urinary orotate levels. Since deficiencies in CPS1 and OTC can cause 
hyperammonemia, we propose that the changes in the expression urea 
cycle enzymes contribute to the occurrence of hyperammonemia.
P13.26  Analysis of MUT gene mutations in t urkish patients 
with methylmalonic acidemia using resequencing microarrays: 
identification of fourteen novel mutations
H. Dündar1, R. K. Özgül2, A. Dursun1;  
1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health and Department 
of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey.
Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is an autosomal recessive inborn 
error of the organic acid metabolism. The condition is resulted from 
functional defects in the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) enzyme 
or disorders of cobalamin metabolism. Patients with methylmalonic 
acidemia have increased levels of methylmalonic acid in blood and 
urine and can suffer from extreme acidosis. The human MCM gene 
(MUT ) is located on chromosome 6 and comprised of 13 exons span -
ning over 35 kb.
In this study, 34 Turkish patients diagnosed with methymalonic aci -
demia were screened for mutations using Affymetrix resequencing 
microarrays and all the detected mutations were confirmed by direct 
sequencing. As a consequence of direct sequencing, mutations of 29 
patients were detected. The resulted mutations consisted of twenty 
one missense mutations, six nonsense mutations, one splicing muta -
tion, one insertion mutation, and two deletion mutations, 21 of 29 pa -
tients were homozygous for the both mutant alleles. DNA sequencing 
analysis revealed fourteen novel mutations. The most common of the 
missense mutations were P615T mutation in exon 11, accounting for 
nearly 43% of the all missense mutations and nearly 30% of the all the 
mutations.P13.27  mitochondrial disorders due to mitochondrial DNA 
mutations on respiratory chain in Bulgaria
B. I. Radeva1, E. Naumova2, M. Stancheva1;  
1Cinical Genetics,University Childrens Hospital, Medical University , Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 2Cinical Genetics,University Childrens Hospital,Immunogenetics 
Labotory, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Mitochondrial disorders are rare disorders due to mitochodrial DNA 
or DNA mutations.By integral approach with clinical ,biochemical 
methods,EEG, EMG ,KAT ,MRI and MT- DNA investigation in peripher -
al intravenous blood and skin fibroblast,sequenced PSR-SBT method 
of mT DNA regions were diagnosed various mitochodrial disorders.
The aim of our work were to evaluate the received data ,to make geno -
type /phenotype correlations and to proceed the results of treatment.
There were diagnosed 40 children with mitochodrial DNA disorders of 
Compex I,Complex III and ComplexV.All found mutation of Mt -DNA 
were new ,not registrated to this time in international register for mi -
tochondrial DNA mutation.All these mutation were unknown function.
We discovered 3, ATP synthase 8 deficiency patientsThe clinical pre -
santation of the found mutations were the same as similar mutations 
descriebed in the literature.For treatment of our children were used low 
protein diet ,very high doses vitamins,l-carnitine.The best results were 
received in patients with Complex 1 deficiency ,in the other there were 
decrease the convulsions,but no significant improvement in mental de -
velopment and neurologic symptomatics.On the parents were offered 
genetic consultation and possibility for prenatal diagnosis.
P13.28  Novel phenotype associated to mutations in the SDHD 
gene resulting in complex II deficiency
C. B. Jackson1, D. Hahn2, S. Vella3, J. Nuoffer2, A. Häberli2, S. Gallati1, A. 
Schaller1;  
1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, 
Bern, Switzerland, 3Lindenhofspital, Bern, Switzerland.
Defects of the mitochondrial respiratory complex II (succinate dehy -
drogenase, SDH) are extremely rare. Of the four nuclear encoded pro -
teins composing complex II, only mutations in the 70kDa Flavoprotein 
(SDHA) and the recently identified complex II assembly factor (SD -
HAF1) have been found to be causative of a mitochondrial disorder. 
Mutations in the other three subunits (SDHB, SDHC, SDHD) and the 
second assembly factor (SDHAF2) have so far only been associated 
with hereditary paragangliomas and phaeochromocytomas.
Here we report the first ever described case of a mutated subunit other 
than SDHA and SDHAF1 causing a mitochondrial disorder with an iso -
lated complex II deficiency. The patient showed a progressive retarda -
tion after the age of six months evolving in a severe encephalopathy 
with choreo-athetotic movements, optic atrophy and intractable myo -
clonic seizures at the age of eight years. MRI and MRS were normal 
at the age of ten months. Complex II had a residual activity of 10% in 
muscle. Analysis by comparative 2D BN-PAGE following MALDI-TOF 
MS demonstrated the absence of SDHA. Further western blot analysis 
confirmed reduced expression of SDHA and SDHB in skeletal muscle. 
Molecular genetic analysis of SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF1 
and SDHAF2 revealed compound heterozygosity for two mutations lo -
cated in a transmembrane domain of SDHD.
We conclude that the mutations of the SDHD-gene result in abolition 
of its protein to integrate into the membrane impairing all other sub -
units to assemble into a functional SDH-complex and are subjected 
to degradation.
P13.29  mitochondrial  ND5 mutations mimicking brainstem tectal 
glioma
M. Rio1, A. Lebre1, P. de Lonlay1, V. Valayannopoulos1, I. Desguerre1, J. 
Dufier2, D. Grévent1, M. Zilbovicius1, C. Tréguier3, F. Brunelle1, C. de Barace4, 
J. Kaplan1, M. Espinasse-Berrod2, C. Sainte-Rose5, S. Puget5, A. Rötig1, A. 
Munnich1, N. Boddaert1;  
1Départements de Génétique, Radiologie pédiatrique et Maladies du 
développement et Inserm U781 et U797, paris, France, 2Département 
d’ophtalmologie, hôpital Necker, paris, France, 3Département de Radiologie 
pédiatrique, Rouen, France, 4Département de Pédiatrie, Saint Brieuc, France, 
5Département de Neurochirurgie, hôpital Necker, paris, France.
We report MRI-periaqueductal T2-hypersignal suggestive of tectal gli -
oma in three unrelated children with reduced vision and normal men -
tal development . Increased CSF lactate and optic atrophy in the first 
case suggested mitochondrial dysfunction. Muscle biopsy revealed Metabolic disorders Complex-I deficiency. A heteroplasmic mt-ND5 mutation was found 
(m.13513G>A). The second case presented with similar clinico-ra -
diological features, Complex-I deficiency and the same heteroplasmic 
mutation. The third case had visual disturbance without optic atrophy, 
normal muscle enzyme activities, but a heteroplasmic mt-ND5 muta -
tion (m.13514A>G). Even in absence of optic atrophy, mental retarda -
tion or multiorgan dysfunction, the combination of visual disturbance 
and periaqueductal T2-hypersignal should prompt the search for mito -
chondrial-DNA mutation.
P13.30  mit OcHONDRiAL mYOPA tHY OF cHiLDHOOD 
AssOciA tED WitH mit OcHONDRiAL DNA DEPLEtiON
D. Mehaney1, F. Hassan1, L. Selim2, S. Abdelhady2, E. Bertini3, F. Santorelli3, F. 
Fattori3, R. Carrozo3, D. Verrigni3;  
1Chemical Pathology department,Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt, 2Pediatrics 
department,Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt, 3Unit of Molecular Medicine, 
Children’s Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes (MDSs) form a group of au -
tosomal recessive disorders characterized by profoundly decreased 
mitochondrial DNA copy numbers in affected tissues. Three main clini -
cal presentations are known: myopathic, encephalomyopathic and he -
patocerebral. The first is associated with mutations in thymidine kinase 
2 (TK2) and p53-induced ribonucleotide reductase B subunit (RRM2B) 
genes.This study aimed at the description of the molecular diagnosis of 
1 Egyption pediatric patient presented to the Cairo University Pediatric 
Hospital (CUPH) with the clinical suspicion of mitochondrial myopa -
thy. Results of histochemical staining of the muscle biopsy specimens 
showed Cytochrome Oxidase negative fibers. Biochemical analysis of 
the muscle homogenate revealed absence of Complex I and Complex 
IV activity compared to age matched controls. Quantitative radioactive 
Southern blot analysis showed reduction of the mitochondrial/nuclear 
(mt/n) DNA ratio (≈30 % of aged-matched controls) . Sequencing of 
the TK2 gene revealed no sequence variation. Targeted molecular di -
agnosis based on the biochemical analysis of the respiratory chain 
enzymes makes the molecular evaluation of pediatric mitochondrial 
disorders much easier. Involvement of other nuclear genes rather than 
TK2 gene in the pathogenesis of the myopathic form of MDS should 
be considered.
P13.31  New mPV17 mutations in a child with mitochodrial 
hepatoencephalopathy. case report
P. Tsygankova1, E. Zakharova1, E. Nikolaeva2;  
1Research center for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Institute of pediatrics and child surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Mitochondrial hepatoencephalopathies comprise the group of mito -
chondrial cytopathies that affect children and young adults. Most of 
them characterized by severe reduction mtDNA copy number (mtD -
NA depletion).Several genes recently have been identified to cause 
mtDNA depletion syndrome (MDS): TK2, SUCLA2, DGUOK, POLG, 
RRM2B and MPV17. Here we report a case of 3 year old girl with 
hepatoencephalopathy and mutations in MPV17 gene. First symptoms 
manifested at 3 months of age by failure to thrive, vomiting and dry 
skin. At 7 months she developed ophthalmoplegia and episodes of 
subfebrile temperature. MRI at 12 months showed meningoencephalic 
lesions. Later she developed hepatopathy, myopathy, hypoglycemia 
and ketoacidosis. At the age of 2 years the girl was able to sit, stand 
with support, had speech and normal mental development. After the 
episode of hypoglycemic coma she developed severe myopathy and 
areflexia. Muscle biopsy showed red ragged fibers and increase num -
ber of paracrystalline mitochondria. 6 months later patient’s condition 
worse a lot. She presented with dysarthria, ataxia, polyneuropathy, 
cardiomyopathy and hyperextention of the knee joints. The patient 
was diagnosed with hepatic cirrosis at the age of 3 years. We made 
full sequence of genes POLG and MPV17 and revealed two novel het -
erozygous mutations in the MPV17 gene: c.185delT and c. 121C>T 
(R41W). To our knowledge about 30 patients with MPV17 gene muta -
tions have been described in the literature. We consider MPV17 gene 
analysis to be done for MDS patients, especially with slowly progres -
sive liver disease.P13.32  Application of mLPA technique in detection of single 
large-scale mitochondrial DNA deletions.
D. Piekutowska - Abramczuk1, A. Tanska1, P. Kowalski1, K. Tonska2, E. 
Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, S. Luczak1, M. Pelc1, J. Sykut-
Cegielska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1;  
1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Institute of 
Genetics and Biotechnology, Warsaw, Poland.
Single large-scale mitochondrial DNA deletions varying in size and lo -
cation, occur mainly as sporadic cases and are usually associated with 
known deletion syndromes (KSS, PS and PEO). Characteristic clini -
cal features include: progressive external ophtalmoplegia, generalized 
muscle weakness with difficulties in swallowing and articulation, short 
stature, deafness, conduct disturbances, delayed puberty, and endo -
crine dysfunction. The most common deletion responsible for almost 
30% of deletion syndromes, contains 4977 bp and is located between 
nucleotides m.8469 and m.13147.
The aim of the study was to examine the utility of the MLPA tech -
nique in the detection of mtDNA deletions. The SALSA MLPA KIT P125 
Mitochondria (MRC-Holland) contains 31 probes for different mtDNA 
sequences, and 1 mutation-specific probe for the frequent point sub -
stitution m.3243A>G.
Fifteen patients with mitochondrial cytopathies (including 5 KSS), 
and seven controls (5 healthy subjects, and 2 patients with known 
m.3243A>G mutation) were enrolled into our study.
Various heteroplasmic deletions spanning regions: m.9169_14174 
(ATP6, MTCOIII , MTND3 - MTND6 genes), and m.10922_15765 
(MTND4 - MTND6, CYB genes) were identified in two patients. The 
last one was confirmed by Southern hybridization. In other six children 
no hybridization of single probes to sequences of MTND2 , MTND4 , 
MTND6  and MTATP8 genes was found. The presence of m.3243A>G 
mutation was confirmed in both control cases, whereas remaining 
changes require verification by other methods.
MLPA technique seems to be a useful tool in identification of hetero -
plasmic large-scale mtDNA deletions.
The study was supported by CMHI grant No. S111/2009.
P13.33  the diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis over 11year: 
the Egyptian experience.
M. M. M. Ibrahim , A. Gouda, E. Fateen, Z. Youssef;  
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Mucopolysaccharidosis is a group of inherited metabolic disorders 
caused by deficiency of specific enzymes needed for the metabolism of 
mucopolysaccharides called glycosaminoglycans(GAGs) which leads 
to their accumulation in lysosomes of different tissues and organs.
Aim: Laboratory diagnosis of MPS among the clinically suspected 
cases& to find out the distribution and frequency of each type of MPS 
among our population.
Subjects and Method: The present study included 1041 patients re -
ferred during the last 11 years for the diagnosis or exclusion of MPS. 
Each patient was subjected to quantitative determination of urinary 
GAGS. Cases with high concentration were subjected to extraction 
of GAGS from urine followed by electrophoretic separation. Activity of 
the specific enzymes according to the abnormal pattern was assayed 
flourometricaly.
Results: Among 1041 patients screened for MPS, 540 had elevated 
GAGS in urine. Using the electrophoretic separation of GAGS, 319 
cases proved to have MPS. The specific enzyme assay for the 319 
positive cases revealed the following distribution: MPS type I n = 81, 
MPS type II n = 51, MPS type III n = 45, MPS type IV n = 65 and MPS 
type VI n = 74.
Conclusion: Quantitative determination of GAGS in urine is a simple 
procedure to select cases for its electrophoretic separation.However, 
enzymatic assay is mandatory to confirm the MPS types.The common -
est MPS disorders among the diagnosed cases in this study were MPS 
type I and type VI followed by type IV.
P13.34  mucopolysaccharidosis t ype i: Outcome of an Early 
Diagnosis and t reatment of two saudi siblings
N. A. Al-Sanna‘a , I. H. Bouholaigah;  
Dhahran Health Center, Dhahrab, Saudi Arabia.
Here, we present an eleven and five years old Saudi siblings with 
Mucopolysaccharidosis type I. They are homozygous for P533R mu -
tation. The first one was diagnosed at 14 months and the younger Metabolic disorders one at birth. The family history is significant for an older affected sis -
ter who died at 15 years of age of cardiopulmanory arrest. Enzyme 
replacement therapy (Aldurazyme 1mg/kg) was commenced on both 
of them in a weekly base at 3 ½ years and 9 months of age respec -
tively. There was significant decrease in glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) 
excretion within the first three month of treatment. Both of the siblings 
had achieved a normal growth velocity. Their cardiac involvement re -
mained stable with a normal cardiac function. The first sibling con -
tinued to have repeated episodes of otitis media. He has sustained 
hearing impairment, speech delay with learning difficulty. The younger 
sibling had no further ear infection following the treatment. Her speech 
and cognitive function were normal. Progressive skeletal deformities 
mainly of the spine were documented on the first child. On the hand, 
the younger child had a mild skeletal involvement with maintaining 
of normal joints mobility. This data emphasized the importance of an 
early diagnosis and treatment of such condition. A detail description of 
the clinical data and outcome of both siblings in addition to literature 
review will be presented.
P13.35  mucopolysaccharidosis type i in Belarus: clinical 
characterization of 7 patients
A. Kulpanovich , I. Naumchik;  
National Medical Center «Mother and child», Minsk, Belarus.
The assessment of wide variation of clinical presentation in patients 
with mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I), dynamic of the disease 
progression is directed toward the early diagnosis of this rare lyso -
somal storage disorder.
We present here the clinical observation of 6 cases with Hurler (MPS 
IH) and 1 patient with Hurler/Scheie (MPS IH/S) which were confirmed 
by laboratory biochemical methods.
The clinical study includes the analysis of 139 phenotype features: 
facial abnormalities, neurologic, ophthalmologic, auditory, cardiovas -
cular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal symptoms etc.
MPS IH. Median age at diagnosis in 3 males and 3 females with MPS 
IH was 1,87 years (range: 0,5-5 years), median age at onset of symp -
toms was 0,25 years (range: at birth - 1 year). Interval from symptom 
onset to disease diagnosis was 1,6 years (range: 0,5-4 years).
All patients (100%) presented severe mental retardation, “coarse” fa -
cial features, joint stiffness and contractures. Over 83,3% of our pa -
tients showed macrocephaly, umbilical hernia, corneal clouding, hepa -
tosplenomegaly and cardiac abnormalities.
MPS IH/S. 1 male with MPS IH/S had “coarse” facial features, normal 
intelligence, joint stiffness, contractures and claw hands, hepatomega -
ly and moderate mitral regurgitation. Median age at diagnosis was 3,8 
years, median age at onset of symptoms was 3 years old.Conclusions: 
Patients with MPS I are very heterogeneous group including three clin -
ically delineated types.The detailed analysis of clinical data provides 
the evidence-based approaches of the formation high-risk groups of 
patients both severe Hurler syndrome and mild types Hurler/Scheie 
and Scheie and contributes to the early clinical diagnostics develop -
ment.
P13.36  Identification of novel candidate genes for non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) using a bioinformatic approach
K. Banasik1, J. Justesen1, M. Hornbak1, N. T. Krarup1, C. Sandholt1, T. 
Jørgensen2,3, D. R. Witte4, T. S. Jensen5, S. Brunak5, T. Hansen1,6, O. 
Pedersen1,2;  
1Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark, 2Faculty of Health Science, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Research Centre for 
Prevention and Health, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Steno 
Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark, 5Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, 
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health Science, 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
Aim: This project applies a bioinformatic approach to identify potential 
new candidate genes for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
Methods: Text-mining in PubMed and OMIM for genes related to liver 
disease, visceral obesity, and waist-circumference and subsequent 
protein-protein interaction analysis were used to identify a small isolat -
ed interactome containing genes highly expressed in the liver. This in -
teractome included EHHADH, ECHS1, HADHA, HADHB,  and ACADL  
which are involved in the mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation. Twenty-
one tagSNPs (HapMap, CEU, R2>0.8) capture all common variation 
in the 5 genes. All tagSNPs were genotyped using KASPar® and analyzed for association with surrogate measures of NAFLD (obesity, 
waist, HOMA-IR, plasma glucose, and serum triglycerides) in 6,514 
Danes from the population-based Inter99 cohort.
Results: Four SNPs in EHHADH  showed an association with increased 
fasting serum insulin and HOMA-IR levels. The G-allele of rs11101721 
in ECHS1 associated with obesity (ORadd=1.33(1.06-1.68), padd=0.02). 
Quantitative trait analysis showed an increase in BMI with a per allele 
effect of 1.5 kg/m2 [0.7;2.3], padd=0.0005. This effect was only seen in 
individuals with impaired glucose regulation (IGR), and hence an inter -
action between rs11101721 and glucose-tolerance status with effect 
on BMI was shown (pint=0.002). The T-allele of rs892447 in HADHA/
HADHB  associated with increased fasting serum insulin (β=4%[8;0.3], 
padd=0.04) and HOMA-IR (β=5%[10;1.0], padd=0.02) among IGR indi -
viduals. Three SNPs in ACADL  associated with obesity measures.
Conclusion: By using a bioinformatic approach, variation in five can -
didate genes was found to be associated with several surrogate mea -
sures of NAFLD.
P13.37  comparative genotyping of obese and lean children in 
Belarus: preliminary results
E. A. Aksyonova1, T. N. Pokladok2, L. S. Viasova3, A. V. Solntsava3, A. V. 
Sukalo3, N. G. Danilenko2;  
1Institute of Genetics and Cytology Belarus National Academy of Sciences, 
Minsk, cytoplasmic@mail.ru, Belarus, 2Institute of Genetics and Cytology, 
Minsk, Belarus, 3Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus.
Last year started the project concerning the investigations of factor-pre -
dictors childhood obesity in belarussian population. 83 obese children 
from 3 groups: 0,5-8 years old (BMI 20-35 kg/m2), 9-12 years old (BMI 
24-35 kg/m2), 13-17 years old (BMI 25-41 kg/m2) and 83 lean control 
children (1-16 years old) were genotyped using PCR-RFLP analysis of 
polymorphic alleles of Gln223Arg (A/G) leptin receptor (LEPR) gene, 
-174G/C interleukin 6 (IL-6), -308 A/G tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 
-23/HphIA/T insulin (INS) gene. No significant differences in genotype 
and allele frequencies were found.
Integrated assessment of metabolic and neuroendocrine status of 
obese children as well as genotypes of their parents is under inves -
tigations.
Age group 
and BminIns -2HphI  (%) LEPR  (%) TNFα (%) IL- (%)
AA AtttAA(QQ) AG GG(RR) AA AG GG GG Gc cc
0-8 >20kg/m239 71,8 20,5 7,7 23,1 61,5 15,4 0,0 29,7 70,3 29,3 58,5 12,2
9-12 >24kg/m227 77,8 14,8 7,4 24,1 69,0 6,9 0,0 24,0 76,0 37,0 51,9 11,1
13-16 >25kg/m217 35,3 52,9 11,8 33,3 61,1 5,6 0,0 18,8 81,3 44,4 44,4 11,1
All obese 8366,3 25,3 8,4 25,6 64,0 10,5 0,025,6 74,4 34,9 53,5 11,6
girls >20kg/m234 70,6 17,6 11,8 28,6 65,7 5,7 0,0 29,0 71,0 31,4 60,0 8,6
boys >20kg/m249 62,5 31,3 6,3 24,0 66,0 10,0 0,0 25,5 74,5 42,0 46,0 12,0
controls 8361,9 34,5 3,6 19,1 62,9 18,0 0,028,6 71,4 34,5 47,1 18,4
P13.38  Resistin gene ( RETN ) promoter polymorphism and 
serum resistin level in patient with abdominal obesity
V. B. Timoshin1, O. D. Belyaeva2, O. A. Garanina2, Î. À. Bercovitch2, E. I. 
Baranova2, V. I. Larionova1;  
1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St. Petersburg State I.P. Pavlov Medical University, St. Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Resistin is a member of a class of cysteine-rich proteins and may pres -
ent an important link between obesity and insulin resistance. OBJEC -
TIVES: (1) to compare the frequency of RETN  polymorphism -180C>G 
(rs1862513) of the resistin gene in patients with abdominal obesity and 
in control group. (2) to study an effect of particular genotypes on serum 
resistin level and indicators of lipid metabolism. STUDY POPULATION: 
130 males and 328 females with abdominal obesity aged 30-55 years 
old. Control group included 110 children and adolescent. METHODS: 
Serum resistin was measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay kit, indicators of lipid metabolism were evaluated according to 
standard protocols. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. RE -
SULTS: In patients with abdominal obesity, the frequency of C-allele 
and G-allele was 0.71 and 0.29, respectively. There was no difference 
in both CC, CG, and GG genotype distribution and in rates of C- and 
G-alleles of resistin gene between the studied groups (0.7 and 0.3 
respectively, p>0.05). No difference was found in serum resistin level, 
in waist circle and in BMI between patients carrying different RETN  
genotypes. However LDL-C levels was higher in patients carrying Metabolic disorders 7CC-genotype compared to patients carrying CG-genotype (4,06±0,08 
mmol/l and 3,8±0,08 mmol/l respectively, (p<0,05)). CONCLUSIONS: 
We did not reveal any difference in serum resistin level in patients with 
abdominal obesity carrying different resistin gene genotypes. LDL-C 
level was higher in patients carrying CC-genotype.
P13.39  Identification of L194R, novel mutation in phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene (PAH) in iranian population
S. Zare Karizi1, M. Hosseini Mazinani2, G. Javadi1, S. Zeinali3;  
1Department of Biology, Islamic Azad University Science and Research 
Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Molecular Genetic, 
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research 
Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common disorder of amino acid me -
tabolism, is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in 
the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The incidence of PKU in 
Iran has been estimated at 1 in 3627 live births. To date, hundreds of 
mutations leading to PKU have been identified in the PAH gene. The 
spectrum of these mutations differs among different populations. In the 
present study, a novel mutation has been identified- during the muta -
tional screening of the PAH gene in 150 Iranian families- in the human 
phenylalanine hydroxylase gene of a patient with classical PKU. It is 
a single base transversion of T to G at the second base of codon 194 
in exon 6 of PAH gene. This mutation results in a Leu to Arg change in 
the catalytic domain of the protein.
P13.40  maternal phenylketonuria in Russia
A. S. Latypov , L. Zhuchenko, A. Khodunova, E. Proskurina;  
MONIIAG, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background
Charles Dent [1957] was first who drew attention to the maternal Phe -
nylketonuria as syndrome. He described three children with mental re -
tardation without PKU which were born from PKU women. There was 
described many different antenatal effects of high blood phenylalanine 
level on the foetus. But actually the knowledge about such children 
health and development is limited. We wanted to determine the prob -
lem of maternal PKU in Russia.
Method
Were interviewed the leaders of regional genetic service in Russia. 
The questionnaire was developed and included information about:
• Regional medical statistic data (for local Russian territory)
• Reproductive activities of registered PKU women
• Local healthcare regulation
Materials
In October 2009 we distributed 47 questionnaires, 17 questionnaires 
were retrieved till January 2010.
Screening period ranged from 40 till 12 years for different regions.
Total number of PKU reproductive age women has reached 206. There 
were registered 33 pregnancies, were born 22 children (only 13 wom -
en received strong service and metabolic control during pregnancy).
Discussion
The information we received shows the low (40%) level of dispensary 
coverage of women identified by screening and insufficient mainte -
nance of metabolic control (59%) within pregnancy. We need con -
tinued research for state and local recommendations developing for 
management PKU women.
P13.41  mutational analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in slovenian patients with phenylketonuria: a preliminary report
T. Hovnik1, U. Grošelj2, J. Kovač1, M. Žerjav Tanšek2, T. Battelino2;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolic Diseases, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Phenylkatonuria (PKU, OMIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive met -
abolic disorder arising from the deficiency of hepatic enzyme phenyl -
alanine hydroxylase (PAH). In the majority of all cases PKU is caused 
by missense mutations in the PAH gene, which maps to chromosome 
12, region 12q23.2.
The average birth incidence of PKU in Slovenia is approximately 1 in 
8000. Currently, Slovenian national register of PKU patients contains 
more than 130 patients. Most of them are planned to be included into our mutational analysis of PAH gene in Slovenia. Here we report a 
molecular characterization of the first 20 patients. The entire coding 
region of the PAH gene spanning 13 exons was PCR amplified and 
analysed with denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography 
(dHPLC). On all the identified PCR fragments we subsequently per -
formed an automated sequencing analysis.
The cumulative mutation detection rate in this group of patients was 
100%. We have identified 13 different disease-causing mutations, 
three of them novel: p.Arg157Ser, p.Leu15GlnfsX24 and c.845-2A>G. 
All patients were found to be compound heterozygotes. The single 
most frequent mutation in Slovenian PKU population is p.R408W in 
exon 12 (approximately 27.5%), which is in concordance with previous 
European and regional studies of PAH gene.
dHPLC proved to be a fast and sensitive method for mutational screen -
ing of the PAH gene. In combination with sequencing method, it rep -
resents a reliable and cost-effective diagnostic tool for detection and 
identification of unknown molecular defects in patients with PKU.
P13.42  the role of carrier enzyme systems in the clinical 
polymorphism of Phenylketonuria
N. Usurelu1, V. Tsourea2, L. Lysyi2, S. Garaeva3;  
1The National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, 
Moldova, Republic of, 2The State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. 
Testemitsanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 3The Institute of Physiology and 
Sanocreatology of Academy of Science, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn poly-enzymatic multi-system pa -
thology of the metabolism, its primary block being the Phenylalanine 
(Phe) hydroxylation that leads to severe mental retardation with clinical 
and biochemical polymorphism.
Methods:  30 PKU children were investigated for the level of free amino 
acids in blood and urine determined through liquid chromatography on 
amino acid analyzer Kovo AAA339, Czech.
The analysis of amino acids concentrations grouped according to the 
enzyme carrier systems (L:, A/ASC:,  X-
AG:, y+:, Pro:, β:, Gly:) deduced 
the decreasing of their function in blood and at the kidney level with 
increasing tendency only of the carrier system of Gly: and significant 
statistically ( p<0,001 ) increasing of the L: carrier system function in 
blood in PKU patients. As the result, in addition to the Phe disorders, 
the troubles of the Met and Trp metabolism, ornithinic cycle were ap -
preciated.
In metabolic disorders of PKU have been appreciated many important 
pathways as: the decreasing of excitatory of CNS amino acids level 
(Asp, p<0,01,  Glu p<0,001 , His p<0,001 ), increased urinary ecxretion 
of stabilizing CNS amino acids (Tau, Tyr, Trp p<0,01 ), also the ten -
dency of increasing of inhibitory amino acids quantity (Gly, GABA). At 
the consequences, the inhibitory processes in CNS are prevalenting, 
evoluating with slow mental development.
Conclusion:  The effectiveness of the PKU treatment increases if com -
bining the low Phe diet with a metabolical correction of enzyme carrier 
systems disfunctions.
P13.43   
Variable Number t andem Repeat marker for carrier Detection of 
Pku in central iran
K. Parivar1, M. Seifati2, J. Koochmeshgi3, M. Hashemi1;  
1Islamic Azad University Science and Research branch, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University Ashkezar branch, Yazd, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Research Institute for Life, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common error in the metabolism 
of amino acids and an important genetic disorder, which- if untreated- 
results in mental retardation. The incidence of PKU among the Cau -
casians in general is 1 in 10000. The highest prevalence for PKU has 
been reported from Iran and its neighboring countries (around 1 in 
4000). This is due to the high prevalence of consanguineous marriag -
es in this region. Due to the large number of PKU-causing mutations in 
the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, segregation analysis of the Vari -
able Number Tandem Repeat (VNTR) polymorphic marker associated 
with this gene is applied in carrier detection of PKU. Level of Informa -
tively of this marker in carrier detection of PKU in a population depends 
on the number of its alleles and distribution pattern of these alleles in 
the population. Considering the population heterogeneity in Iran, we 
investigated allelic frequencies of this marker in the province of Yazd 
(central Iran). 33 mutant and normal chromosomes from 9 unrelated Metabolic disorders PKU families were studied by PCR and gel electrophoresis. 5 VNTR al -
leles were identified. All of them were present in normal chromosomes 
but only 4 of them were present in mutant chromosomes. One of these 
4 alleles accounted for 78% of mutant chromosomes. Pattern of dis -
tribution of alleles in normal and mutant chromosomes were markedly 
different (20%, 20%, 33%, 13.5%, 13.5%). Polymorphic Information 
Content (PIC) of this marker was 63%, which indicates it as a suitable 
marker for carrier detection of PKU in the population under study.
P13.44  Tissue-specific activity of a new phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene enhancer
M. Stojiljkovic , B. Zukic, N. Tosic, T. Karan-Djurasevic, M. Radmilovic, V. 
Spasovski, S. Pavlovic;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is metabolic disorder caused by mutations in 
the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene ( PAH). Although PAH genotype 
is the main determinant of the severity of patient’s phenotype, incon -
sistencies were reported. To explain phenotypic differences between 
patients with the same genotype, we analyzed a potential transcription 
regulatory sequence from PAH gene intron 8 (I8).
Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) confirmed interaction of I8 with 
nuclear extracts from both, HepG2 and K562 cell lines. Competition 
and supershift EMSA experiments revealed that GATA-1 transcription 
factor binds to I8, while South-Western blot verified that the protein 
complex bound to I8 contains GATA-1 among other tissue-specific 
transcription factors.
Furthermore, we analysed activity of pBLCAT5_I8 construct in func -
tional in vitro  assays. Analysed construct showed 3.8 times higher re -
porter activity in comparison to basal activity of pBLCAT5 in HepG2 
cell line. Student’s t-test confirmed the statistical significance of this 
finding (p=0.04). In contrast, the same construct expressed 0.8 times 
lower activity in K562 cell line, demonstrating importance of charac -
teristic hepatoma cell line transcriptional factors for I8 activity as an 
enhancer.
We concluded that PAH intron 8 contains a new transcriptional regu -
latory element which binds GATA-1 transcription factor and acts as 
an enhancer specifically in the hepatoma cell lines. Revelation of this 
modulated PAH expression could have an impact on the better under -
standing of PKU phenotype complexity. In addition, it is the first time 
that an enhancer has been identified in the PAH intron. Thus, present -
ed data could unlock new area for analysis of PAH gene expression.
P13.45  the analysis of genotype and phenotype of Estonian 
phenylketonuria patients for finding out potentially BH4-
responsible forms
M. Uudelepp1, K. Joost2,3, I. Kerna1, N. Tõnisson1, K. Õunap1,4;  
1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, 
Tartu, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children‘s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Tartu, The Centre of Excellence for Translational 
Medicine, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
Introduction: The clinical phenotype of phenylketonuria (PKU) and 
potential tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) - responsiveness depends on re -
sidual phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) activity and can be predicted 
by patient’s genotype. The aim of the study was to analyze the geno -
type-phenotype data of present Estonian PKU patients, to find out the 
prevalence of potentially BH4-responsive PKU forms, and in order to 
suggest the inclusion of the BH4 loading test in the PKU diagnostic 
protocol in newborn screening program.
Material and Methods: The clinical data about 75 PKU patients in Es -
tonia is partly available since 1979 and fully available since 1993 when 
newborn screening for PKU was started. The genotypic data was 
available in 72 of them.
Results: Forty eight of patients (67%) were homozygous for R408W 
mutation in the PAH gene and had clinically classical PKU. Patients 
with R408W/IVS12nt1, R408W/R252W, R408W/P281L, R408W/
E221D222fsdelAG and R158Q/IVS12nt1 genotype showed classical 
PKU, except one moderate PKU patient with genotype R408W/R252W. 
Patients with R408W/I306V genotype had mild and with R408W/L48S, 
R408W/S349P genotype moderate PKU. Two classical PKU patients 
had R408W/R261Q genotype with many complaints in spite of dietary 
treatment. In one of them we have started BH4 treatment with good 
response.Conclusion: Seven (9.3%) previously diagnosed Estonian PKU pa -
tients with R408W/I306V, R408W/L48S and R408W/R261Q genotype 
from mild to classical PKU form, can be good candidates for the BH4 
treatment after positive results on loading test. Therefore, in the future 
it is also reasonable to perform a BH4 loading test in all PKU patients 
after the detection by newborn screening.
P13.46  completization of mutation spectrum among slovak PKU 
patients
E. Polák1, A. Ficek1, L. Kádaši1,2;  
1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular 
Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a heterogenous autosomal recessive inher -
ited disorder arising from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase 
(PAH), which catalyses the essential conversion of phenylalanine 
(Phe) to tyrosine (Tyr). In the majority of cases, PKU is caused by 
mutations in the PAH gene, and it presents with different phenotypes 
which are classified according to Phe tolerance. More than 500 mu -
tations have been described world-wide and the PAH enzyme has 
been fully characterized. The incidence of the disease in the Slovak 
population had been estimated to be 1:10 000 newborn. Thirty-two 
mutations have been identified so far, and these make up 88 % of all 
PKU alleles. The aim of this work was to carry out a complete muta -
tion analysis in a sample of 75 unrelated PKU patients with 1, or with 
no known mutation. HRM (High Resolution Melting) and MLPA (Multi -
plex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) methods were applied to 
screen all 13 exons of the  PAH gene. Amplicons with differing melting 
curves were subsequently sequenced to characterize the DNA vari -
ants. Sequencing revealed several different substitution mutations and 
polymorphisms. MLPA analysis was applied for the detection of large 
deletions and gene duplications, not previously found in the Slovak 
population. Additionally, the corresponding frequencies for all muta -
tions were estimated, and their classification according to phenotypic 
categories of PKU was identified. Detailed results will be presented in 
our poster.
P13.47  Detection of a novel mutation in the GAA gene in an 
iranian child suffering glycogen storage disease type ii
H. Galehdari1, G. Mohammadian2, M. Pedram3, B. Salehi3;  
1Genetics, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic center, welfare 
organization, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research center for thalassemia 
and hemoglobinopathies, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Glycogen storage disease II (GSDII or pompe disease, OMIM # 
232300), is a hereditary lysosomal disorder with an autosomal reces -
sive mode. Mutations in the GAA gene on the chromosome 17q25.2-
q25.3 are usually leading to the absent activity of the acid alpha-glu -
cosidase (acid maltase, GAA, OMIM *606800, EC 3.1.26.2), which 
results in impaired degradation and subsequent accumulation of 
glycogen within the lysosomes. The pompe disease is classified into 
the classical infantile-onset and the late-onset. The late-onset form is 
subdivided in the childhood, juvenile and adult-onset; thereby the clas -
sification is based on the age of onset, organ involvement, severity, 
and the rate of progression.
In the present report, the molecular analysis of the entire coding re -
gion and the flanking introns of the GAA gene were performed in an 
Iranian infant suspected with pompe disease regarding to the classical 
symptoms as hypotonia, cardiomegaly, muscle weakness and acid al -
pha-glucosidase deficiency. According to the human genome mutation 
database (www.hgmd.org), we found in the exon 15 of the GAA gene a 
novel single base insertion (insA) at codon 691 that leads to a prema -
ture stop codon at codon 736. To validate the molecular analysis from 
the infant, the parents were subjected to sequencing of GAA gene. 
Both the mother and the father were heterozygote for the same muta -
tion. The detected mutation in the GAA gene may cause the disease, 
which is in accordance with the measured deficient acid alpha-glucosi -
dase activity and other clinical symptoms in the proband.
P13.48  The effect of lactose intolerance and lactose intake on 
metabolic traits
L. Zgaga1, V. Vitart2, C. Hayward2, E. Theodoratou1, I. Kirac3, I. Rudan1;  
1University of Edinburgh, Public Health Sciences, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 
2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University Metabolic disorders Department of Surgery, Sestre milosrdnice University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia.
Lactose intolerance is a condition where one is unable to metabolise 
lactose and it is almost completely determined by a single nucleotide 
polymorphism (rs4988235) on the chromosome 2q21.3. The condition 
affects the majority of the adult human population and is associated 
with a range of health problems. We want to investigate the effects 
of lactose consumption on seventeen classical biochemical traits in 
individuals with different genotype at rs4988235 locus.
Individuals from three populations (Vis and Korcula, Croatia, and 
Orkney, Scotland; N=2935) were studied, for whom a large number 
of metabolic traits was available. They were typed at C/T-13910 locus 
(rs4988235), and lactase persistence phenotype was inferred from the 
genotype: TT and TC were considered lactose tolerant. Lactose intake 
was estimated from food frequency questionnaires. Linear regression 
was used to investigate the effects of lactose intake, lactose tolerance 
and their interaction on numerous metabolic traits.
In the islands of Korcula and Vis there were 42% and 50% of lactose 
tolerant individuals, respectively, but as much as 96% in Orkney. The 
strongest association was found in Vis between rs4988235 and tissue 
plasminogen activator, tPA, (p-value=0.0004), but association did not 
replicate in Korcula (tPA not measured) or Orkney (too few intolerant 
individuals). Significant association was found for lactose intake and 
HDL in Vis (p-value=0.031), and the association was replicated in Ko -
rcula (p-value=0.047).
Lactose tolerance, intake and their interaction seem to affect metabolic 
traits. Better understanding of this association might have implication 
in health recommendations.
P13.49  A new UKGtN (UK Genetic t esting Network) service for 
DHCR7  mutation analysis in smith Lemli Opitz syndrome
H. Sawyer1, M. Greenslade1, S. Burton-Jones1, J. Honeychurch1, M. Gable1, A. 
Brown2, M. Williams3;  
1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, 
Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Biochemical Genetics Unit, Clinical Chemistry 
Department, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United 
Kingdom, 3Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS 
Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Smith Lemli Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive metabolic dis -
order causing multiple congenital malformations; there is continuum 
of severity from intrauterine lethality to mild dysmorphism/mental im -
pairment. It results from deficiency of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, 
which catalyses the last step of endogenous cholesterol synthesis, 
due to pathogenic mutations in the DHCR7  gene.
The incidence of SLOS in the UK is estimated at 1/15,000 - 1/60,000 
births. The carrier frequency may be as high as 3% in Caucasian pop -
ulations. The incidence of SLOS is lower than expected from carrier 
rates from mutation studies. This discrepancy may be due to under-
diagnosis and lethality of severe cases in utero .
The local Biochemical Genetics service has offered SLOS testing by 
quantitation of 7-DHC since 1995, hence molecular genetic analysis 
of DHCR7  builds upon existing local expertise and clinical interest to 
provide a comprehensive service.
The drivers for developing the molecular service were: 1) biochemi -
cal carrier testing on fibroblasts requires cholesterol-free culture media 
which is challenging and not readily available, 2) clarification where 
the biochemical test result is equivocal or normal but the phenotype 
is strongly suggestive of SLOS, 3) testing of parents for retrospec -
tive diagnosis of a deceased child or fetus where no other material is 
available.
We present results from patients tested to date (8 proband referrals, 3 
sets of parents at the time of the abstract): 6/8 patients carry at least 
one copy of the common c.964-1G>C mutation, 9 other different muta -
tions have been detected in these patients, including one apparently 
novel nonsense variant.
P13.50  Studying of efficiency valproic acid treatment of 
patiens with spinal muscular atrophy respective of CYP2C  and 
CYP2C1  polymorphism
M. M. Danilova1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, V. G. Vaharlovsky1, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe autosomal recessive neu -
romuscular disorder. Clinical trails on SMA treatment with valproic acid (VA) preparations are in progress in our institute as well as in many 
other Centers. Detoxification of VA and its major metabolic products 
is known to be carried out by cytochrome P450 enzyme system, with 
special emphasis on cytochromes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. Analysis of 
the relevant genes polymorphisms (430C>T & 1075A>C for CYP2C9)  
(681G>A for  CYP2C19 ) and their association with efficiency of SMA 
treatment was a major goal of the present study. PCR-RFLP analysis 
was carried out in 35 SMA patients and in 210 individuals of the control 
group. The genotype and allele frequencies for both studied genes 
were also quite comparable in the patient and control groups. No cor -
relation of genotype and allele frequencies for CYP2C9  and CYP2C19  
polymorphisms respective of VA treatment efficacy were found.
The work was partly supported by Saint-Petersburg Personal grant for 
PhD 2009
P13.51  screening for metabolic diseases in 414 families with 
hereditary mental retardation in iran
M. Mohseni1, O. Blankenstein2, K. Kahrizi1, A. Tzschach3, H. Darvish1, G. 
Bahrami Monajemi1, S. Abedini1, S. Banihashemi1, S. Tadayon1, S. Arjangi1, H. 
Ropers4, A. Grüters5, H. Najmabadi1;  
1GRC, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pediatric Department, Charité 
University Hospital, Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Germany, 5Pediatric Department, Charité University Hospital, Germany.
Metabolic disorders account for about 3% of hereditary disorders as -
sociated with mental retardation in developed countries. Due to the 
progressive nature of metabolic disorders, MR is often not apparent 
early in life and becomes manifest only later.
In this study we asked the question what percentage of adults with 
hereditary mental retardation have inborn errors of metabolism and 
what their prevalence is in our population.
A total of 414 families were investigated by Tandem Mass Spectrom -
etry (MS). The blood was spotted on Guthrie cards for one proband 
from each family. The samples were analyzed at the Charité Hospital 
in Berlin. Our results revealed a total of 14 positive cases among our 
samples (3.4%). PKU was the most prevalent form (6 families), fol -
lowed by four cases of MCAD, three cases of CPT-1 and one patient 
with homocystinuria. The frequency of metabolic disorders in our pa -
tient cohort was 1.5% for PKU, 1% for MCAD, 0.7% for CPT-1 and 
0.25% for homocystinuria. Mutation screening is under way for the 
positive samples to help the families with carrier detection and prena -
tal diagnosis.
P13.52  t ype 2 diabetes risk alleles near ADcY5, cDKAL1 and 
HHEX-iDE are associated with reduced birth weight
E. A. Andersson1, K. Pilgaard2, C. Pisinger3, M. N. Harder1, N. Grarup1, K. 
Færch2, P. Poulsen4, D. R. Witte2, T. Jørgensen3,5, A. Vaag2, T. Hansen1,6, O. 
Pedersen1,5;  
1Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark, 2Steno Diabetes Center, 
Gentofte, Denmark, 3Research Centre for Prevention and Health, Glostrup, 
Denmark, 4Novo Nordisk, Bagsværd, Denmark, 5Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
Aims: The fetal insulin hypothesis suggests that variation in the fe -
tal genotype influencing insulin secretion or action may predispose to 
both low birth weight and type 2 diabetes (T2D). We examined asso -
ciations between 25 confirmed T2D risk variants and birth weight in a) 
individuals from the Danish Inter99 population and b) meta-analyses 
including own data and reported studies.
Methods: Midwife records from the Danish State Archives provided 
information on mother’s age, parity, as well as birth weight, length at 
birth and prematurity of the newborn in 4,740 individuals from the pop -
ulation-based Inter99 study. Twenty five risk alleles showing genome-
wide associations with T2D were genotyped.
Results: Birth weight was inversely associated with the ADCY5 -
rs11708067 T2D risk allele (β=-33g [-55;-10], P=0.004) and with the 
CDKAL1 -rs7756992 T2D risk allele (β=-22g [-43;-1, P=0.04). The asso -
ciation for the latter locus was confirmed in a meta-analysis (n=24,885) 
(β=-20g [-29;-11], P=5*10-6). The HHEX-IDE  variant showed no signifi -
cant association among Danes ( P=0.09); however, in a meta-analysis 
(n=25,164) the T2D risk allele was associated with lower birth weight 
(β=-16g [-24;-8], P=8*10-5). On average, individuals with high genetic 
risk (>=25 T2D risk alleles) weighed marginally less at birth than those Metabolic disorders 0with low genetic risk (<25 T2D risk alleles) (β=-33g [-66;0], P=0.05)
Conclusions: We report a novel association between the fetal ADCY5  
T2D risk allele and lower birth weight. In meta-analyses we confirm 
associations between lower birth weight and the HHEX-IDE  and CD-
KAL1  T2D risk alleles. No strong general effect on birth weight can be 
ascribed the 25 T2D risk alleles.
P13.53  Influence of Wfs1 gene deletion and chronic valproate 
treatment on glucose metabolism and ER stress.
K. Douroudis1,2, A. Terasmaa1,2, M. Eltermaa2, M. Ivask2, J. Oflijan2, E. Vasar1,2, 
S. Kõks1,2;  
1Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre of 
Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
The WFS1 gene encodes a protein expressed in the endoplasmatic 
reticulum (ER) membrane and its deficiency causes ER stress. ER 
stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetes, contrib -
uting to β-cell loss and insulin resistance. The XBP1 molecule modu -
lates the ER stress response and it is critical for the regulation of Wfs1. 
GLUT2 protein enables passive glucose movement across cell mem -
branes with a suggestive role in the control of insulin secretion. The 
aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of Wfs1 gene deficiency 
and chronic valproate (cVLA) treatment on hyperglycemia in mice. The 
gene expression of ER stress and insulin pathway molecules in liver 
tissue has been analyzed. The glucose tolerance test revealed that the 
blood glucose levels on 30 minutes after glucose administration were 
significantly higher (p=0.0049) in the Wfs1+/+ cVLA treatment group 
compared to Wfs1+/+ saline group. The expression of the XBP1 splice 
variant was significantly higher (p=0.041) in the Wfs1+/+ saline group 
when compared to the Wfs1+/+ cVLA group. In addition, a significant 
higher expression (p=0.025) of the GLUT2 was observed in the cVLA 
Wfs1-/- group when compared to the saline Wfs1-/- group. No significant 
differences in expression of the Wfs1 gene between the saline and 
the cVLA groups were observed. In conclusion, the chronic valproate 
administration increases glucose levels and induces the expression 
of GLUT2 in Wfs1-/- mice without improvement of glucose tolerance. 
The effect of VLA in insulin signal transduction pathway needs further 
investigation.
P13.54  Frequent A tP7B gene mutations in Russian Wilson 
disease patients
M. E. Metzger , O. A. Schagina;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The ATP7B gene mapped to 13q14.3-q21.1 encodes copper-trans -
porting P-type ATPase. Mutations in this gene cause Wilson disease 
(Hepatolenticular degeneration), - an autosomal recessive disorder of 
cooper metabolism.
The aim of our investigation was to determine the most frequent muta -
tions in the ATP7B gene among Russian patients. We researched a 
sample consisted of 186 Russian unrelated patients of our laboratory 
with clinical characteristics of Wilson disease. This sample was previ -
ously researched for c.C3207A. Then we created a system for 7 muta -
tions (deletions and insertions) search by AFLP method and tested the 
sample by this system. The results of the investigation are represented 
in a table below.
Genotype and allele frequencies of the mutations in ATP7B gene in Russian Wilson disease 
patients
Mutationc. C 
3207 
Ac. 
2532 
del 
Ac. 
3402 
del 
Cc. 
2304 
ins 
Cc. 
1770 
ins Tc. 1340_
1343 del 4c. 
3649_3654 
del 6c. 3627_
3630 del 4
Number of 
heterozygotes33 0 7 9 3 0 1 0
Number of 
homozygotes27 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Allele frequency 
(%)23,4 0 1,9 2,4 0,8 0 0,3 0
P13.55  sequencing analysis of ATP7B  gene in patients with 
Wilson disease in croatia
H. Ljubić , L. Juričić, A. Acman, D. Caban, M. Kalauz, B. Vucelić, J. Sertić;  
University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of cop -
per metabolism resulting from the absence or dysfunction of copper transporting P-type ATPase ( ATP7B ). More than 400 mutations of the 
ATP7B  gene have been identified to date. Here we report preliminary 
results of sequencing analysis of the ATP7B gene. We have analyzed 
exons 5, 8, 13 and 14 of 19 clinically diagnosed WD patients from 
Croatia, already screened for the most common His1069Gln mutation. 
It accounts for 35-45% of Wilson disease alleles in a mixed European 
population. Genomic DNA was used to amplify 21 exons of the AT-
P7B gene. Sequencing analysis was performed by PCR and capillary 
electrophoresis with BigDye Terminator v3.1 kit on AB Genetic ana -
lyzer 3130xl. Out of the total number of 19 tested patients with WD, 
molecular analysis has confirmed the clinical diagnosis in 6 patients 
(31.6%) so far. Two patients are homozygous for mutations Arg616Gln 
and Ala1003Thr, respectively. Three patients are compound hetero -
zygotes for mutations Ala1003Thr and His1069Gln and one patient 
is compound heterozygote for mutations H1069Q and 2304delC. We 
also found deleterious mutation in heterozygous state in three more 
patients: 2304dupC (two patients) and Gly591Asp. Sequencing analy -
sis of the ATP7B  gene is the best method to establish the frequency of 
mutations in specific population so the screening test panel for most 
common mutations can be developed for this population.
P13.56  POPULA tiON stUDY OF WiLsON DisEAsE iN 
BELARUS: INCIDENCE AND CARRIER FREQUENCY
S. Dubovick , N. Gusina;  
National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, 
Belarus.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by 
impairment of copper transport. More than 300 mutations in ATP7B 
gene causing WD have been identified. The incidence of WD in many 
populations is thought to be 1:40000 and a carrier frequency is 1:90. 
The molecular bases of WD in Byelorussian patients have been stud -
ied. The frequency of H1069G in Byelorussian WD patients was found 
to be 56%. The other identified mutant alleles were 2299insC (3,7 %), 
3400delC (2,4 %) and I1102T (2,4 %). The estimated incidence of WD 
in Belarus was found to be 1:17000 according to the correlation of 
the number of WD patients revealed from 2000 to 2008 with the birth 
rate. This value can be underestimated. We used mutation analysis 
approach to determine WD frequency in Byelorussian population. The 
screening for the H1069G mutation has been done in 560 newborns. 
The total number of alleles was 1120 and 6 WD alleles was revealed. 
This data corresponds to allelic frequency 0,53% (95% confidence in -
terval (CI) 0,25% - 1,16%) and carrier frequency 1 in 93. Considering 
that H1069G mutation accounts for 56% of all WD alleles we obtained 
the total WD alleles frequency and carrier frequency as 0,95% (95% 
CI 0,55% - 1,75%) and 1 in 52 respectively. Assuming Hardy-Wein -
berg equilibrium, these data could be translated into a WD incidence of 
1:11000 live births. The study demonstrates the importance of mutation 
analysis for estimation the true incidence of the disease in population.
P13.57  increased expression of mt2A gene in growth delayed 
and zinc deficient children
C. Coker1, A. Toylu2,3, A. R. Sisman1, B. Deveci1, N. Atabey2, M. Coker4;  
1Dokuz Eylul University, Department of Biochemistry, Izmir, Turkey, 2Dokuz 
Eylul University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 
3Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Department of 
Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Background: Zinc has an essential role for the activity of many en -
zymes involved in different metabolic pathways. Zinc deficiency is 
resulting with diseases of growth, maturity, immunity and nervous sys -
tem. However prediction of zinc deficiency is still very difficult, due to 
absence of a reliable marker. Since, the binding of zinc with some pro -
teins such as Metallothionein 2A (MT2A) are crucial for zinc homeo -
stasis, we hypothesed that zinc-binding storage protein MT2A mRNA 
expression level may be a biomarker of zinc status for screening.
Aim: Among normal and growth delayed children, presence of a rela -
tionship between serum zinc concentration and MT2A gene expres -
sion level was questioned.
Methods: Zinc measurements of serum and hemolysate were per -
formed with atomic absorption spectrometry. MT2A gene expression 
at mRNA level was detected by quantitative PCR in cells of peripheral 
blood with Taqman probe. G6PDH was used as a reference. Statistical 
analysis was made by using Mann-Whitney test.
Results: Serum zinc concentrations were significantly reduced in Metabolic disorders 1growth delayed children compared to healthy children. Expression of 
MT2A gene in growth delayed children was displayed a considerable 
induction. Within growth delayed children group, with the increase of 
serum zinc concentrations expression of MT2A has closed to the level 
of healthy children but, in the presence of lower levels of zinc, expres -
sion of MT2A has elevated significantly over control.
Conclusion: Among growth delayed children presence of the low levels 
of zinc was identified and, elevated expression of MT2A gene may im -
ply an abnormal regulation of zinc homeostasis of circulating cells.
J13.1  A novel tYmP c.1001c>t mutation in a patient with mNGiE
S. A. Kurbatov1, V. P. Fedotov1, L. A. Elkanova2, E. Y. Zakharova2, P. G. 
Tsygankova2;  
1Genetic counseling, Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian 
Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome (MN -
GIE) (OMIM #603041) is a rare autosomal recessive progressive 
multisystem disorder. MNGIE is caused by mutations in the gene en -
coding thymidine phosphorylase (TYMP), locus 22q13. Mitochondrial 
dysfunction represents multiple deletions and depletion of mtDNA and 
ragged-red fibers on a muscle biopsy.
We describe a case of 37 year’s old, subgroup Armenian (Hamshen) 
woman born from healthy cousins. She had been complained about 
hearing loss and myasthenic syndrome for the past five years. The 
disease manifested in childhood with mild gastrointestinal symptoms. 
Today she is presented with cachexia (height - 161 cm, weight - 34 
kg), mild gastrointestinal dismortility, ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, sen -
sorineural deafness, symmetric mild low limbs weakness, decrease 
tendon reflexes, distal sensory loss, primary amenorrhea.
Electromyographical assay revealed peripheral demyelinating poly -
neuropathy with axonal loss. Needle EMG showed denervation 
changes without myodistrophic pattern. The decrement was detected 
on rapid repetitive nerve stimulation. MRI showed severe diffuse leu -
koencephalopathy.
Sequence analysis of coding regions of TYMP gene revealed mis -
sense homozygous mutation in the position c.1001C>T. This transition 
cause to substitution leucine for arginin in the 334 a.a. position of the 
polypeptide chain. To our knowledge this mutation wasn’t described 
earlier.
Myasthenic syndrome in our patient seems to be a unique clinical fea -
ture that isn’t usually included in the MNGIE phenotype.
P14 therapy for genetic disorders
P14.01  Breast cancer susceptibility Genes Polymorphisms and 
pathologic effects in high risk iranian families
F. Keshavarzi1, S. Zeinali2;  
1Islamic Azad University of Sanadaj, Iran, sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Medical Genetics Laboratory of Dr.Zeinali , Kawsar Human Genetics Research 
Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Nearly 15% of all breast cancer cases are associated with a strong ge -
netic predisposition and BRCA1 and BRCA2 are responsible for 30% 
of this genetic predisposition. More than 3000 (1600 in BRCA1 and 
1800 in BRCA2) different sequence variants have been reported in 
these genes that many of them are disease-associated, but also in -
cluded are unclassified variants and polymorphisms. We investigated 
mutations in BRCA genes in many high risk Iranian families and deter -
mined the genetic polymorphisms in these genes. A total of 63 breast 
cancer patients and 50 controls were selected from subjects who had 
come to Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center for other purpose. 
All samples were fully sequenced for BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. 
Many missense substitutions in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were iden -
tified. The missense substitution Gly1738Glu of BRCA1 is pathogenic. 
Here two novel mutations are reported (Gly1140Ser in BRCA1 and 
Glu1391Gly in BRCA2). The missense substitutions Glu1038Pro, 
Gly1140Ser were found in large series of breast and ovarian cancer 
patients aged 30-35 years and 20% < of matched controls. Based on 
our preliminary results some haplotypes may have a pathogenic role 
in breast cancer development ,the haplotypes at the BRCA1 locus 
defined by alleles Leu871Pro, GLu1038Gly, Ser1613Gly, Gly1140Ser 
was found in 10 affected families. In addition, haplotypes of BRCA1 defined by single alleles Glu1038Gly, Ser1613Gly, Gly1140ser and 
simultaneously Glu1038Gly, Gly1140Ser are associated with low-pen -
etrance predisposition to breast or ovarian cancer. Further studies are 
required to confirm the hypothesis that genetic polymorphisms are as -
sociated with breast cancer.
P14.02  Expression of human factor iX in Drosophila s2 cell
J. Vatandoost1,2, A. Zomorodipour2, F. Ataei2;  
1Department of Genetic, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetics Engineering and Biotechnology of Iran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Gamma-carboxylation is essential for biological activities of certain 
proteins, including the human coagulation factor IX (hFIX), which is a 
plasma glycoprotein participating in the intrinsic pathway of blood co -
agulation. A pro-peptide sequence in the hFIX precursor is recognized 
by a γ-glutamyl carboxylase, to direct the carboxylation of 12 glutamic 
acid residues in the N-terminal portion of the molecule. This enzyme 
has been characterized in two invertebrates; Drosophila melanogaster  
and cone snails in addition to vertebrates. No γ-carboxylase substrate 
of Drosophila origin has been identified so far. However, pro-peptide of 
the human FIX and prothrombin are recognizable more efficiently by 
the Drosophila enzyme than by that of mammalians. The yield of car -
boxylated product for the Drosophila  enzyme is about five times more 
than that obtained with the human enzyme.
The Drosophila  melanogaster  Schnider (S2) cells were transiently 
transfected with a plasmid encoding the hFIX  gene under the Dro -
sophila metallothionein promoter (pMT). Based on ELISA the hFIX 
antigen was detectable in the cultured media taken from the trans -
fected S2 cells, indicating for the potential of the insect cells for the 
hFIX expression. In order to evaluate the biological activity of the hFIX 
expressed by S2 cells in comparison with the hFIX expressed by mam -
malian cells, in parallel a CMV-regulated hFIX expressing plasmid was 
also transiently transfected into CHO cells. The two recombinant hFIX 
(rhFIX) expressed by S2 and CHO cells will be examined, for their γ-
carboxylation and for their coagulation activities, subsequently.
P14.03  Favorable evolution after early rehabilitation in a case with cri du chat syndrome
M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2;  
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania.
Cri-du-chat syndrome is a relatively rare chromosomal disorder with an 
estimated incidence of 1 in 20000 to 50000 newborns, resulting from 
loss of varying lengths of the short arm of chromosome 5. We pres -
ent a case report on the rehabilitation treatment of a patient with this 
condition, aged 18 months, who received multidisciplinary treatment 
and precocious stimulation. The baby was born from healthy, young 
parents, with a birth weight of 2250 g. At examination this patient pre -
sented cranio-facial dysmorphy, transverse flexion creases, important 
growth and psychomotor retardation, axial hypotonia and hypotrophy, 
bilateral varus equine, positive Babinski sign, lively deep tendinous 
reflexes, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, unclosed sagittal and lambdoid 
sutures. The child had a happy aspect, was able to sit and to roll, but 
was not able to stay in the quadruped position. Rehabilitation program 
started at 15 months and consisted of hydrokinetotherapy in the pool 
for 15 minutes each day, physiotherapy for global tonisation, re-educa -
tion of motor control stages, tonisation of paravertebral, quadriceps, 
gluteal muscles, paraffin therapy for the legs, cervico-dorso-lumbar 
and leg tonic massage. Occupational therapy, coordination exercises 
and speech therapy were also performed. The evolution of the child 
was very good, he was able to stand with assistance after the first 
rehabilitation period of three weeks. Improvements in management of 
patients with this disorder by a multidisciplinary team, with the applica -
tion of early rehabilitation programs increase psychomotor develop -
ment, improve autonomy and finally lead to a better social adaptation.
P14.04  moxonidine effectively alleviates excessive 
noradrenaline release and cold-induced sweating in two siblings with crisponi syndrome
J. Herholz1, L. Crisponi2, B. N. Mallick3, F. Rutsch1;  
1University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica 
e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale della Ricerche c/o Citadella 
Universitaria di Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, 3School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Therapy for genetic disorders 2Nehru University, New Delhi, India.
Crisponi syndrome is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder involving 
contractions of the facial muscles, severe hyperthermia, major feeding 
and respiratory difficulties, physical dysmorphisms and often sudden 
death in early childhood. Surviving patients can develop cold-induced 
sweating (CIS), which has also been reported in Cold-Induced Sweat -
ing Syndrome (CISS) type 1 and type 2. CIS has not been extensively 
characterized in patients with Crisponi syndrome. Our aim was to ef -
fectively alleviate this symptom and to shed light on the underlying 
pathogenic mechanism.
We present two Turkish siblings diagnosed to suffer from Crisponi syn -
drome, who developed CIS during adolescence. Both patients were 
proven to be homozygous carriers of the c.708-709delCCinsT (Pro -
238ArgfsX6) mutation in CRLF1 . At 19°C ambient temperature, the 
probands showed excessive plasma noradrenaline release and pro -
fuse sweating of the upper part of the body. Treatment with clonidine 
was effective in reducing sweating but was associated with excessive 
fatigue. Moxonidine, however, ameliorated CIS and catecholamine 
release with negligible side effects. We propose that in Crisponi syn -
drome, CIS is triggered by excess noradrenaline acting centrally on 
α1-adrenoceptors and can be successfully treated with moxonidine by 
reducing noradrenaline release.
P14.05  Aerobics and airway clearance techniques in children 
with cystic fibrosis
B. Almajan-Guta1,2, V. Almajan-Guta3, M. Oravitan4, C. Avram4;  
1University Politehnica Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic 
Fibrosis Center, Timisoara, Romania, 3Special Care Center „Speranta“, 
Timisoara, Romania, 4West University, Timisoara, Romania.
Background: Physiotherapy management is a key element of care for 
people with cystic fibrosis. Airway clearance techniques, physical ex -
ercise and inhalation therapy are part of treatment and are associated 
with improved long-term outcomes.
Hypothesis: aerobic fitness is an independent predictor of survival and 
those with better physical fitness have better quality of life.
Method and materials: 20 children with CF from Romanian National 
Cystic Fibrosis Center, Timisoara, with age between 10-14 years old 
all randomized in 2 groups: control (clearance techniques: ACTB, PD, 
oscillating PEP ) and study (same clearance techniques and aerobic 
training-3 days per week, 30 minutes per session; heart rate 75% of 
maximum heart rate).
Objective: was to evaluate the efficiency of aerobic exercises com -
bined with airway clearance techniques.
The results showed an improvement in all measured values of qual -
ity of well-being (the quality of sleep, respiratory manifestations, re -
spiratory infections, number of hospitalization, fatigue during normal 
activities or effort, and the participation at school activities) at the study 
group compare to the control group.
Conclusions: Aerobic training promoted mucociliary clearance, im -
proved maximum exercise capacity, strength and quality of life. Exer -
cise should be considered and encouraged as part of overall physio -
therapy management in CF. From time of diagnosis physical activity 
should be incorporated into the daily routine.
P14.06  Enzyme replacement therapy for mPs Vi --- Experience 
in taiwan
S. P. Lin1,2, H. Y. Lin1,2,3, D. S. Lin1,2, C. K. Chuang1, F. J. Tsai4, S. J. Lin5, Y. Y. 
Ke6, Y. H. Chien7, N. C. Lee7, W. L. Hwu7;  
1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Early Childhood 
Care and Education, Mackay Medicine, Nursing and Management College, 
Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, 4China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, 5National 
Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, 6Changhua Christian Hospital, 
Changhua, Taiwan, 7National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
We evaluated the safety and efficacy of weekly treatment with recom -
binant human arylsulfatase B (rhASB) in Taiwanese MPS VI patients. 
Eight patients (3 male, 5 female; age 1.5-21 years) receiving weekly iv 
infusions of rhASB 1.0 mg/kg for at least 12 months were enrolled. We 
assessed biochemical and clinical responses every 3 months. 
Results: After 24 months of treatment, 4 patients experienced a 259.9-
m (41.8 %) improvement in 12-minute walk, a 49.6-m (16.6%) improve -
ment at 6-minute time point of the walk, and a 50-stair (36.8%) gain in 
3-minute stair climb comparing with the baselines. The time require -ment of coin picking decreased 20 seconds (46.8%). Joint Pain and 
Stiffness Questionnaire scores improved by 0.66 points (38.9%) in 4 
patients. Improvement in pulmonary function (FVC and FEV1) was ob -
served in 4 patients. All 8 patients achieved a mean decrease of 75.4% 
in urinary GAG excretion. Episodes of hypersensitivity happened on 3 
patients, but the reactions resolved in 5 months after premedication,. 
Conclusions: rhASB improved endurance, mobility, joint function, re -
duced GAG, and had an acceptable safety profile for most Taiwanese 
patients with MPS VI. ERT for MPS VI has been endorsed by the Na -
tional Health Insurance program for the treatment of MPS VI in Taiwan 
since February, 2006. The patients in our study were not selected on 
the basis of disease severity, this point is in contrast with the previous 
clinical trials. Long term observation is needed to determine whether 
ERT for all MPS VI actually improves physical endurance and QoL.
P14.07  insulin resistance in Romanian type 1 Gaucher patients
C. Coldea1, A. Zimmermann2, R. A. Popp3, A. P. Trifa3, C. Al-Khzouz1, A. 
Craciun4, P. Grigorescu-Sido1;  
1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania, 2First Medical Clinic, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic 
Diseases, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, 3Department 
of Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 
4Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania.
This study investigates insulin resistance (IR) measured by HOMA pa -
rameters and the impact of Pro12Ala polymorphism of the transcripi -
tional factor PPAR-gamma, in Romanian Gaucher patients. Thirty-six 
patients, 30 receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), with Imiglu -
cerase, for 3.96+/-1.23 years (group A) and 6 untreated (group B) were 
analyzed. PPAR-gamma polymorphism was identified by PCR-RFLP 
method. Twenty-six patients presented a Pro/Pro genotype (group A1) 
and 4 patients were Ala carriers (group A2).
Fasting glucose and insulin levels were determined by enzymatic 
methods. HOMA indices - HOMA-IR, QUICKI, IRI and HOMA-B - were 
calculated, using standard formulas.
Prevalence of impaired fasting glucose and insulin resistance among 
treated patients was 10% and 6.6%, respectively. Untreated patients 
did not show dysglycemia.
Results are summarized in table I.
In treated patients insulin resistance was directly correlated with ERT 
duration (significantly) and severity score index (moderately). Weight, 
chitotriosidase, global and pre-ERT duration of the disease had no in -
fluence on IR.
In untreated patients, insulin resistance correlated directly, moderately 
with chitotriosidase. Fasting insulin correlated significantly with weight, 
but inversely with fasting glucose, demonstrating a normal insulin sen -
sitivity.
Conclusion: Treated Gaucher patients showed higher insulin resis -
tance and a relative hyperinsulinemia over untreated patients, mildly 
correlated with severity of the disease. When treated, presence of Ala, 
in position 12 of the PPAR-gamma structure, improves significantly 
insulin sensitivity.
Table I. Insulin resistance parameters in Romanian type 1 Gaucher patients
NoParameterAll patients: A+B (n=36) Treated patients: A (n=30)
Group A  
Treated  
Patients  
(n=30)Group B  
Untreated  
Patients  
(n=6)pSubgroup A1  
(n=26)Subgroup A2  
(n=4)p
1Glucose  
(mg/dl)79.96+/-16.65 81.00+/-16.88 0.894 81.65+/-16.85 69.00+/-11.34 0.108
2Insulinemia  
(microUI/ml)7.92+/-3.88 5.25+/-2.30 0.043 8.54+/-3.80 3.93+/-1.11 0.0001
3HOMA-IR 1.59+/-0.89 0.97+/-0.23 0.002 1.73+/-0.87 0.66+/-0.23 0.00005
4QUICKI 0.37+/-0.04 0.38+/-0.01 0.131 0.36+/-0.03 0.41+/-0.02 0.016
5IRI 2.73+/-0.28 2.58+/-0.12 0.056 2.77+/-0.27 2.41+/-0.15 0.006
6HOMA-B 213.1+/-221.2 136.7+/-119.7 0.249 220.6+/-234.9 164.0+/-97.0 0.417Therapy for genetic disorders P14.08  Clinical Observation: Alendronate Improves Bone 
Mineral Density and Quality of Life in a Boy with Gaucher 
Disease
N. V. Buchinskaya , O. V. Kalashnikova, M. F. Dubko, V. G. Chasnyk;  
State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Splenomegaly, Gaucher cells in the spleen and bone marrow are the 
hallmarks of all 3 clinical forms of the Gaucher Disease (GD). Almost 
all patients also have skeletal involvement with episodes of bone pain, 
focal abnormalities on plain x-ray (“Erlenmeyer flask”, lytic lesions) 
and generalized osteopenia, etiology of which is not clear. Enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) results in rapid decrease of glucosylce -
ramide storage, but skeletal involvement seems to be totally resistant 
to ERT or improves too slowly. Several reports on additional to ERT 
bisphosphonate treatment have been published recently (Wenstrup et 
al., 2004; Cox, 2008).
For 2 years we observe a boy who is now 17 years old with saposin 
form of GD, diagnosed by typical chititriosidase, glucocerebrosidase 
activity and bone marrow infiltration. At the age of 15 he had 66% bone 
mineral density deficiency (BMDD), pain crisis and vertebra fractures, 
which were the arguments to administer Alendronate with calcium and 
vitamin D supplementation. ERT or substrate reduction therapy were 
never provided. After 6 months of Alendronate treatment BMDD was 
45% and after 1 year BMDD was 23%. During the course of treat -
ment the pains were tapered and stopped, we didn’t find any vertebra 
fractures. There were no side effects. The course of treatment with 
Alendronate, calcium and vitamin D without ERT also significantly im -
proved the quality of life (QOL): the boy has higher everyday activity 
and makes progress in schooling.
We consider that Alendronate treatment makes BMDD lower and im -
proves QOL even without ERT in children with GD.
P14.09  studying the secretory Expression of the Human 
coagulation Factor iX Using Gaussia princeps  Luciferase and 
Human coagulation Factor Vii signal Peptides in cultured 
mammalian cells
M. Ghorbani , A. Zomorodipour, F. Ataei;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Use of suitable signal peptide (SP) is crucial for both expression level 
and secretion efficiency of a protein in heterologous expression sys -
tems. Using SPs from Gaussia princeps  Luciferase (LUC) and Human 
Coagulation Factor VII (FVII), we have studied the secretory expres -
sion of the human coagulation Factor IX (hFIX) in comparison with the 
native hFIX-SP. Considering the key role of host-preferential codon 
usage, RNA secondary structure and SP processing efficiency for the 
synthesis/secretion efficiency; we reconstructed the coding fragments 
of LUC and FVII SPs and used them at the N-terminal the hFIX. The 
chimeric fragments were examined for the secretion of the hFIX in 
comparison with native hFIX-SP transiently in CHO-K1 and HEK-293T 
cultured cell lines, in a CMV-regulated vectors. At various post-trans -
fection times, presence of hFIX in the cultured media and cell extract 
were evaluated by coagulation test and ELISA. In the case of the LUC-
SP in both cell lines expression of the hFIX was dramatically reduced 
(<1 ng/ml). In the case of the hFVII-SP containing construct, in spite of 
its low expression level a relatively lower intracellular FIX was docu -
mented, which indicate a relatively higher secretion efficiency of the 
hFVII-SP in comparison with the hFIX-SP. The native hFIX-SP con -
struct appeared to be the most efficient hFIX expressing one, among 
the examined constructs. However, considerable intracellular accumu -
lation of the hFIX for the hFIX-SP, suggest for a need for the optimiza -
tion of the hFIX native SP to achieve an efficient secretion of the hFIX 
in such heterologous mammalian hosts.
P14.10  Reading-through premature termination codons 
identified in the BCKDHB gene of classical maple syrup Urine 
Disease patients
P. Fernández-Guerra1, R. Sanchez Alcudia1, B. Merinero1, M. Vilaseca2, B. 
Pérez1, L. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, P. Rodríguez-Pombo1;  
1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), Dpto Biol. 
Mol., Centro de Biología Molecular-SO, UAM-CSIC, Centro de Investigación 
en Red de Enfermedades Raras, (CIBERER), Universidad Autónoma Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain.
Mutations in any of the three different genes BCKDHA , BCKDHB  and 
DBT encoding for E1b and E2 catalytic components of the branched-
chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKD) complex can cause Maple 
Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD). The disease presents heterogeneous 
clinical and molecular phenotypes, which ranges from classical to the 
mildest variant types. Up to now, 26 out of 55 MSUD Spanish patients 
analyzed show a defect in the BCKDHB  gene and a high frequency 
of mutations resulting in premature termination codon (PTC) (14/52 
BCKDHB  alleles) have been identified in this series.
Herein, we have tested the hypothesis that some of these PTCs 
changes could be functionally rescued by “in vitro” and/or “in vivo” 
treatment with aminoglycoside antibiotics known for their ability to sup -
press translational stop codon recognition. Regarding the importance 
of both; type and sequence context of the nonsense mutation and 
level of nonsense transcript available for read-through, two changes, 
p.R285X and p.R324X have been selected as targets for the study.
The efficacy of treatment has been assessed using an “in vitro” cDNA 
coupled transcription/translation test and the overexpression of a c-
myc reporter vector containing the complete cDNA BCKDHB  with the 
selected PTCs in cell lines.
Positive responses have been obtained for both changes and antibiot -
ics, with recoveries of full length protein using TNT of around 30% and 
10% of the total protein synthesized for 0.50 µg/mL geneticin and 10 
µg/mL gentamicin respectively.
These results highlight the possible use of read-through drugs as a 
therapeutic option for this inherited metabolic disorder.
P14.11  Reduction of glycosaminoglycan synthesis in 
mucopolysacharidosis type i cells by using siRNA
D. Dziedzic , G. Wegrzyn, J. Jakobkiewicz-Banecka;  
University of Gdansk, Department of Molecular Biology, Gdansk, Poland.
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are severe, inherited metabolic diseas -
es caused by deficiencies in activities of enzymes involved in degra -
dation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Incomplete GAGs degradation 
leads to their lysosomal accumulation in cells of patients. Recent stud -
ies indicated that substrate reduction therapy (SRT) may be a novel 
therapeutic approach for lysosomal storage diseases. We had previ -
ously demonstrated that siRNA-mediated silencing of genes coding 
for enzymes involved in the synthesis of the linkage tetrasaccharide 
sequence, common to both heparan sulfate and chondroitin/dermatan 
sulfate, resulted in a decrease in the levels of the genes’ products and 
reduction of GAG synthesis in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA, 
Sanfilippo disease) fibroblasts.
In the present study, we have used an RNA interference-based strat -
egy to reduce mRNA levels of two genes, whose products are involved 
in chondroitin/dermatan sulfate synthesis: CSGALNACT1 and CS -
GALNACT2, in MPS I fibroblasts. This decrease in levels of transcripts 
corresponded to a decrease of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate synthesis 
in these fibroblasts after the treatment of the cells with siRNA. These 
results indicate that reduction of GAG synthesis by the use of siRNA 
may be considered as a potential therapy for MPS I and could consti -
tute a novel approach for MPS treatment, which may either comple -
ment or be used as an alternative approach to enzyme replacement 
therapy (ERT).
P14.12  scoliosis in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome
V. L. David1, M. C. Popoiu2, C. Rus3, E. S. Boia2, M. Puiu2;  
1Emergency Children’s Hospital „Louis Turcanu“, Timisoara, Romania, 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 
3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Grigore T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania.
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder with an estimated 
incidence of 1 in 25,000. PWS patients suffer from various medical 
conditions that require the attention of many professionals. Affecting 
up to 80% of the PWS patients scoliosis is a major concern for the 
orthopedist and choosing the proper treatment for these patients is 
challenging job because of the other clinical manifestations of PWS 
that can complicate the perspective. In 2008 several Romanian uni -
versities and health institution across the country joined together in a 
research program aimed to bring a multidisciplinary approach to PWS 
and Angelman Syndrome. In this article we do a review of the orthope -
dically problems of 14 cases of PWS that were included in this project. 
Age of the patients ranged between 7 and 28 years, mean 15 years. Therapy for genetic disorders There were 9 female and 5 male patients. Scoliosis was diagnosed 
in 7 cases (50%), 2 boys and 5 girls, age 9 to 28 years. In all the 7 
patients the Cobb angle was less than 30 degrees and the disease 
were controlled only by physical exercise and regular surveillance. 
Nonsurgical treatment should the primarily option for PWS patients 
with scoliosis. Spinal surgery has a higher rate of complications than 
general populations. Regular physical exercises corroborated with 
physiokinetotherapy besides improving the spinal curve increase the 
muscle tonus and help maintaining body weight, and can control the 
scoliosis in up to 90% of the patients.
P14.13  Pseudoexon exclusion by antisense therapy in 6-
pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase deficiency
S. Brasil*1, D. Meilli*2, A. Rassi2, L. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, B. Pérez1, B. Thöny2;  
1Centro de Biología Molecular, CIBERER Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2Division of 
Clinical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University Children´s Hospital, Zurich, 
Switzerland.  
* Equally contributed
The number of mutations identified in deep intronic sequences that 
activate disease-causing pseudoexon-inclusion in mRNAs is in -
creasing. Here we report the effect of cellular antisense therapy to 
suppress pseudoexon activation in primary dermal fibroblasts from 
three independent patients with mutations in the gene encoding the 
6-pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS), which leads to the most 
common form of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (OMIM 261640). Pa -
tient MD130 presented an insertion of 45 nt between exon 2 and 3 
(r.163_164ins45) due to an intronic deletion (g.3760_3816del57) locat -
ed in the 3´splice site of an inserted antisense Alu pseudoexon. Simi -
larly, patient MD335 had inserted the same antisense Alu sequence 
due to a mutation (c.164-716A>T) located in the 5´splice site of the 
pseudoexon. In patient MD96, a 79-nt pseudoexon between exons 1 
and 2 was activated by an A>T substitution (c.84-322A>T) at the 3’ 
end of a LINE-2 sequence (r.84--85ins79). Antisense morpholino oli -
gonucleotides directed to the 3’ or 5´splice sites of the corresponding 
pseudoexons were designed to block intronic insertions into the mRNA 
for all three patients. Twenty-four hours post transfection, mRNA was 
isolated and transcriptional profiling analysis was performed. The RT-
PCR pattern indicated that in all three cases a dose and sequence 
specific recovery of normal splicing was achieved. Furthermore, PTPS 
enzyme activity in all three patients’ fibroblasts was recovered to nor -
mal values 2-3 days posttransfection. These results represent another 
excellent example of pseudoexon exclusion therapy in inherited meta -
bolic disease.
P14.14  Use of read-through drugs as a novel therapeutical 
approach in propionic acidemia
R. Sánchez-Alcudia, B. Pérez, M. Ugarte, L. R. Desviat ;  
Centro De Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa Csic-Uam, Madrid, Spain.
Mutation-specific therapies are a promising option for human genetic 
diseases. Among them, the use of aminoglycosides and drugs identi -
fied after high-throughput screens such as Ataluren (PTC124) have 
shown to read through nonsense mutations in several diseases. In 
propionic acidemia, caused by a defect of propionylCoA carboxylase 
(PCC) involved in the metabolism of several amino acids, odd-chain 
fatty acids and cholesterol, nonsense mutations constitute ~10% of 
the total alleles in both the PCCA and PCCB genes encoding both 
subunits of the PCC enzyme. Among the patients’ samples available 
in the laboratory we have selected fibroblasts with nonsense mutations 
in which the stop codon is UGA, which has been shown to be most 
susceptible to read-through. We have confirmed the greatly decreased 
levels of both immunorreactive protein and mRNA, probably due to 
the NMD mechanism. PCCA and PCCB cDNAs have been cloned in 
vectors under the control of the T7 promoter to allow the synthesis in a 
coupled transcription-translation assay (TNT). The selected nonsense 
mutations have been introduced by PCR mutagenesis in the corre -
sponding vectors. The TNT assay in the presence of 35SMet-Cys con -
firms the synthesis of truncated proteins of the expected size. Different 
concentrations of gentamicin and of geneticin have been assayed. Our 
first results indicate that the inclusion of geneticin (0.1-0.25 µg/mL) in 
the synthesis reaction results in the production of up to 10% of full-
length protein. To determine if this results in a functional recovery of 
the defect the corresponding patients’ fibroblasts will be treated with 
the read-through compounds.P14.15  salbutamol increases smN mRNA in spinal muscular 
atrophy patients (smA): relevance for clinical trial design
F. D. Tiziano1, R. Lomastro1, A. M. Pinto1, S. Messina2, A. D’Amico3, S. Fiori1, 
C. Angelozzi1, M. Pane1, E. Mercuri1, E. Bertini3, G. Neri1, C. Brahe1;  
1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 2University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy, 3Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disorder caused 
by homozygous absence of the SMN1  gene. Based on severity, three 
forms of SMA are recognized (type I-III). All patients have at least one 
(usually 2-4) copies of a highly homologous gene ( SMN2 ) which pro -
duces insufficient levels of functional SMN protein, due to alternative 
splicing of exon7. Recently, we have provided evidence that SMN2  
expression can be enhanced in vitro  by albuterol/salbutamol, a beta2-
adrenergic agonist. This compound has also been shown to improve 
motor function of SMA patients in two different open pilot trials. In the 
present study, we have evaluated the in vivo  molecular efficacy of 
salbutamol in SMA patients. We have recruited 12 type II-III patients 
who received the compound orally for six months. SMN2  full length 
transcript levels have been determined in peripheral blood leukocytes 
by absolute real time PCR, at baseline and after 3 and 6 months of 
treatment. A significant and constant increase in SMN2- full length tran -
script levels was detected and the response was directly proportional 
to SMN2  gene copy number. Our data strongly support salbutamol as 
potential candidate for SMA treatment, and suggest that SMN2  copy 
number may predict the molecular response to treatment and may 
be useful as a randomization parameter in double blind placebo-con -
trolled clinical trial design.
P14.16  chemical coupling of targeting moiety on phage surface; 
A distinct approach for transgene delivery into eukaryotic cells
M. Khalaj-Kondori , M. Sadeghizadeh, M. Behmanesh;  
1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Targeting gene carriers to specific cell/tissue is of great interest. Some 
approaches including displaying peptide or monoclonal antibody on 
phage surface have been tried yet. However, taking advantage of 
phage display has improved gene delivery and expression of trans -
gene to eukaryotic cells, but its efficiency has been remained to be 
improved. Previous studies reported that the efficiency of phage pen -
etrating to eukaryotic cells is directly related to the copy number of 
displayed moiety. On the other hand, the number of phage coat fusion-
bearing proteins in each phage particle is limited because of their inter -
ference at phage particle assembly process. To increase the number 
of displayed moieties on each phage particle, we have addressed the 
problem from a distinct point of view. The lambda bacteriophage par -
ticles bearing the GFP have been utilized to couple with human holo-
transferrin chemically to formulate targeted lambda phage nanobiopar -
ticles. Coupling conjugation efficiency has been evaluated by ELISA 
using HRP-conjugated anti human apo-transferrin. Cell penetrating 
efficiency of targeted nanobioparticles and nontargeted lambda par -
ticles was compared using ELISA and PCR. The GFP expression was 
evaluated by RT-PCR and florescent microscopy followed by flow-cy -
tometery. Our results revealed more efficient penetrating and delivery 
of transgene into AGS cell line and highlight the potency of coupling 
conjugation procedure as a distinctively efficient alternative route to 
standard phage display system in eukaryotic cell gene delivery trails.
P14.17**  siRNA-mediated reduction of MBD2  results in up 
regulation of γ-globin in human model cells
J. Gharesouran1,2, M. Banan2, Z. Deylami3, M. Asghariyan4, H. Najmabadi2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Research Center, 
University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology, Azad University, Zanjan, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 4Department of Biology, Azad University, Tonekabon, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
The β-thalassemias are congenital anemias that are caused by mu -
tations that reduce or abolish expression of the beta-globin gene. 
Excess alpha-globin precipitates in erythroid progenitor cells result -
ing in cell death, ineffective erythropoiesis and severe anemia. The 
chicken homolog to an MBD2 containing NuRD co-repressor complex 
(MeCPC) has previously been purified from primary erythroid cells and 
characterized as binding to the methylated ρ-globin promoter in ery -Therapy for genetic disorders throid cells of adult chickens in which the gene is silent [Kransdorf 
et al. Blood 2006; 108:2836-45]. Knockdown of MBD2 by siRNA in 
MEL cells stably transfected with a methylated ρ-globin gene construct 
leads to a greater than 10-fold increase in ρ-globin gene expression. 
Likewise, knockout of MBD2 results in a ~20 fold upregulation of the 
human gamma globin gene in adult erythroid cells of βYAC transgenic 
mice [Rupon et al. PNAS 2006; 103:6617-22]. Other group addressed 
the role of DNA hypomethylation in the induction of -globin expres -
sion by 5-azacytidine [Mabaera et al. Blood 2008; 111:411-420]. These 
observations provide an impetus to investigate the role of MBD2 in 
-globin induction and 5-aza pathway. We investigated by northern blot 
and quantitative PCR assay that -globin could be induced by 5-aza 
in the model cells. In the second step -globin levels increased in the 
presence of MBD2 siRNA. Finally, as predicted, treatment of cells with 
5-azacytidine in the presence of MBD2 siRNA induces only a small, 
nonadditive induction of -globin mRNA, signifying that DNA methyla -
tion acts primarily through MBD2 to maintain γ-globin suppression in 
adult erythroid cells.
P14.18**  The therapeutic potential of δ globin gene in “Th3/+” 
mouse
M. F. Marongiu , M. F. Manchinu, S. Porcu, D. Poddie, F. Crobu, C. Casu, M. S. 
Ristaldi;  
Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR CAGLIARI, Monserrato 
(CA), Italy.
The delta globin gene produces a small amount of delta globin, being 
part of the HbA2 synthesis.
The delta globin chain could be a valid substitute of the beta globin 
chain in thalassemia and also an antisickling agent in sickle cell ane -
mia.
Our previous work in vitro  showed that the creation of the CACCC box 
consensus sequence on the delta globin gene promoter is sufficient to 
enhance its expression to a considerable extent.  
We produced a transgenic line carrying the mini LCR (HS-HS4) and the 
delta gene driven by the CACCC containing delta promoter (CACCC-
delta-LCR).
Here we show that the delta globin gene can be activated in vivo reach -
ing high levels of expression in our transgenic mouse model.
Our results on a single copy transgenic line show an expression level 
of the delta gene of 30% compared to the endogenous beta major.
This level of expression could be considered curative for beta thalas -
semia and sickle cell disease.
After this result, we decided to intercross the homozygous transgenic 
line CACCC-delta-LCR with the heterozygous mouse model of beta-
thalassemia (Hbb-th3/+).
Hematological analysis performed at 8 weeks after-born mice Hbb-
th3/+ revealed 8,7±1,2 g/dL of total hemoglobin levels versus 10,5 g/dL 
± 1,3 in heterozygous CACCC-delta-LCR/Hbb-th3/+ mice, 11,6±0,94 
g/dL in homozygous CACCC-delta-LCR/CACCC-delta-LCR/Hbb-th3/+ 
and 15.48±1.4 g/dL in wild type mice.
We plan to obtain the final validation of the delta globin gene as a ther -
apeutic gene by the rescue of the thalassemic mouse model th3/th3.
J14.1  Early physical therapy for children with genetic disorders
M. Gafencu1, M. Puiu1, C. Apostol2, G. Doros1;  
1University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Roumania, Timisoara, 
Romania, 2Children Hospital L Turcanu, Timisoara, Roumania, Timisoara, 
Romania.
Aim: To focus upon the crucial moments from the first years of ge -
netic affected children s life, when an accurate diagnosis followed by 
well-oriented physical therapy can modulate the prognosis, in some 
cases. Material and methods: We worked with a cohort of kids with 
genetic transmitted diseases included in long and complex therapy, 
including physical. The diagnostic was established in the Emergency 
Children Hospital L. Turcanu Timisoara (between 2006 and 2009) and 
the physical treatment performed in ambulatory department next to the 
same hospital. The children’s were diagnosed with Down syndrome 
- 11 cases, and other different diseases as Goldenhar syndrome, ar -
throgryposis, neurofibromatosis, Horner Syndrome, and more than 10 
children with cerebral palsy. The physical specialist identifies potential 
or existing problems and consults the other medical team members 
(surgeon, psychiatrist, genetician). Results: In all cases the quantifi -
able outcome was documented with individual observational papers and in some with measurements or pictures. The specific intervention 
was conducted with remarkable results in Down syndrome cases, the 
main aspect - motor development was better correct when the cases 
were sent to therapy in the first month of life. Conclusions: The team 
work with toddlers genetic disorders and an early diagnose followed 
by individual plan for physical therapy can give other chance for inte -
gration in future life and low the medical costs in upcoming years of 
existence.
J14.2  the importance of sight in early motor development
V. Almajan-Guta1, B. Almajan-Guta2;  
1Special Care Center, Timisoara, Romania, 2University “Politehnica”, Timisoara, 
Romania.
Background: Studies made on groups of blind children and groups of 
children without visual impairment in similar conditions have pointed 
out the fact that the medium age at which the mains milestones of 
motor development are performed, are significant delayed. Fine and 
gross motor development of the blind babies are crucial in order to 
achieve maximum independence.
Method and materials: the longitudinal study compared the develop -
mental data concerning 9 motor skills of 11 blind children (retinopathy 
of prematurity) from Special Care Center “Speranta” Timisoara with 
age 2 months -3 years old, to a control group of sighted children at 
the same age.
Objectives: to establish the age when they perform the milestones; to 
evaluate the motor behavior of the blind children; to advise the parents 
how to handle their babies.
The results the motor development of blind children was delayed in all 
the stages, but significant in 5 motor skills that were examined (p<0, 
05). This delay shows the major importance of vision in motor develop -
ment and in self-care skills, but also is caused by the lack of stimula -
tion and no/poor motor experience.
Conclusions: Early intervention of the physiotherapist for the achieve -
ment of maximum potential of the child, a safe and an adequate stimu -
lating environment, proper handling could shorten the motor develop -
mental delay and could improve the quality of life of those children.
P15 Laboratory and quality management 
P15.01  Quantitative Study of bacterial DNA effects on aged bone 
DNA amplification
A. Ghasemi1, N. Mahdieh2, M. Tavallaei3, M. Aslani4, M. Kargar5, F. Kafilzadeh5, 
R. Yaghoubi6, A. Shirkavand7,8, Z. Zafari7,9, S. Zeinali7,10;  
1Azad University of Jahrom,Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ilam 
University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human 
Genetic Research Center,Baqyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Microbiolology Research Center, Pasteur Institute 
of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Azad University of Jahrom, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Shiraz Transplantation research center, Namazi 
hospital, Shiraz university of medical sciences, Shriaz, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 7Kawsar‘s Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 8Biology Group, Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 9Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
10Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Molecular human identification is one of the most important tests per -
formed in forensic laboratories. These tests are applied for identifica -
tion of human remains from natural disasters, wars, etc., but two prob -
lems may occur as a result of DNA degradation and contamination.We 
are planning to test probable effects of bacterial DNA on amplifying 
aged bone DNA. DNA was extracted from bone remains and E.Coli. 
Despite the large amount of DNA observed, PCR amplification for mo -
lecular identification was failed. Using different aged bone and bacte -
rial DNA dilutions along with PCR based methods, we tried to test their 
positive, negative or inhibitory effects on each other. Quantification of 
these effects is carrying out by real time PCR. Based on our prelimi -
nary data, addition of bacterial DNA is a valid biological test for testing 
quality of bone DNA to enable us for the identification testing of human 
remains. This method will help to detect DNA and DNA contamination 
which are usually present in the archeological remains.Laboratory and quality management P15.02  European validation of a new molecular diagnostic test 
for cystic Fibrosis
X. Pepermans , A. Bosmans, T. Leal, M. Philippe;  
Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Human Genetic Center, Bruxelles, Belgium.
The efficacy of a new molecular screening method for CF, the xTAG® 
Cystic Fibrosis 71v2 kit (Luminex 200), allowing identification of 71 
CFTR  mutations and 6 polymorphisms, was compared with a routine 
reference method, the INNO-LiPA from Innogenetics. The latter con -
sisting on the combination of CFTR17+Tn Update and INNO-LiPA 
CFTR19 allows identification of 36 mutations and 3 polymorphisms.
For validation purposes, CF positive and negative DNA samples were 
tested in parallel by both methods. Initially, 30 DNA INNO-LiPA positive 
samples were analysed by Luminex and results were compared with 
those obtained by INNO-LiPA. Wild-type DNA samples (n: 60) were 
also compared. If a new substitution was detected, a CFTR  exonic se -
quencing (BDT3.1/3130xl, Applied Biosystems) was performed. Final -
ly, DNA samples obtained from different biological matrix (10 samples 
for each: whole blood, chorionic villi, amniotic fluid and blood spot from 
Guthrie cards) were processed. Samples were analysed in triplicate by 
3 different operators at 3 different days.
For all DNA samples, the new and the reference method provided simi -
lar results for each corresponding CFTR  mutation. The reproducibility 
of the new method was comparable and no significant inter-operator 
variability was noted.
As conclusions, the Luminex kit is a robust CFTR  screening method 
allowing a twice as large CFTR mutation detection rate and applicable 
in routine lab analysis. Currently more than 300 screening tests have 
been performed by the new method at our lab.
P15.03  cytochrome P450 analysis using HRmA and DHPLc
A. Kaczmarek1, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1,2, M. Zimniak1, D. Hoevelmans1, U. 
G. Froster1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics and Oncogenetics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of 
Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Cytochrome P450 is a superfamily of enzymes catalyzing the oxidative 
metabolism of many endogenous compounds and xenobiotics. Two 
enzymes, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, are primarily involved in the trans -
formation of pharmaceuticals; together they metabolize around 20% 
of widely prescribed drugs. Genes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 encoding 
those enzymes are highly polymorphic. Many of alleles account for a 
deficient metabolism, resulting in phenotypes of poor (PMs) and in -
termediate metabolizers (IMs). In our study we investigated the three 
most common alleles responsible for a decreased enzyme activity: 
CYP2C9*2 (p.Arg144Cys), CYP2C9*3 (p.Ile359Leu) and CYP2C19*2 
(c.19154G>A in exon 5, causing aberration in splicing site) in a control 
population of 100 patients from Saxony and Thuringia. We tested the 
effectiveness and reliability of DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance 
Liquid Chromatography)and the more recently developed HRMA (High 
Resolution Melting Analysis) used for genotyping as alternative meth -
ods to automatic sequencing. Both methods turned out to be equally 
sensitive and precise. However, HRMA required less preparation steps 
and allowed a higher throughput than DHPLC. HRMA showed a great 
potential as a rapid genotyping technique and it helps limiting the need 
for sequencing. Allele frequencies estimated in our study (13 % for 
CYP2C9*2, 5 % for CYP2C9*3 and 19 % for CYP2C19*2) were similar 
to the ones determined in other Caucasian populations.
P15.04  A window on the lab: one year of diagnostic activity in the molecular Genetics Laboratory of Ferrara - italy
A. Ravani , P. Rimessi, A. Venturoli, B. Dolcini, M. Taddei Masieri, C. Trabanelli, 
S. Carturan, S. Brioschi, R. Selvatici, F. Gualandi, A. Ferlini;  
Sezione di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy.
FERRARA is a small town in Emilia Romagna (Italy), but with an im -
portant Centre for Molecular Genetics, not only at regional but also at 
national level and receiving international requests for molecular test -
ing. Defining both the means and the safety of genetic testing is not 
only important for public health care organisation planning and evalua -
tion but also for the intense public interest and concern about anything 
labelled ‘genetics’.
Here we intend to give an overview of the specific pathologies/genes 
we analyse, the number of examinations performed per year, the tech -
niques used, and finally the participation to National or European Ex -
ternal Quality Assessment Schemes at least for the tests quantitatively more represented.
We believe that to correctly perform molecular diagnosis of genetic 
disorders a deep cultural medical genetics background is needed. 
The patients referring to our Lab are sent by the Genetic Counselling 
Service of our Department, or by other specialised Institutes. Our Lab 
ensures a deep and continuous interaction with requesting doctors, in 
order to chose the best diagnostic flow-chart for obtaining the correct 
interpretation of the molecular results.
Note: Please see the online version of the abstract database (www.
eshg.org/eshg2010) for the table included in this abstract.
In conclusion, we believe that only laboratories with recognised and 
experienced background can assure consistent and accurate testing 
since they are able to perform extensive, up-to date molecular diag -
nostics by using articulated methods, and can give accurate interpreta -
tions of data.
P15.05  How to prepare samples to molecular genetic tests?
K. M. Sasin1, A. M. Czarnecka2;  
1GENE Association for Children with Genetic Disorders, Poznań, Poland, 
2Department of Oncology, Institute of Military Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.
Molecular genetic testing is often performed as part of a routine diag -
nostic procedure. It is often based on taking a sample of blood. This 
study investigates the use of a simple DNA extraction technique for 
application in medical and research studies and systematically ana -
lyzes the potential impact of time lag and temperature of storage be -
tween blood drawing and DNA isolation. It compares the influence of 
various blood sample storage conditions on the quantity and quality of 
isolated DNA. A modified phenol/chloroform isolation technique was 
used. DNA was isolated from samples collected from 13 participants 
and processed in triplicate: a) after storing blood at 20°C for 3 days; b) 
after storing blood at 4°C for 7 days; c) after storing blood at -20°C for 
28 days. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA concentra -
tion measurements were performed to analyze the quality of isolated 
the DNA. The amount of DNA isolated was as low as 1.37 ng/mL after 
storage at 4°C and 865.0 ng/mL when stored at -20°C. This pilot study 
suggests that storage at -20°C for 28 days and at 20°C for 3 days 
allows isolation of high quality DNA. Further studies are needed to 
investigate the influence of long-term storage of biological specimens 
on DNA isolation and quality.
P15.06  European external quality assessment (EQA) for constitutional molecular karyotyping: Experiences from the 
CEQA/EMQN pilot scheme.
H. Gabriel1, J. R. Vermeesch2, S. J. Patton3, R. Elles3, R. J. Hastings4;  
1Diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Center for Genetics, K.U. Leuven, Belgium, 
3Regional Molecular Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
The Cytogenetics European Quality Assessment scheme (CEQA) and 
the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) initiated a 
joint pilot scheme for molecular karyotyping.
Based on a questionnaire 10 labs were selected for each method 
(BAC-ArrayCGH, Oligo-ArrayCGH, SNPArray). 10 ugDNA isolated 
from a transformed cell line derived from a patient with developmental 
and mental retardation was sent out. The patient was carrier of two 
clinical significant aberrations: a 1.7 Mb telomeric deletion at 20p and 
a 9.1 Mb terminal duplication at 18p11.32p11.22. A 30 year old male 
patient with obesity, microgenitalia, no philtrum and
mental retardation was presented as case scenario.
Participating labs were asked to proceed according to their standard 
methods and to return their results (genotype and clinical interpreta -
tion). One lab failed to perform testing. Six labs made significant geno -
typing errors (21%). 24 labs (83%) failed to provide an adequate inter -
pretation. Moreover, 7 of these labs (24%) provided no interpretation 
at all. Only 3 labs (10%) fulfilled the required criteria (correct genotype 
and major aspects of the interpretation).
From this EQA, it became clear that many labs have serious technical 
problems to detect even large chromosomal imbalances using array 
CGH. In addition, this EQA reveals a large variation in the reporting 
methodology of those laboratories.
The scheme demonstrated that a significant proportion of the laboratories 
currently offering molecular karyotyping in a clinical diagnostic context are 
poor performers. In addition, this EQA has set criteria for reporting which 
will in the future result in more uniform reporting of array results.Laboratory and quality management 7P15.07  customer satisfaction survey as a tool to improve the 
Cystic Fibrosis External Quality Assessment scheme
S. Berwouts1,2, E. Dequeker1,2;  
1Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Cystic Fibrosis European 
Network, Leuven, Belgium.
The Cystic Fibrosis Network aims to provide well organized External 
Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes for cystic fibrosis (CF). In order to 
define the needs of the EQA participants and to continuously improve 
the scheme, a customer satisfaction survey was developed.
All 213 laboratories that participated in the CF EQA scheme round of 
2008 were invited to complete an online questionnaire, which touched 
upon different aspects such as user friendliness of the different online 
forms, clarity of instructions, suitability of sample concentration, under -
standability of the report and complaint handling.
Responses were collected from 32% of the laboratories, located in 
22 different countries, and put into an importance-satisfaction matrix. 
This matrix gave the scheme provider an overview of both the relative 
importance of the different aspects and participants’ satisfaction.
The general satisfaction about the service of the CF Network was 
good, demonstrated by an average of 4.33 on a scale of 1 to 5. Issues 
that fulfill or exceed participants’ expectations include clarity of the in -
structions to register and accurate time schedule, as well as suitability 
of DNA purity and sample packages. On the other hand it was shown 
that the CF EQA scheme could improve with respect to the online form 
used to submit genotype results, reports and raw data, and the under -
standability of individual comments and general report.
This survey and its results provide a tool to identify shortcomings and 
strong points, and to prepare to fulfil the requirements of ISO 17043, 
the new accreditation standard for EQA providers.
P15.08  Assessment of the Fragile X PCR screen assay in 
retrospective genotyping 
Z. Musova , M. Macek Jr., A. Krepelova, M. Simandlova, M. Malikova, M. 
Havlovicova;  
Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
We present our initial assessment of the novel Fragile X PCR Screen 
assay (Abbott Molecular). Retrospective analysis was performed in 
80 samples characterized previously by Southern blot, except for the 
normal male controls. This evaluation was performed in 22 samples 
with full mutations, in 21 samples with premutations, in 3 samples with 
alleles localized within the “grey zone”, in 2 mosaics of normal alleles 
with full mutations, in 3 mosaics of a premutation with a full mutation 
and in 29 normal cases. Altogether 43 female and 37 male samples 
were tested. Expansions were detected using Fragile X PCR Screen 
assay in all samples with pre-mutations or full mutations. The signal of 
trinucleotide repeat peaks was clear up to 90 CGG in all female sam -
ples with full mutations and up to 115 CGG in all male samples with 
full mutations. Our data provided evidence that the new assay is fast 
and efficacious for detecting Fragile X-related expansions. Moreover, 
the test is useful for exact determination of borderline alleles within the 
normal, grey zone and permutation ranges. Based on our experience 
this new assay could be used as a rapid first choice to exclude the 
presence of an expansion alone. The current commercial Fragile X 
PCR ‚sizing‘ assay from the same vendor could be used in the second 
step to substantiate the exact sizing of alleles at risk. In summary, both 
assays can provide an integrated, Southern blot free and fast diagnos -
tics of the Fragile X Syndrome.
Supported by Eurogentest and MZOFNM2005.
P15.09  How to survive the sequence boom? submit your 
mutations and unclassified variants to databases
M. H. Breuning , E. Bakker, J. T. den Dunnen;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
The ever-increasing speed of DNA sequencing and other forms of ge -
nome analysis leads to a fast growing mountain of DNA variants of 
unknown clinical significance. All laboratories are facing the challenge 
of interpreting these correctly, and provide evidence based answers to 
the questions asked by clinicians. Since the majority of variants are not 
reported in the literature, and single centers will never collect sufficient 
data on a variant on their own, it will remain very difficult to interpret 
variants under the current system.
To characterize variants we need large numbers of well-documented patients and their family members to get a clear picture of the geno -
type-phenotype relation. The only way to collect sufficient numbers is 
by sharing the data in databases such as DECIPHER, ECARUCA, 
HGMD, and Leiden Open (source) Variant Databases (LOVD), etc.
This cannot be the effort of a few enthusiastic individuals who tend to 
their pet gene database or chromosomal region into the small hours. 
Reporting all detected variants to one single database should be an 
integral part of the quality system of the diagnostic laboratory. Each ac -
credited laboratory, be it public, academic or commercial, should have 
a small share in database curation proportional to its annual turnover. 
Our scientific societies, national and international, should take up the 
challenge to co-ordinate this effort.
Funding from health insurance cannot be expected. However, in the 
longer run the system finances itself, since the interpretation of se -
quence variants will expedited. Eventually this will help diagnostic 
laboratories cope with their increasing workload.
P15.10  European external quality assessment for the 
improvement of KRAS  testing
K. Cox1, M. Ligtenberg2, K. de Stricker3, A. Edsjö4, V. Gorgoulis5, G. Höfler6, 
A. Jung7, A. Kotsinas5, P. Laurent-Puig8, F. López-Ríos9, E. Rouleau8, J. van 
Krieken2, E. Dequeker1;  
1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark, 4Clinical pathology Malmö, Malmö, Sweden, 5National 
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 6Medical University 
of Graz, Graz, Austria, 7Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, München, 
Germany, 8Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique St Cloud, St Cloud, France, 9Hospital 
Universitario Madrid Sanchinarro, Madrid, Spain.
KRAS  mutational status in tumour cells has become an important de -
terminant for the successful application of EGFR targeting therapy in 
patients with colorectal cancer. To provide optimal and reliable testing 
for patients throughout Europe, regional KRAS  External Quality As -
sessment (EQA) schemes in 8 different European countries were set 
up to evaluate the performance of KRAS testing, including the assess -
ment of the percentage tumour cells evaluated (a critical step in the 
testing) and the correct identification of the mutations.
Consecutive unstained sections paraffin-embedded material from 10 
invasive colorectal carcinomas with known KRAS mutation status 
were sent to each participating laboratory. The laboratories could use 
their method of testing of choice and were required to provide the re -
sults within 10 working days. In total, 61 laboratories participated in 
the regional schemes. From these 61 laboratories, 44 reported all 10 
genotypes correctly. 9, 6 and 1 laboratories made 1, 2 and 3 geno -
type mistakes, respectively. A wide variety of different DNA extraction 
methods and KRAS  mutation detection methods is being used. The 
estimation of % tumour cells showed a large difference among the 
participants.
We conclude that more standardization in estimating tumour cell per -
centages is required but that about 70% of laboratories correctly identi -
fied the KRAS  mutational status in all cases. We expect that this EQA 
scheme is a useful educational tool that provides information about the 
performance of a laboratory compared to other laboratories, finds the 
source of the genotype mistake(s) and eliminates them.
P15.11  Evaluation of two commercially available multiplex 
Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) software 
programs.
S. L. Hume , M. Hicks, R. Tomaszewski, C. L. Walker, M. J. Somerville, P. Scott;  
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
In order to maintain quality assurance and control in a diagnostic lab 
setting, MLPA analysis is best achieved with controlled software. Our 
lab chose to review two commercially available MLPA software analy -
sis programs: GeneMarker v.1.9 (Softgenetics) and Sequence Pilot 
MLPA v.3.3 (JSI medical systems GmbH) using the results from a num -
ber of MLPA kits purchased from MRC-Holland. These two software 
programs were evaluated with respect to their ease of use, audit trail 
capability, network performance, accuracy of allele sizing (automated 
binning), ease of template modification, user manual, ability to dis -
criminate various allele copy numbers (ie. from 0 - 4 alleles), and the 
ease of interpretation of methylation-specific MLPA data. Furthermore, 
examination of the standard deviations from 100 data sets permitted 
a comparison of the two algorithms used by the software. These data Laboratory and quality management sets also allowed calculation of program sensitivity and specificity us -
ing real-time PCR to classify discordant or out-of-range allele calls. 
The results from this study have shown that both software programs 
are comparable and selection of software is dependent on laboratory 
requirements and preferences.
P15.12  towards better mtDNA population samples by inspecting 
autosomal stR markers
M. Bodner , W. Parson;  
Institute of Legal Medicine, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
Mitochondrial DNA with its features of a circular genome, strictly mater -
nal inheritance and high copy number is an intriguing marker applied in 
population, medical and forensic genetics and phylogeography.
Reliable data are required for all these applications. Quality control 
measures have been introduced to ensure highest standards in se -
quence data generation, validation and a posteriori inspection. A phy -
logenetic alignment strategy has been widely accepted as a prerequi -
ste for data comparability and database searches, for a reconstruction 
of human migrations and for a correct interpretation of mtDNA muta -
tions in medical genetics.
There is continuing effort in enhancing the number of worldwide popu -
lation samples in order to contribute to a better understanding of hu -
man mtDNA variation. This often means to rely on convenience sam -
ples collected for other purposes that do not meet all quality require -
ments for mtDNA data sets. Here, we introduce an additional quality 
control means that deals with this limitation: by combining autosomal 
marker with mtDNA information, it helps to avoid the bias introduced 
by related individuals included in the same (small) sample. By STR 
analysis of individuals sharing their mitochondrial haplotype, pedigree 
construction and subsequent calculation of likelihood ratios based on 
the allele frequencies found in the population, closely maternally re -
lated individuals can be identified and excluded. An ideal population 
sample would be representative for its population: this new approach 
represents another contribution towards this goal.
This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund FWF, project 
L397.
P15.13  EmmA, an innovative diagnostic method for 
simultaneous detection of point mutations and large scale 
rearrangements: routine screening of 1224 patients on BRCA1  
and BRCA2
V. Moncoutier1, L. Castéra1, C. Tirapo1, D. Michaux1, M. A. Remon1, J. L. 
Viovy2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,3,4, C. Houdayer1,3;  
1Institut Curie, Service de Génétique Oncologique, Paris, France, 
2Physicochimie Curie - Institut Curie / CNRS UMR 168 / UPMC, Paris, France, 
3Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Inserm U830, Paris, France.
EMMA (Enhanced Mismatch Mutation Analysis®, Fluigent) is a new 
method for mutation screening based on heteroduplex analysis by 
capillary electrophoresis thanks to an innovative polymer. In combi -
nation with limiting PCR conditions, point mutation and large scale 
rearrangement are detected in a single run. High profile specificity 
and reproducibility allow the interpretation of polymorphisms based 
on their profiles. This was checked by blind analysis of 402 patients 
and following sequencing of all polymorphic profiles: as expected, all 
polymorphic profiles showed the expected polymorphism without any 
other variant.
We report on the routine diagnostic use of this method for BRCA1  
and BRCA2  screening on a series of 1224 unrelated patients. BRCA1  
and BRCA2  were amplified in 24 multiplex PCRs (81 fragments) using 
a single condition. PCRs were electrophoresed with a single analyti -
cal condition on an ABI3100 and data were analysed using dedicated 
software (Emmalys).
Mutation detection rate was 12%, which is in line with the results we 
previously obtained for 3700 index cases analysed by DHPLC.
This easy-to-use method relies on i) a single condition of analysis: 
modelling related to melting domain is not required, ii) simultaneous 
detection of point mutations and large rearrangements, iii) ready-to 
-use optimized polymer, iv) throughput: 30 cases are screened on both 
BRCA1  and BRCA2  in one week by one technician (DNA extraction 
and sequencing excluded) v) low reagent costs: 3 times cheaper com -
pared to DHPLC.
Overall EMMA demonstrates considerable simplification and cost re -
duction with regards to previous diagnostic methods while keeping the same sensitivity.
P15.14**  Genetic investigations in paternity cases in Portugal: a 
call for psychosocial and ethical recommendations
S. Silva1,2, H. Machado3,4, A. Amorim5,6, C. Alves5;  
1Institute of Public Health (ISPUP), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 
2Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Porto Medical School, 
Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Sociology, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 
4Center for Social Studies, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Institute 
of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), 
Porto, Portugal, 6Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
The Paternity Testing Commission of the International Society for Fo -
rensic Genetics has published several recommendations on biostatis -
tics, laboratory management and quality control for genetic investiga -
tions in paternity cases. In this paper we aim to expand the traditional 
technical and scientific requirements related to the collection, use and 
storage of genetic information in paternity cases by exploring the un -
specified practices of informed consent and individual identification 
performed by experts working in Portuguese laboratories involved in 
paternity testing.
A qualitative and interpretative design was followed, grounded on the 
following sources of information: (a) interviews conducted with experts 
involved in genetic paternity investigations ordered by courts by labo -
ratories located in Portugal; (b) the consent forms and the individual 
identification sheets used in genetic investigations of paternity cases.
Official technical and scientific recommendations on standard proce -
dures and quality control in the field of paternity testing coexist with 
informal and heterogeneous laboratory practices. Specific recommen -
dations on ethics and psychosocial issues related to genetic inves -
tigations in paternity cases are needed, drawing on debates around 
the implications of this activity to citizens’ individual rights, personal 
autonomy and privacy. Good practices for genetic investigations of 
paternity cases should also incorporate guidelines concerning the 
anonymization of data, the storage and content of biological samples 
and possible uses of the genetic information, in order to guarantee the 
quality and safety of the genetic databases.
P15.15  comparison of PEP and nested PcR for analysis of 
single cell and low quantity DNAs
M. Mashayekhi1, K. Parivar1, N. Mahdieh2, M. Raiesi3, M. Masoudifard3, M. 
Asheri3, F. Keshavarzi1, S. Zeinali3;  
1Science and research Unit, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Faculty of 
Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Kawsar‘s Human Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Molecular analysis of a single cell is essential in many genetic studies 
such as preimplantation genetic diagnosis and forensic investigations. 
Whole genome amplification methods have been introduced as pow -
erful tools for DNA analysis in a single cell. A molecular technique, 
named primer extension preamplification (PEP), has been introduced 
as a method for whole genome amplification. In other hands, nested 
PCR has been used for amplifying DNA from single cell and very few 
cell samples. Here, we are planning to compare the efficiency of these 
techniques. DNAs were extracted from 30 blood samples, 10 bone. 
Also, thirty blastomers were obtained using a standard IVF procedure. 
PEP procedure was applied on DNA samples and blastomers using a 
15-base random oligonucleotide primer followed by PCR amplification 
using specific primers for three regions (exon1 form FVIII and a seg -
ment of beta globin, GJB2 gene). These regions were also amplified 
by nested PCR in two steps.Briefly, for PEP-PCR analysis, 147 of 450 
samples (32.67%) for FVIII gene, 122 of 450 samples (27.11%) for beta 
globin gene and 137 of 450 samples (30.44%) for GJB2 gene were 
determined. However, for nested PCR, 290 of 450 samples (65.56%), 
302 of 450 (67.11%) and 295 of 450 (58.89%) were determined for 
FVIII, beta globin and GJB2 genes. Our preliminary data showed that 
good amplification efficiencies are provided when performing nested 
PCR. Thus, the nested PCR has a higher efficiency than PEP-PCR 
for single cells. Our data highlights the application of nested PCR for 
diagnostic purposes such as PGD. Laboratory and quality management P15.16  A standardized framework for the validation and 
verification of diagnostic molecular genetic tests.
C. J. Mattocks1, M. A. Morris2, G. Matthijs3, E. Swinnen3, A. Corveleyn3, E. 
Dequeker3, C. R. Müller4, V. Pratt5, A. Wallace6, -. For the EuroGentest working 
group on validation7;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United 
Kingdom, 2Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, CMU, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 3Centre for Human Genetics (EuroGentest), Leuven, Belgium, 
4Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 
5Quest Diagnostics, Chantilly, VA, United States, 6National Genetics Reference 
Laboratory (Manchester), Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Various.
The validation and verification of laboratory methods and procedures 
prior to their use in clinical testing is an essential component of provid -
ing a safe and useful service to clinicians and patients.
After test design and development are complete, it is necessary to 
determine whether the performance of the test, in terms of accuracy,  
meets the required diagnostic standards. Whether this is achieved by 
performing analytical validation  or verification  depends on the ex -
istence of a suitable performance specification  that details the ex -pected accuracy of the test under given conditions. The validation or 
verification of methods are formal requirements for the accreditation 
of laboratories. Although the general requirements are clearly stated 
in the standards, very little guidance is available about the specific 
requirements and concepts in molecular genetics.
To address these shortcomings EuroGentest created a working group 
comprising clinical scientists and experts on quality assurance and 
statistics. Through a series of meetings literature review and consulta -
tion we have produced a guidance document outlining the principles 
of validation and verification in the context of molecular genetics. We 
describe implementation processes, key components, types of tests 
and suggest some relevant statistical approaches that can be used by 
individual laboratories to ensure that tests are performed to defined 
standards. As a practical tool we have also developed a standard pro 
forma  that can be used as a plan to guide validation or verification pro -
cedures, act as a checklist to ensure all points are adequately covered 
and provide a framework for systematic documentation.Laboratory and quality management 70Abstracts of EmPAG Plenary sessions
EPL1.1  Adapting to the new genetic status after predictive 
testing for Huntington’s disease - the experiences of non-
carriers
E. Winnberg1, U. Almqvist1, A. Hagberg2, T. Bui3;  
1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Huddinge, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
Little is known about the personal experiences of receiving a negative 
test result after predictive testing for Huntington’s Disease. 
The aim of this study was to explore how the test results have in -
fluenced the non-carriers’ lives, seen in a long term perspective (> 5 
years). 
Method: Semi-structured interviews were carried out with 21 non-car -
riers, tested for the HD mutation 6-12 years ago. The interviews were 
audio-taped and analysed with a qualitative content analysis method. 
Results: A broad variety of reactions to the new genetic status were 
revealed. The informants witnessed both positive and negative reac -
tions. Everybody experienced a great Relief of anxiety , but for some 
it was accompanied by Anxiety of receiving a second chance  in life. 
It was stressful living up to their expectations of doing something im -
portant and worthy this extraordinary lottery win. Others experienced 
a feeling of Emptiness  immediately after receiving the test results. A 
couple of informants experienced severe problems with adapting to 
the test results which they described as A need of a new identity. A 
common negative reaction of the test results was Feelings of guilt 
towards untested siblings or siblings affected by HD. Two infor -
mants made major positive changes directly related to the test results: 
one completely changed lifestyle from being a criminal to becoming a 
serious student and another quit smoking on the day the test results 
were given.
Conclusion: This study shows the importance of long term follow-up 
after predictive testing to support non-carriers to adjust to a new ge -
netic status.
EPL1.2  Early experiences with a genetic disorder: 
consequences in later life
L. B. Van der Meer1, A. Tibben1,2;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Persons who are at 50% risk for a late onset genetic disorder with high 
clinical severity may have experienced negative life events in child -
hood due to the disease process of a parent. This may have influenced 
their attachment process, possibly resulting in higher-than-average 
levels of attachment insecurity in adulthood.
Using Rolland’s Psychosocial Typology of Genomic Disorders, we 
compare attachment style and emotion regulation in persons at risk for 
a fully penetrant, unpreventable and incurable neurodegenerative dis -
order (Huntington’s Disease, CADASIL, or HCHWA-D) and in persons 
at risk for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC), which is par -
tially penetrant and for which there are preventive or treatment options. 
Participants are persons who apply for predictive testing (n=168), and 
their partners (n=96).
In our study, we find more insecure attachment in persons at risk than 
in partners. Persons at risk for a neurodegenerative disorder have 
more attachment anxiety than persons at risk for HBOC. We find inse -
cure attachment to be significantly associated with less adequate pat -
terns of emotion regulation and less psychological well being, which 
may have important consequences during the period of testing and 
dealing with test results.
We present our data along with clinical experiences in a predictive 
testing program, to show how attachment may be used to adapt psy -
chological counseling to the specific needs of persons who apply for 
testing for a disorder that has influenced their lives to a considerable 
extent.EPL1.3  Living with Huntington‘s disease from the partner‘s 
perspective
A. J. A. G. Van Tongerloo , A. M. J. J. De Paepe;  
University Hospital Gent, 9000 Gent, Belgium.
Introduction: Huntington‘s disease (HD) is an incurable, autosomal 
dominant, late onset neurodegenerative disorder. Although the impact 
of the disease on medical, procreative and psychosocial issues in HD 
patients has been studied extensively over the last years, little data on 
the consequences for the close relatives, in particular the partners, is 
available.
Materials and Methods: A qualitative study using thematic analysis 
was set up to identify the psychosocial issues experienced by healthy 
partners of HD patients, the daily challenges with which they are deal -
ing and their experiences as caregivers. Semi-structured interviews 
were conducted in 12 partners and following topics were questioned: 
1/ What disease-related issues are most difficult to cope with? 2/ How 
has your personal life changed? 3/ Are you able to cope with these 
changes? 4/ Do you communicate about the disease? 5/ How do you 
view the future?
Results: The major problem for the partners is experiencing the virtual 
‚loss‘ of their partner in life, resulting from an increasingly antisocial 
behavior and lack of communication by their diseased spouse. Their 
partner‘s illness affects them to the extent that they feel as if becoming 
ill themselves. Nevertheless, all show great loyalty and responsibility 
to their diseased spouse. Communicating about the disease to fam -
ily or friends is felt to alleviate the burden. None of the partners are 
preoccupied with the future; they handle the problems on a day-to-day 
basis.
Conclusions: Documenting experiences of partners of HD individuals 
is important to guide genetic counseling and psychological support in 
HD families.
EPL1.4  the challenge of Adolescent clients: Using Predictive 
testing for FAP as a case study for Exploring Developmentally 
Appropriate care 
R. E. Duncan1,2, M. B. Delatycki3, L. Gillam4,5, S. M. Sawyer6,5;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2Centre 
for Adolescent Health, Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research & 
Children‘s Bioethics Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 
3Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Melbourne, Australia, 
4Children‘s Bioethics Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia, 5Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 
6Centre for Adolescent Health, Royal Children‘s Hospital & Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Predictive genetic tests are routinely offered to young people during 
early adolescence as long as medical benefit is conferred by the test. 
Nonetheless, it can be highly challenging to engage, work with and 
support young people through this process due to (i) their unique de -
velopmental stage of life, (ii) the frequent and simultaneous involve -
ment of multiple family members, and (iii) the lack of training provided 
to most genetic health professionals in adolescent health and de -
velopment. Young people sit between childhood and adulthood; old 
enough to have their developing autonomy respected yet too young to 
be treated exactly as adults. They differ from adults in their cognitive 
capacities, communication styles, health risks, independence and the 
influence of peers. For these reasons, young people require a different 
clinical approach from that provided to adults. This presentation draws 
on findings from ten in-depth interviews with young people who under -
went predictive testing for familial adenomatous polyposis (four male, 
six female; five gene-positive, five gene-negative; aged 10-17 years at 
the time of their test). Using real cases and first-hand accounts from 
young people, the key challenges associated with adolescent clients 
will be highlighted. These will then be used to propose a model of best 
practice for adolescent care in clinical genetics, drawing on established 
practice wisdom in the field of adolescent medicine more broadly. The 
specific challenges brought to clinical genetics by adolescent clients 
require distinct and separate attention if developmentally appropriate 
care is to be provided both now and in the future.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 71EPL1.5  Empowerment: Development and validation of a 
new outcome measure for evaluating genetic counselling 
interventions
M. McAllister1, A. M. Wood1, G. Dunn1, S. Shiloh2, C. Todd1;  
1The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The University of 
Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel.
The aim in this study was to develop, and perform preliminary psy -
chometric validation, of a new Patient Reported Outcome Measure 
specific to genetic counselling and clinical genetics services to cap -
ture the previously identified construct of Empowerment. Findings from 
previous qualitative research, and the published research literature 
were used to develop a draft 84-item questionnaire to capture the five 
dimensions of the Empowerment construct suggested by qualitative 
research: Cognitive control, Decisional Control, Behavioural Control, 
Emotional Regulation and Hope. The draft questionnaire (paper and 
online versions) was completed by 549 members of patient support 
groups for genetic conditions. Responses were subjected to explor -
atory factor analysis, and parallel analysis was used to identify the 
number of factors to extract using promax rotation. Internal consis -
tency was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha. Test retest reliability 
was calculated using analysis of variance. Exploratory factor analysis 
identified a 7 dimensional solution: Hope, Perceived Personal Control, 
Emotional Regulation, Family Implications, Helplessness, Referral Co -
herence and Control/Benefit-Finding. Hierarchical factor analysis con -
firmed a single overarching construct, Empowerment. 24 questions 
were selected to form the final questionnaire, informed by (a) the size 
of factor loadings (b) the issues that the qualitative research suggested 
were most troubling for families affected by genetic conditions (c) clini -
cal judgement. Internal consistency (α= 0.87) and test-retest reliability 
(0.86) are acceptable. The Empowerment questionnaire has potential 
as a clinical genetics-specific Patient Reported Outcome Measure for 
use in evaluating genetic counselling interventions in both research 
and clinical contexts. The findings may also be useful for targeting ge -
netic counselling interventions.
EPL1.6  “All is done by Allah”? Understandings of Down 
syndrome in Pakistan
L. Bryant1, S. Ahmed1, M. Ahmed2, H. Jafri3, Y. Rashid4;  
1Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United 
Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Leeds Hospitals Teaching 
NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Gentec Laboratory, Lahore, Pakistan, 
4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Rawalpindi Medical College, 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
The psychosocial impact of a genetic condition can only be properly 
understood within the wider cultural context of the affected individual 
and their family. This study used Q-methodology to characterise un -
derstandings of Down syndrome in Pakistan in a sample of health pro -
fessionals and parents of children with the condition. Fifty statements 
originally developed for a UK study were translated into Urdu and 
Q-sorted by 61 participants. Statements reflected different attitudes 
towards Down syndrome in terms of its impact on the individual, their 
family and wider society. Using factor analytic techniques three inde -
pendent accounts of the condition were identified and qualitative data 
collected during the Q-sorting exercise was used in their interpretation. 
For two accounts, conceptualisations of the ‘will of God’ were central 
to an understanding of the existence of people with Down syndrome. 
However, perceptions about the value and quality of life of the indi -
vidual differed significantly between these accounts as did views about 
the impact on the immediate and extended family. The third account 
privileged a more ‘natural scientific’ view of Down syndrome as a ge -
netic abnormality but also a belief that society can further contribute to 
disabling those affected. Attitudes towards prenatal testing and termi -
nation were collected and results demonstrated that a belief in the will 
of Allah was not always associated with a rejection of these technolo -
gies. All views were situated within the cultural and economic context 
of Pakistan and reflected issues associated with raising a child with a 
learning disability and health problems in that country.
EPL2.1  the impact of predictive gene testing for hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and long QT syndrome
I. Macciocca1,2, O. Ukoumunne3,2, A. Davis4,5, R. Weintraub4, V. Connell4, 
L. Yeates6,7, J. Ingles8,7, M. Delatycki9,5, S. Wake1,2, C. Semsarian10,7, W. J. 
McKenna11,12, T. Marteau13, V. Collins5;  1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 
3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 4Royal 
Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 6Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 
7Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia, 8Royal Brisbane and Women‘s 
Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 9Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia, 10University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 11University College London, London, United 
Kingdom, 12University College London Hospitals, London, United Kingdom, 
13Kings College London, London, United Kingdom.
Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and Long QT syn -
drome (LQTS) are inherited cardiovascular conditions for which pre -
dictive testing has become more common. The most concerning fea -
ture of these conditions is sudden death which can be prevented if 
those at risk are identified.
Methods: We conducted a multi-centre prospective questionnaire-
based study to examine the impact of predictive testing for HCM/
LQTS. Understanding of test results, risk perception, motivations for 
and concerns about testing and psychological impact of result disclo -
sure were examined. Participants (n=77, 14-67 years old, 29 (37.6%) 
tested positive) were recruited from four Australian and one British site. 
Questionnaires were completed before testing and at 2 weeks and 3 
months post-disclosure.
Results: Only one participant regretted being tested and one could 
not accurately recall their result. Perceptions of the likelihood of de -
veloping disease, level of worry, and the number of concerns about 
LQTS/HCM reported were consistent with gene test result. Younger 
gene positive participants were more worried about developing dis -
ease than older ones (p=0.003). Regression analysis adjusting for 
baseline scores demonstrated a higher mean anxiety (p=0.005) and 
distress (p=0.003) score in gene positive compared to gene negative 
participants at 2 weeks, but these differences were less apparent at 
3 months. There was no difference in depression scores at any time 
point. Results did not change significantly after adjusting for potential 
confounders using analysis of covariance.
Conclusion: Participants were pleased to have undergone testing, 
understood the implications of their result and seemed to cope well 
psychologically.
EPL2.2  Risk factors for sudden cardiac death and follow-up in 
a large nationwide cohort of predictively tested hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy mutation carriers
I. Christiaans1, I. M. van Langen1, E. Birnie2, G. J. Bonsel2, A. A. M. Wilde3;  
1Academic Medical Centre, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Centre, Institute of Health Policy and 
Management, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Academic Medical Centre, Department 
of Cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Aims: We investigated the presence of a clinical diagnosis of hyper -
trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), risk factors for sudden cardiac death 
(SCD), and cardiac events during follow-up in all known Dutch predic -
tively tested asymptomatic carriers of a sarcomeric gene mutation.
Methods and results: In total 136 (30%) of 447 mutation carriers were 
diagnosed with HCM at one or more cardiological evaluation(s). Ka -
plan-Meier curves suggested slower progression to manifest HCM in 
carriers <40 years. Male gender (hazard ratio (HR) 1.69 [95%-confi -
dence interval 1.20-2.37]) and age (HR per year 1.02 [95%-confidence 
interval 1.01-1.03]) were independent predictors for manifest disease. 
Thirty-three percent of carriers, with and without manifest disease, had 
risk factor(s) for SCD. During an average follow-up of 3.5±1.7 years 
two carriers, both with manifest disease, died suddenly (0.13%/per -
son-year). A high risk status for SCD (≥2 risk factors and manifest 
HCM) was present in 16 carriers during follow-up (1.1%/person-year). 
Age was a significant predictor for a high risk status for SCD (HR per 
year 1.03 [95%-confidence interval 1.00-1.06).
Conclusions: Thirty percent of carriers had or developed manifest 
HCM after predictive DNA testing. Older age and male gender were in -
dependent predictors for manifest disease. Risk factors for SCD were 
frequently present. The low SCD rate during follow-up disallows prog -
nostic evaluation of risk factors for SCD. Our data suggest that SCD 
risk is low, that risk stratification for SCD can be omitted in carriers 
without manifest disease and that frequency of cardiological evalua -
tions can be decreased in carriers <40 years as long as hypertrophy 
is absent.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 72EPL2.3  Adolescents with implantable cardioverter defibrillators: 
a patient and parent perspective
B. Rahman1, I. Macciocca2, M. Sahhar2, S. Kamberi3, V. Connell3, R. Duncan4;  
1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Genetic Health Services 
Victoria, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal 
Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Centre for Adolescent Health, 
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is a device used in the 
treatment of individuals with life-threatening cardiac conditions. These 
include genetic disorders such as long QT syndrome, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and Brugada syndrome, which are associated with 
sudden cardiac death. The ICD detects abnormal heart rhythms and 
delivers a shock to the heart to restore it to a normal rhythm. Adult ICD 
patients consistently report elevated levels of anxiety and depression, 
as well as negative lifestyle changes associated with the device. Com -
pared to older ICD recipients, young patients face decades of life with 
the device and the long term impact and implications are important to 
consider.
This presentation draws on findings from qualitative interviews to ex -
plore the experience of living with an ICD as an adolescent. Six ado -
lescents and six of their parents participated; three of the six partici -
pants had received an ICD as part of treatment for a genetic cardiac 
condition. Eight key themes emerged: (1) Restrictions, (2) Adjusting to 
Life, (3) Professional Communication, (4) Benefits, (5) Ongoing Chal -
lenges, (6) ICD Shocks, (7) Not Being Normal, and (8) Holding Back.
Some themes reflect experiences previously reported in the literature 
such as the restrictions adolescents face, and the ICD shock experi -
ence. New findings have also emerged relating to communication be -
tween health professionals, patients and parents, and the limitations 
adolescents impose on themselves post-ICD implantation. These find -
ings have important implications for medical management, and may 
inform genetic counselling practice to ensure adolescents with ICDs 
and their families are managed sensitively and effectively.
EPL2.4  congenital heart defects and heredity: what do adult 
patients know and want to know?
K. van Engelen1, M. J. H. Baars1, L. T. van Rongen1, E. T. van der Velde2, E. 
M. A. Smets1, B. J. M. Mulder1;  
1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Most patients with congenital heart defects (CHD) survive to reproduc -
tive age. Inheritance and transmission of CHD to offspring are impor -
tant issues in this population. We evaluated patients’ knowledge and 
concerns on the heredity of their CHD and the information patients 
received from health care providers. A questionnaire was sent to 490 
adult patients with (non-syndromic) CHD aged 20 to 45 years in one 
university hospital. Until now, 328 patients (67%) completed the ques -
tionnaire. Interim analysis of 145 patients (49% male, mean age 31.7 ± 
7.5 years) showed that only 28% of patients recalled to have received 
information on heredity of their CHD from their cardiologist. Eleven 
percent of patients consulted a clinical geneticist. Patients estimated 
the recurrence risk for CHD in their (future) offspring correctly in 48%, 
too low in 8% and too high in 44%. Additional information on the he -
redity of their CHD was desired by 47% of patients. Worries about 
transmitting CHD to offspring were reported by 49%. Patients who 
estimated the recurrence risk too high were more often worried than 
patients who estimated the recurrence risk correctly (P = 0.03), and 
more often desired additional information (P = 0.03). Other predictors 
for inadequate knowledge, concerns and desire for additional informa -
tion will be discussed. We conclude that a subset of adult patients with 
CHD lack adequate knowledge on heredity and recurrence risk of their 
CHD and a large proportion of patients desire additional information. 
This study shows that better patient education on heredity of CHD is 
needed.
EPL2.5  Family letters are an effective way to inform relatives 
about inherited cardiac disease
W. P. van der Roest1, J. M. Pennings2, M. Bakker1, M. P. van den Berg3, J. P. 
van Tintelen1;  
1University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, department 
of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, department of health science/metamedica, Groningen, 
Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, department of Cardiology, Groningen, Netherlands.
Purpose: Increasing numbers of patients are being referred to cardio -
genetics outpatient clinics with potentially inherited cardiomyopathies 
(CM) and arrhythmias (ARR). To inform family members at risk, we 
ask index-patients to distribute “family-letters” containing information 
on risks, possibility of (genetic) screening and preventive options to 
close relatives. The goal of this study is to assess the response to 
these letters in terms of actual referral to a cardiologist and/or clinical 
geneticist.
Methods: Fifty-six index-patients had been asked to distribute 249 
family-letters: 85 in the ARR group and 164 in the CM group. We ana -
lyzed:
(1) Whether these family-letters had reached relatives and whether 
relatives had been referred to a cardiologist/clinical geneticist. There -
fore a questionnaire was sent to 52 index-patients.
(2) The numbers of family members that were referred to the clini -
cal geneticist and/or cardiologist by studying our files at the genetics 
department.
Results: (1) Fifty percent of index-patients responded to the ques -
tionnaire; 23/26 (88%) had passed the letters on to their relatives. In 
19/23 index-patients ≥1 family-member had been screened. (2) Within 
a mean follow-up period of 2 years the number of relatives actually 
referred differed significantly (P<0.01) between the ARR (80%) and 
CM group (45.1%).
Conclusions: A high percentage of family-members of index-patients 
with a potentially inherited cardiac disease undergo screening, particu -
larly in the ARR group, suggesting a higher anxiety in this last group. 
This study shows that distribution of “family-letters” is an effective 
means to inform and motivate relatives to undergo screening for high 
risk inherited cardiac disease.
EPL2.6   
Prenatal and preimplantation diagnoses in marfan syndrome: 
the point of view of French patients and geneticists 
F. Coron1, G. Jondeau2, V. Cusin2, S. Odent3, O. Dulac4, H. Plauchu5, P. 
Collignon6, M. Delrue7, B. Leheup8, C. Cassini1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, C. 
Boileau9, L. Faivre1;  
1Centre de génétique, Hopital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Centre de référence 
Maladie de Marfan, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France, 3Service de génétique, 
Rennes, France, 4Service de génétique, Toulouse, France, 5Service de 
génétique, Lyon, France, 6Service de génétique, Marseille, France, 7Service 
de génétique, Bordeaux, France, 8Service de génétique, Nancy, France, 
9Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France.
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue 
disorder with manifestations mainly involving the skeletal, ocular, and 
cardiovascular systems. The phenotypic variability observed in MFS 
makes genetic counseling difficult. Prenatal (PND) and preimplanta -
tion diagnoses (PID) are technically feasible when a causal mutation 
is identified, but both raise many ethical questions. Little is known re -
garding opinions and practices in such reproductive issues in MFS. 
The goal of this study was to report on patients’ points of view and 
geneticists’ standard practices. Two different questionnaires were pro -
duced. Patients questionnaires were sent by the “Association Fran -
çaise pour le Syndrome de Marfan” to its members. Fifty-four answers 
were collected, 65% from patients and 35% from unaffected relatives. 
Most of them (74%) thought that PND was acceptable, and that the 
choice should be given to the parents. Seventy percent were aware 
of the possibility of performing PND in MFS, and 54% of PID. Fifty ge -
neticists filled in the questionnaire. Forty-four percent had already had 
to deal with patients requiring information regarding PND or PID. This 
information led to PND or PID in a minority of cases. Twenty-two per -
cent of geneticists thought that PND was acceptable, 72% debatable 
and 6% not acceptable. PID was more often reported acceptable (34% 
of answers). This study showed that the majority patients were in favor 
of PND and that among practitioners opinions varied considerably.
EPL3.1  Desirability of early identification of Duchenne Muscular 
Dystrophy (DmD): parents’ experiences of the period prior to 
diagnosis
R. Eilers1, J. H. Kleinveld2, E. Vroom3, M. J. Westerman1, M. C. Cornel2,4, A. C. 
Plass2,5;  
1VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Duchenne Parent Project, Amsterdam, Netherlands, EMPAG Plenary Lectures 74The EMGO Institute for Health and care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
5The EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), X-linked recessively inherited, 
is the most common progressive muscular disorder in children. Early 
diagnosis could offer opportunities for timely initiation of treatment 
possibilities, genetic counselling, and prevent a long diagnostic quest. 
Despite the availability of a test, DMD is not included in the newborn 
screening programs. Ethical concerns, e.g. parents would not be able 
to enjoy the first carefree years of their child before learning that the 
child is affected with DMD, are considered strong arguments for not 
considering DMD screening. However, this has never been properly 
assessed.
Aim: This study aimed to explore the way in which parents experienced 
the period from their child’s birth to the time the diagnosis was made.
Method: A qualitative face-to-face semi-structured interview was held 
with parents of sons affected with DMD.
Results: 8 parent-couples, invited by the Dutch Duchenne Parent 
project, participated. They reported minor worries starting shortly af -
ter birth, increasing over time. All parents wished they had known the 
diagnosis earlier, preferably before the child was two years of age, for 
they regretted the way they had treated their child during the period in 
which they were unaware of the disorder in their child.
Conclusion: A true carefree period seemingly does not exist. Early di -
agnosis would have enabled parents to treat their child in the best 
possible way, adjusted to their child’s condition (‘good parenting’). This 
emerging need for ‘good parenting’, parents expressed, by far out -
weighed the possibility of enjoying a carefree period in the child.
EPL3.2  New non-invasive prenatal genetic technologies: Public 
understandings and concerns
H. R. Farrimond , S. E. Kelly;  
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
‘Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis’ (NIPD) is a group of novel technolo -
gies which has the potential to allow earlier and safer genetic diagnosis 
of the fetus in the womb from a sample of maternal blood. At a clinical 
level, this represents an advantageous risk reduction in comparison 
with existing invasive prenatal diagnostic techniques, such as am -
niocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Existing academic work has 
focused primarily on the bioethics of NIPD, particularly over fears of 
exacerbating routinization and the problem of obtaining informed con -
sent. However, little if any research, has considered what the public 
themselves think of the introduction of NIPD technologies. This study 
aimed to identify shared ‘lay discourses’ on NIPD amongst a sample 
of 71 UK participants using Q-methodology, a form of factor analysis. 
Participants were asked to read a short description of NIPD, and then 
sort 70 statements on the topic on whether they agreed or disagreed 
with them. A by-person factor analysis resulted in a seven factor model, 
with each factor representing a different lay discourse. Factors differed 
on several dimensions; the framing of termination decisions, the right 
to know/not know and perceived societal impact of NIPD. A consen -
sus emerged over fears of commercial testing misuse and over ‘trivial’ 
testing, with a desire for ongoing regulation by health professionals. 
However, discourses were strongly polarized. In conclusion, amongst 
this sample in the UK, there was no one public understanding of NIPD. 
This raises challenging questions about how public attitudes towards 
NIPD should be incorporated into policy decisions.
EPL3.3  Attitudes and intentions to undergo invasive prenatal 
testing: the moderating role of ambivalence
B. B. Biesecker1, M. Hankins2, M. Schwartz3, T. Marteau2;  
1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 
2Kings College, London, United Kingdom, 3Georgetown University, Washington 
DC, DC, United States.
Objective: Attitudes strongly predict prenatal screening decisions, with 
ambivalence as a moderator. This study examined ambivalence as a 
moderator of the relationship between attitudes and uptake of invasive 
prenatal testing. Methods: Eighty-four pregnant women referred for 
prenatal genetic counseling completed measures of attitudes, ambiva -
lence and intentions to undergo invasive prenatal testing. Telephone 
calls were made to participants four weeks later to learn of their test 
decision. Results: Attitudes were a strong predictor of both intentions 
and test uptake. The correlations between attitudes and intentions and 
between attitudes and uptake were greater in women with lower lev -els of ambivalence (r=0.76 and r=0.49, respectively) than in women 
with higher levels of ambivalence (r=0.45 and r=0.03, respectively). 
The difference between the correlation coefficients for each, intentions 
and uptake, was significant (p=0.0294 and p=0.0192, respectively). 
Conclusion: These findings suggest that higher ambivalence modifies 
the relationship between attitudes and test uptake in invasive prenatal 
testing decisions. Practice Implications: Reducing ambivalence among 
women facing decisions about prenatal testing may be a useful coun -
seling intervention to enhance informed choices.
EPL3.4  Reproductive decisions of couples with an increased 
risk of having a child with retinoblastoma, a cross-sectional 
survey
C. J. Dommering1, M. M. Garvelink1, A. C. Moll2, H. J. Meijers-Heijboer1, L. 
Henneman1,3;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2Department of Ophthalmology, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Public and Occupational Health, 
EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Aim: To investigate reproductive decisions of individuals at risk for a 
child with retinoblastoma (Rb), and examine factors influencing these 
decisions.
Methods: Cross-sectional questionnaire survey, 1-10 years post-ge -
netic counseling of individuals with an increased risk of a child with Rb 
who visited the National Retinoblastoma Treatment Center in the Neth -
erlands. Risk for having a child with Rb ranged from <1% to 50%.
Results: The response rate was 69% (81/118). Rb influenced past 
reproductive decisions in 25 respondents, by refraining from having 
(more) children (n=17), undergoing sterilization (n=3) or using prena -
tal diagnosis (n=5). Sixteen respondents had accepted their increased 
risk and had more children, although five of them indicated they have 
had doubts about the decisions made. Of the 40 respondents who did 
not have (more) children after being aware of their increased risk, 25 
did not have a future desire to have children for reasons other than reti -
noblastoma (e.g. family completed, gynaecological problems). Of the 
15 remaining respondents, who indicated to have a future child wish, 
11 indicated intentions to use prenatal diagnosis, preimplantation ge -
netic diagnosis or adoption, because of their increased risk. The most 
important factor that influenced reproductive decision-making was per -
ceived risk, more than actual risk (p<.05).
Conclusion: Rb has had a substantial effect on past and future repro -
ductive decisions. Ongoing access to genetic counseling and support 
in the decisional process of couples at increased risk of having a child 
with Rb is warranted.
EPL3.5  Longitudinal evaluation 7 years after termination of pregnancy (t OP) on the context of prenatal diagnosis
F. Afonso1, J. Rocha1,2, P. Rendeiro2, A. Leonardo3, M. Correia4, P. Tavares2;  
1UnIPSa-CICS, ISCS-N, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, 
Portugal, 3H. Sta. Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Mat. Alfredo Costa, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
TOP, when a fetal problem is diagnosed, frequently generates consid -
erable emotional problems, however the lack of research concerning 
long term consequences is evident. Our goal is focused on obtaining 
information about the long-term responses of perinatal grief, trauma 
and depression and its evolution, after TOP on the context of an ad -
verse prenatal diagnosis.
On the present evaluation, the following instruments were applied: 
semi-structured interview, Impact of Event-Revised Scale (IES-R), 
Perinatal Grief Scale (PGS) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Our 
sample consists of 28 women with history of TOP seven years ago, 
which consented to participate and have been evaluated also on previ -
ous moments, 15 days (BDI) and six months after (BDI and PGS).
On the evaluation seven years after TOP we observe 21.4% of wom -
en with depression (BDI>12) and 42.9% with high levels of traumatic 
stress (IES-R>35). Comparing the previous evaluations of depression, 
we found that there is a considerable decrease between first and sec -
ond evaluation (p<0.01), however there is no decrease on seventh 
year. Considering perinatal grief symptoms there is no significant de -
crease after the sixth month. Attrition rates were analyzed and the lon -
gitudinal bias controlled.
The results show a high degree of traumatic symptoms, even seven EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7years after TOP, describing the termination of pregnancy as a particu -
larly intense life event, which repercussions arise continuously, em -
phasizing the importance of a meaningful support and regular moni -
toring. Understanding of these symptoms should be considered key 
element in future approaches of the genetic counselling on the peculiar 
context of the TOP.
EPL3.6  Exploring health professionals’ views on Perinatal 
Hospice care: a qualitative study.
A. Horwood1, S. Buscombe2, J. Hodgson1,3;  
1The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 2Peter MacCallum Cancer 
Centre, East Melbourne, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Parkville, Australia.
Pregnant women receiving a diagnosis of a ‘lethal fetal abnormality’ 
may choose to either terminate their pregnancy, or continue the preg -
nancy in the knowledge that their baby is likely to die before or shortly 
after birth. In some countries perinatal hospice care is offered in these 
circumstances. It comprises provision of medical and psychosocial 
care within a multidisciplinary team. This caring environment allows 
families to engage with the ongoing pregnancy and value whatever 
time they have with their baby.
This presentation explores the views and experiences of key informant 
health professionals in Victoria, Australia involved in caring for these 
women about a) the current practice of care for women who choose to 
continue a pregnancy diagnosed with a ‘lethal fetal abnormality’, and 
b) the acceptability of perinatal hospice care. Eight semi-structured 
interviews were analysed using a qualitative approach allowing a num -
ber of themes to emerge.
Findings revealed that:
-The term ‘lethal fetal abnormality’ was viewed by this cohort as an 
inaccurate and inadequate term for these frequently complex situa -
tions.
-Current practice in Victoria is variable, commonly referred to as ‘ad 
hoc’, with some components of care needing improvement.
-All participants were supportive of perinatal hospice care and made 
suggestions about other factors to consider.
-A number of professional issues emerged including the need for edu -
cation and support for professionals working in this area of practice.
These findings have practice implications for health professionals and 
women who choose to continue a pregnancy diagnosed with a ‘lethal 
fetal abnormality’.
EPL4.1  What information do cancer genetic counselees 
prioritize?
C. Ingvoldstad1, A. Roshanai1, K. Nordin1, C. Lampic1, R. Rosenquist2;  
1Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, 
Sweden, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
Purpose: The study objective was to explore counselees’ expectations 
and the preferred issues to be discussed prior to the first genetic coun -
seling due to a personal and/or familial history of breast or colorectal 
cancer.
Method: 110 counselees attending the cancer genetic counselling 
in 2009 constituted the study sample. The data was collected using 
Q-methodology and the QUOTE-GENEca questionnaire. Counselees 
ranked 30 items, based on the order of importance to them. The re -
sponses were forced onto a quasi-normal distribution, asking the 
participants to identify the 3 most important, 3 least important, 7 very 
important, 7 next to least important and 10 items that were neither 
important nor unimportant.
Results: The counselees expected the counsellor to be skilled, provide 
them with clear explanations and risk estimations. The most important 
issues for counselees were to receive regular clinical examinations 
and information about symptoms that are important to be attentive to 
and seek further medical follow-up for. To receive general information 
on genetics, reassurance, discussing emotional issues, and receiving 
supportive calls or receiving support in communication with relatives 
was regarded as the least important topics.
Conclusion: Unlike previously assumed, emotional and communica -
tive difficulties relating to cancer genetic information, was not among 
the most important issues for the counselees. The counselee´s highest 
priority appeared to be the practical aspects of the cancer susceptibil -
ity, to receive counselling including medical and risk information and suggestions how to reduce their risk. Receiving emotional support or 
help in communicating the information to at-risk relatives was regarded 
as least important.
EPL4.2  managing anxiety in individuals undergoing cancer 
genetic risk assessment: a self-help coping intervention can 
reduce psychological distress and avoidance of genetic risk 
information.
C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray3;  
1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Service for Wales, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment and testing can cause 
psychological distress in vulnerable individuals. We have developed a 
self-help written coping intervention, based upon psychological theory, 
which teaches patients strategies to control intrusive worries whilst 
waiting for cancer genetic information.
The impact of the intervention was evaluated through a national ran -
domised controlled trial. Referrals into the Cancer Genetics Service 
for Wales over a 12 month period were randomised into intervention 
or control condition and completed questionnaires upon referral (Q1), 
four weeks later (Q2) and one month post-risk notification (Q3). 590 
participants completed Q1, 429 completed Q2, and 280 completed Q3 
with an equitable response rate across trial groups. Key psychologi -
cal outcomes included psychological distress, intrusive thoughts, and 
negative mood.
The intervention significantly reduced intrusive thoughts in those re -
porting moderate worries (p<0.05) whilst having no adverse longer-
term impact in the sample as a whole. Participants in the control group 
(but not the intervention group) who dropped out of the study reported 
significantly higher levels of avoidance (mean=11.49) than those who 
remained in the study (mean=8.99, p=0.05), and had significantly high -
er levels of negative affect (mean=19.94) than those who remained in 
the study (mean=16.91, p=.004).
The intervention offers an effective means of controlling worries in 
large patient populations undergoing genetic assessment or other 
cancer screening programmes. The intervention may also reduce the 
number of patients likely to drop out of such programmes due to high 
levels of avoidance or negative affect.
EPL4.3  Quality of life after breast cancer: information provision 
regarding DIEP flap and implant breast reconstruction
J. P. Gopie1, R. Timman2, M. A. M. Mureau2, M. T. Hilhorst2, A. Tibben1,2;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Purpose: Breast reconstruction (BR) after (prophylactic) mastectomy 
has shown to improve quality of life in patients who deal with breast 
cancer. Exploring aspects of information provision regarding BR can 
help improve counseling concerning the decision-making process of 
BR. This might make BR more accessible and the decision for a spe -
cific type of BR easier. We explored the informational and psychologi -
cal characteristics of patients who either undergo DIEP flap BR (DBR) 
or implant BR (IBR).
Methods: This study was part of a multi-centred prospective follow-up 
study (N ≈ 200). We included women who were about to undergo DBR 
or IBR. Preoperatively, women filled in psychological questionnaires 
and a study-specific questionnaire regarding information provision 
concerning BR. Analyses were aimed at the specific psychological 
characteristics that we associated with actively seeking information 
regarding BR.
Results: Preliminary results show significant differences between the 
reconstruction groups in the use of informational sources and the ex -
tent to which one makes decisions autonomously. An active coping 
strategy and more autonomy are associated with choosing for DBR. 
The physician/plastic surgeon appeared to play an important role in 
the decision-making process of BR.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study exploring informa -
tional and psychological characteristics of patients who either undergo 
DBR or IBR. Differences found between the two groups in aspects 
concerning information provision, suggest information provision re -
garding BR is not well standardized. This is an important implication 
for patient counselling which can be improved to make reconstruction 
options clear and accessible for all patients considering BR.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7EPL4.4  Acceptance, experiences and information preferences 
of young women newly diagnosed with breast cancer regarding 
treatment-focused genetic testing
B. Meiser1,2, M. Gleeson1, K. J. Watts1,2, C. Saunders3, G. Mitchell4, E. Lobb5,6, 
K. Barlow-Stewart7, J. Kirk8, K. Tucker1;  
1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 3School of Surgery, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, WA, Australia, 4Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer 
Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 5Calvary Health Care Sydney, Kogarah, 
NSW, Australia, 6WA Centre for Cancer & Palliative Care, Curtin University 
of Technology and Edith Cowan University, Perth, WA, Australia, 7Centre for 
Genetics Education, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 
8Familial Cancer Research Group, Westmead Millenium Institute for Medical 
Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Background. An increasing number of women newly diagnosed with 
breast cancer and with a family history of breast/ovarian cancer or 
with other features indicative of a high mutation carrier risk are be -
ing offered genetic testing to guide their treatment (treatment-focused 
genetic testing - TFGT). This qualitative study aimed to identify young 
women’s attitudes; prior experiences if any; and information prefer -
ences regarding TFGT.
Methods. Women (N=26) with breast cancer (<50 yrs) who had either 
(i) previously had TFGT (N=14) or (ii) had a recent breast cancer diag -
nosis and were asked about their hypothetical views of TFGT (N=12) 
participated in semi-structured interviews. The interviews were tran -
scribed verbatim and coded using NVivo software.
Results: TFGT was highly acceptable. Most women wanted to be in -
formed about it at or around the time of their cancer diagnosis. The 
primary motivation for TFGT was to obtain information to inform ap -
propriate surgical decisions. Assisting family with risk information was 
another significant motivation, while a small number also identified 
decision-making about reproduction and breast reconstruction. Half 
of the women preferred to receive the information from a genetics spe -
cialist, genetic counsellor or their breast care nurse, while half pre -
ferred to receive information from their surgeon or medical oncologist. 
The preferred format for the educational materials was brief written 
information.
Conclusion: TFGT is highly acceptable to many women, and they want 
to be informed about the testing around the time of their breast cancer 
diagnosis. We are currently in the process of developing and pilot-test -
ing a brief pamphlet on TFGT.
EPL4.5  Genetic counseling between breast cancer diagnosis 
and treatment: Psychosocial burden and clinical consequences
D. E. E. Hahn1, M. R. Wevers1,2, S. Verhoef1, M. D. K. Bolhaar1, N. K. 
Aaronson1, M. G. E. M. Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1;  
1Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background: In 15% of high-risk families, a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene 
mutation can be found. Female carriers with breast cancer have an 
increased risk of new primary tumours and may opt for preventive sur -
gery. Our aim was to evaluate the psychological impact and treatment 
consequences of rapid  genetic counseling and testing (RGCT) offered 
in the period between breast cancer diagnosis and initial surgical treat -
ment.
Methods: Female breast cancer patients, who had received RGCT at 
the Family Cancer Clinic of the Netherlands Cancer Institute between 
January 2006 and November 2008, were invited to complete a ques -
tionnaire in 2009.
Results: Of the 31 eligible patients, 27 completed the self-report ques -
tionnaire. In total 26 patients had rapid counseling and DNA-testing, 
one had rapid counseling only. Ten BRCA mutations were found. 
Almost all mutation-carriers (n=9) opted for a bilateral mastectomy, 
compared with 44% of the other patients. Despite frequent worries 
about cancer recurrence being reported by 19% of the women, daily 
functioning was not impaired by these worries. Ten patients received 
psychosocial counseling at the time of RGCT; 8 reported that this was 
(very) useful. More than 90% of patients were (very) satisfied with the 
timing of RGCT and with the decisional process.
Conclusions: This small retrospective study suggests that RGCT in 
high-risk breast cancer patients may influence surgical treatment, with -
out causing long-term distress. The offer of psychosocial counseling at the time of RGCT was valued. Currently, a large, prospective ran -
domized clinical trial is being conducted to investigate these issues 
further.
EPL4.6  Psychological impact of msi testing shortly after cRc 
diagnosis
K. M. Landsbergen , J. B. Prins, H. G. Brunner, P. van Duijvendijk, F. M. 
Nagengast, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, N. Hoogerbrugge;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: The aim of the present study is to determine psychologi -
cal distress and effects on family communication in recently diagnosed 
patients with CRC after MSI testing.
Method: Newly diagnosed patients (n=400) with CRC from 33 Dutch 
hospitals whose CRC had been tested for MSI were identified by the 
researcher and invited to participate by their surgeons. Patients re -
ceived questionnaires immediately after MSI-test disclosure (T1) and 
6 months later (T2).
Results: Response rates of patients with high (MSI+) and with low (MSI-
) risk for Lynch syndrome were 30% (n=23/77) and 18% (n=57/323) re -
spectively. At T1, mean levels of cancer specific distress (IES-cancer) 
of MSI+ patients and MSI- patients were high (25.1, SD 9.4 and 26.2, 
SD 4.7, respectively) but not statistically significant different. Levels of 
cancer specific distress reached a post traumatic stress disorder level 
(IES >26) in 49% of this newly diagnosed patient group, consisting of 
9 MSI+ patients and 30 MSI- patients (P=0.16). At T1, mean levels of 
general psychological distress (SCL-90) of MSI+ patients and MSI- pa -
tients were 137.0 (SD 43.9) and 128.7 (SD 36.2) respectively (P=0.4). 
MSI+ patients had statistically significant less family communication 
compared to MSI- patients, 12.8 (SD 5.5) and 15.9 (SD 4.5) respec -
tively (P=0.01). Results of T2 are expected in May 2010.
Conclusion: Newly diagnosed patients at high risk for hereditary CRC 
report similar levels of psychological distress, but had less open family 
communication as compared to patients who are at low risk for heredi -
tary CRC.
EPL6.1  communicating BRcA1/2 genetic test results within 
families: implications for genetic counselling
C. Jacobs1, C. Dancyger2, S. Michie2, J. Smith3;  
1Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 
2University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Birkbeck College, 
London, United Kingdom.
Background: Communication of genetic risk information is central to 
clinical genetics. In the UK patients are encouraged to disseminate 
risk information throughout their families, but the processes involved 
in doing this and subsequent impact upon family relationships are not 
well understood. This study explored the flow of BRCA1/2 test informa -
tion through families, factors that influenced communication, and the 
process and outcomes of communication within the family.
Method: Results consultations with 10 women affected with breast/
ovarian cancer receiving positive BRCA1/2 genetic test results were 
audio-recorded. Semi-structured interviews were later conducted to 
explore the womens’ understanding of their results and experiences 
of communicating this information to relatives. For each family, similar 
interviews were then conducted with two relatives with whom test re -
sults had been shared. Data were analysed using Interpretative Phe -
nomenological Analysis.
Findings: Analyses indicated that not all information was accurately 
communicated or understood by relatives, and not all relatives were 
informed of results. Three themes emerged: responsibility to tell; emo -
tional and developmental readiness and communicating in the context 
of the existing family culture.
Discussion: These findings highlight the importance for clinicians of 
communicating genetic information in the context of the family’s exist -
ing communication patterns and relationships; of acknowledging the 
influence of feelings of responsibility and obligation within families and 
of supporting patients in considering who will take responsibility for 
communicating test results to relatives, and what will happen if their 
normal channels of communication are unavailable.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7EPL6.2  Psychological distress in women at risk for hereditary 
breast cancer: the role of family communication and perceived 
social support
M. den Heijer ;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background:  Hereditary breast cancer has a profound impact on individ -
ual family members and on their mutual communication and interactions. 
The way at-risk women cope with the threat of hereditary breast cancer 
may depend on the quality of family communication about hereditary 
breast cancer and on the perceived social support from family and friends.  
Objective:  To examine the associations of family communi -
cation and social support with long-term psychological dis -
tress in a group of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer.  
Methods: The study cohort consisted of 222 women at risk for he -
reditary breast cancer, 4-9 years after they participated in stud -
ies on the psychological consequences of either regular breast 
surveillance or prophylactic surgery. Two months before a sur -
veillance appointment at the clinic general and breast cancer 
specific distress, hereditary cancer related family communica -
tion, perceived social support and demographics were assessed.  
Results:  We found that open communication about hereditary cancer 
within the family was associated with less general and breast can -
cer specific distress. In addition, perceived support from family and 
friends was indirectly associated with less general and breast can -
cer specific distress through open communication within the family.  
Discussion:  These findings show that family communication and per -
ceived social support from friends and family are of paramount impor -
tance in the long-term adaptation to being at risk for hereditary breast 
cancer. Sources of support and family communication about hereditary 
cancer need to be addressed and explored by clinicians working with 
women at risk for hereditary breast cancer.
EPL6.3  is telegenetics as effective as face-to-face consultations 
for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer genetic counseling?
E. M. Zilliacus1, B. Meiser2, E. A. Lobb3, K. Barlow-Stewart4, P. Kelly5, J. Kirk6, 
A. Spigelman7, L. Warwick8, K. Tucker9;  
1University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 2Department of Medical 
Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Calvary Health 
Care, Sydney, Australia, 4Centre for Genetics Education, North Shore Hospital, 
St Leonards, Australia, 5Sydney School of Public Health, Sydney, Australia, 
6Familial Cancer Service, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, Australia, 7UNSW St 
Vincent‘s Clinical School, Sydney, Australia, 8ACT Genetics Service, Canberra 
Hospital, Woden, Australia, 9Dept Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, 
Randwick, Australia.
Purpose: Telegenetics is increasingly being used to deliver familial 
cancer services for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) to out -
reach areas; however there has been little research evaluating this 
method of service delivery. This study aimed to evaluate the effec -
tiveness and acceptability of genetic counseling through videocon -
ferencing. Methods: Three hundred women were recruited between 
December 2007 and December 2009. Ninety-three women seen by 
videoconferencing and 78 women seen face-to-face participated in the 
evaluation. A questionnaire was administered prior to genetic coun -
seling, and one month post-consultation. The questionnaire measured 
knowledge of HBOC, expectations, satisfaction, perceived personal 
control, perceived clinician empathy, cancer-specific anxiety, general -
ized anxiety and depression. Results: No significant differences were 
found between telegenetics and face-to-face genetic counseling in 
terms of changes in knowledge (p = 0.36), patient satisfaction (p = 
0.18), perceived empathy of the genetic clinician (p = 0.20), and de -
pression (p = 0.67). Telegenetics performed significantly better than 
face-to-face counseling in meeting patients’ expectations ( p < 0.001), 
promoting perceived personal control (p < 0.001), reducing breast can -
cer-specific anxiety (p < 0.001), and in terms of perceived empathy of 
the genetic counselor (p = 0.03). By contrast, face-to-face counseling 
was more effective than telegenetics in terms of reducing generalized 
anxiety (p = 0.007).
Conclusion: Telegenetics performed as well as, if not better than, tradi -
tional face-to-face genetic counseling in all outcomes other than gen -
eralized anxiety. It appears to be an acceptable and effective method 
of delivering genetic counseling services for HBOC to outreach areas.EPL6.4  A whisper-game perspective on the family 
communication of DNA-test results: A retrospective study on 
the communication process of BRcA1/2-test results between 
genetic-counsellor, proband and relatives
J. Vos1, A. M. Jansen1, F. Menko2, C. J. Van Asperen1, A. M. Stiggelbout3, A. 
Tibben1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Decision-Making, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Purpose - We analyzed how DNA-test result information was commu -
nicated and perceived within families.
Method - We conducted a retrospective descriptive study in 13 pro -
bands with an unclassified variant, 7 with a pathogenic mutation, 5 with 
an uninformative result, and in respectively 44, 14, and 12 of their rela -
tives. We examined differences and correlations between: (a) informa -
tion actually communicated by genetic-counsellors, (b) probands‘ per -
ception, (c) relatives‘ perception. The perception consisted of recollec -
tions and interpretations of both cancer-risks and heredity-likelihood.
Results - Differences and low correlations suggested few similari -
ties between the actually communicated information, the probands‘ 
and the relatives‘ perception. More specifically, probands recalled 
the communicated information differently compared to the actually 
communicated information(R=.40), and reinterpreted this information 
differently(R=.30). The relatives‘ perception was best correlated with 
the proband‘s interpretation(R=.08), but this perception differed signifi -
cantly from their proband‘s perception. Finally, relatives reinterpreted 
the information they received from their proband differently(R=.25), 
and this interpretation was only slightly related with the original mes -
sage communicated by the genetic-counsellor(R=.15). Unclassified-
variant were most frequently misinterpreted by probands and rela -
tives, and had largest differences between probands‘ and relatives‘ 
perceptions. The low correlations between the proband‘s and relatives‘ 
perception could be explained by the way in which the proband had 
communicated the DNA-test result, especially the amount of provided 
reassurance.
Discussion - Like in a children‘s whisper-game, many errors occur in 
the transmission of DNA-test result information in families. More at -
tention is required for how probands disseminate information to rela -
tives. Genetic-counsellors may directly communicate to relatives, e.g. 
via letters.
EPL6.5  t aking on passing on: A grounded theory on containing 
cancer in BRcA carriers
L. A. Jeffers1,2, d. Fitzsimons2,1, E. McCaughan3, P. Morrison1;  
1Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2University of 
Ulster, Jordanstown, United Kingdom, 3University of Ulster, Coleraine, United 
Kingdom.
Background: Psychosocial research into the BRCA1/2 breast cancer 
susceptibility genes has yet to account for any long term psychosocial 
effects of genetic testing in gene carriers who have a personal history 
of HBOC.
Aim of Study: To address this deficit in the literature this study was 
concerned with exploring the experience and needs of this group of 
women over time.
Methodology: A grounded theory approach was taken using qualitative 
interviews (n= 42) and reflective diaries.
Analysis and Results: Containing cancer emerged as the basic social 
psychological process through which BRCA carriers with a personal 
history of HBOC respond to and resolve what is for them, a major con -
cern - the passing on of a cancer gene to their offspring.
Constant comparative analysis of the data traces the development of 
the process through the stages (1) Hypothesising Risk, (2) Formalising 
Risk (3) Minimising Risk and Maximising Survival
The theory adds to the literature on coping and adaption, health psy -
chology theories and dimensions of women’s health in relation to their 
multiplicity of roles.
Implications for Clinical Practice: This prospective longitudinal study 
adds to clinical practice by contributing to our understanding of how 
women cope with learning their genetic status and manage its im -
plications at a personal, familial and societal level over time. It has 
highlighted ongoing needs of women after they leave a cancer ge -
netic clinic and part of the genetic counselling role would be preparing EMPAG Plenary Lectures 77women and other pertinent health professionals in how best to meet 
the needs of this group.
EPL6.6  Genetic testing for Brca and Hungtington’s disease in 
twins: experience of 10 cases
M. M. Bottomley , T. Clancy, G. Evans, G. Hall, W. Beckett, L. Kerzin-Storrar;  
Department of Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
We present our experience with 10 families with presumed identical 
twins/triplets presenting to the genetic service for discussion about 
genetic testing for BrCa or Huntington’s disease. The cases included 
one set of female triplets, and all but one of the twin pairs were also 
female. Seven cases involved presymptomatic genetic tests, the other 
3 were diagnostic tests for one twin and presymptomatic for the other. 
For half of the cases, both twins were seen in our genetic clinic, for the 
other half the second twin was either seen in another genetic service 
or did not have a genetic consultation for a variety of reasons. In all 
but one case, decisions about testing were agreed between the twins/
triplets. In the remaining case the presenting twin was encouraged to 
make contact with her estranged twin in another country, but has not 
proceeded to testing.
We encountered several issues relating to the process and outcome of 
testing, including consent, value of zygosity testing, relative prepared -
ness for testing, coordination of result disclosure, as well as impact 
of result for twins and the family. We will discuss strategies which we 
found helpful in genetic counselling management of these cases, in -
cluding using zygosity testing to increase preparedness for the test 
result, encouraging the initially presenting twin to consider the impli -
cations of testing for their twin and on the twin-twin relationship, and 
careful planning for timely progression and result giving.
EPL7.1  Descriptive and numeric estimation of risk for psychotic 
disorders among affected individuals and relatives: implications 
for clinical practice
J. C. Austin , W. G. Honer;  
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Background: Psychotic illnesses cumulatively affect 3% of the popu -
lation. Affected individuals and their families want information about 
psychosis risks for other family members. Deriving accurate numeric 
probabilities for psychosis risk is challenging, and people have difficul -
ty interpreting probabilistic information, thus it is tempting for clinicians 
to use risk descriptors rather than numbers. Relationships between 
families’ perceptions of numeric probabilities and risk descriptors in 
the context of psychosis are unknown. Purpose: We explored numeric 
and descriptive estimations of psychosis risk in a cohort of individuals 
with psychotic disorders and unaffected first-degree relatives. Method: 
An online survey was posted on an Early Psychosis Intervention web -
site. Respondents numerically and descriptively estimated risk for an 
individual to develop psychosis in two scenarios. In scenario 1, the 
individual had no affected family members, in scenario 2, the individ -
ual had an affected sibling. Results: 250 affected individuals and 268 
first-degree relatives estimated numeric probabilities and attributed a 
descriptor in at least one scenario. Affected individuals significantly es -
timated higher risks than relatives. Numeric probabilities of 1%, 10%, 
25% and 50% were attributed all descriptors between “very low” and 
“very high” by respondents. There were significant differences between 
distributions of descriptors attributed to identical numeric probabilities 
between scenarios, with more certain descriptors being used in sce -
nario 2. Conclusion: Considerable inter-individual and inter-contextual 
variability exists in terms of how risk descriptors are applied to numeric 
probabilities for psychosis. For those providing counseling about risks 
for psychosis, in clinical practice, using risk descriptors only with cau -
tion may be appropriate.
EPL7.2  A population based study of the psychosocial impact 
of Klinefelter syndrome and attitudes towards diagnosis and 
screening
A. S. Herlihy1,2,3, R. I. McLachlan4,5,3, L. Gillam1,6,7, M. L. Cock3,2, J. L. 
Halliday1,7;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Monash University, 
Clayton, Australia, 3Andrology Australia, Clayton, Australia, 4Prince Henry‘s 
Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Australia, 5Monash University, Clayton, Austria, 6Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 7The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition (47XXY) affecting 
males, which results in a spectrum of clinical features including in -
fertility, androgen deficiency, gynaecomastia, behavioural and learn -
ing difficulties. The prevalence has been estimated at 1:650, yet up 
to 70% remain undiagnosed. While the medical aspects have been 
explored, almost no evidence exists regarding the personal impact of 
KS. This study aims to determine (a) the psychosocial impact of KS (b) 
the influence on adult quality of life of age at diagnosis, testosterone 
treatments and other interventions, and (c) attitudes of men with KS 
towards optimal diagnosis age, acceptability of screening, and effec -
tiveness of therapeutic interventions.
A population-based sample was recruited from a broad range of sourc -
es. 87 participants completed a written questionnaire. Of these, 79 pro -
vided a saliva sample for genetic analysis and 77 agreed to take part in 
an interview. The mean age was 43 years (range 19 to 76). Compared 
to population normative data, there was strong evidence (p<0.001) of 
the KS cohort having differences in: subjective well-being (PWI), body 
image (MBSRQ), self-esteem (RSE), and mental health (K-10). 72% of 
participants were diagnosed as adults, and 66% of these wished they 
had been diagnosed earlier. Two thirds of all participants supported 
population screening for KS.
For men with KS, there is a measurably negative psychosocial impact 
of having this condition. The possible benefits of achieving earlier di -
agnosis through population screening should be considered in relation 
to possible negative impacts, using available frameworks (Herlihy et 
al, 2010).
EPL7.3  the clinical utility of web-based familial risk information 
for diabetes prevention: do people adopt risk-reducing 
behaviours?
M. Wijdenes-Pijl1, D. Timmermans1, M. Cornel2, L. Henneman1,2;  
1Department of Public and Occupational Health, EMGO Institute for Health 
and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
2Department of Clinical Genetics, section Community Genetics, EMGO Institute 
for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
Aim: To investigate how personalized prevention messages based on 
familial risk information using a web-based tool affect (determinants 
of) self-reported health behaviour (i.e. saturated fat intake and physi -
cal activity).
Methods: Overweight individuals with and without a family history of 
diabetes (aged 45 - 65 years) were randomized to receive web-based 
diabetes risk information based on: (1) general risk factors alone (con -
trol group, n=588), (2) general as well as familial risk factors (interven -
tion group, n=586). Outcomes were assessed using questionnaires at 
baseline, post-test, and 3-months follow-up.
Results: There was no overall effect of familial risk information on health 
behaviour, except for low educated people a decrease in self-reported 
saturated fat intake was found ( p=0.05). For people with a family his -
tory, there was no effect on the perception that heredity is an important 
cause of diabetes ( p=0.43). In contrast, there was an increase of this 
perception for people without a family history ( p<0.01). The interven -
tion resulted in a lower increase in perceived susceptibility of diabetes 
for people with a family history ( p<0.05). Whereas, no effect was found 
on perceived susceptibility for people without a family history.
Conclusions: People with a family history already seem to be aware of 
heredity as a cause of diabetes. Web-based familial risk information 
did not motivate risk-reducing behaviour, but might be effective for low 
educated people. Of note, the emphasis on familial risk information did 
not result in false reassurance for people without a family history, since 
there was no effect on perceived susceptibility .
EPL7.4  Parents‘, patients‘ and professionals‘ views on genetic 
counselling for cleft lip and palate
R. M. MacLeod , M. McAllister, A. Callard, J. Clayton-Smith;  
The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background: Individuals and parents of children with cleft lip and pal -
ate (CLP) may benefit from genetic counselling to discuss aetiology 
and recurrence risk. However, it is not clear what is the best way to EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7offer these services to achieve the balance between raising concerns 
amongst families at low risk, and providing risk information to those 
families who may benefit.
Aim: To explore the views of families affected by CLP, and of profes -
sionals involved in their care about how genetic counselling for CLP 
might best be provided.
Method: A qualitative approach was used, involving 3 focus groups 
(n=13), with healthcare professionals caring for families affected by 
CLP in Manchester (including speech therapists, surgeons and pae -
diatricians) and 8 telephone interviews with patients and family mem -
bers. Semi structured interview schedules were used that included 
questions about perceived advantages and disadvantages of attend -
ing a genetics appointment, preferences for receiving genetic informa -
tion and understanding of roles within the CLP team. Transcripts were 
analysed using a modified grounded theory approach.
Results: Health professional participants had concerns about timing of 
referral, and uncertainties about how to approach the offer of genetic 
counselling. Patients wanted information from an ‘expert’ but felt the 
period immediately following the birth of an affected child was prob -
ably too soon. Patients and health professionals both wanted a clear 
plan for follow up, and access to information for specific groups e.g. 
teenagers.
Conclusion: Findings will be used to develop a model of service deliv -
ery for CLP families, for evaluation in a follow-up study.
EPL7.5  New European recommendations for genetic 
counselling - the views of clinical genetics professionals
R. A. Pestoff1,2, H. Kääriäinen3, L. Kerzin-Storrar4;  
1Regional Oncogenetic Clinic, Oncology Department, Linköping University 
Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, 2Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health 
Sciences Centre, CMFT and University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom, 3National Insitute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4Genetic 
Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, CMFT and University 
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
This study, carried out in collaboration with EuroGentest, sought to 
investigate practicing genetic professionals views of new ESHG en -dorsed European recommendations for genetic counselling related to 
genetic testing (www.eurogentest.org). These guidelines outline pre 
and post test counselling for a range of situations including predictive, 
carrier and prenatal testing. Forty-six (response rate 35%) of invited 
genetic counselling professionals (25 medical geneticists, 25 genetic 
counsellors, and 4 psychologists) from 19 European countries partici -
pated, comprising a professionally and geographically diverse group of 
respondents all currently in clinical practice. A questionnaire including 
opportunities for free text responses was used to evaluate attitudes to 
the recommendations and relevance to their practice.
Participants were unanimously positive to having European guide -
lines. The most frequent reasons reported were: advantages to the 
professional of accessing collective expertise, promoting consistent 
quality of service provision, and providing a framework for developing 
local or national guidelines where this did not already exist. Ninety 
percent of participants reported that their current practice meets all 
or most of the recommendations, however half described areas for 
improvement, most commonly provision of written information to pa -
tients and adequate psychological support following test results. Lack 
of time and resources was the barrier to providing adequate provision 
in these areas and several respondents stated that genetic counselling 
had a low national priority leading to insufficient resources. Interest -
ingly, very few professional or societal cultural barriers to implementing 
the guidelines were reported, although a few participants commented 
that recommendations could lead to a loss of professional flexibility 
and freedom.EMPAG Plenary Lectures 7Abstracts of EmPAG concurrent sessions
Ec5.1  Genetic testing of newborns for type 1 diabetes 
susceptibility: A prospective cohort study on effects on maternal 
mental health
K. K. Aas1, K. Tambs1, M. S. Kise2, P. Magnus1, K. S. Rønningen1;  
1Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 2Norwegian Directorate of 
Health, Oslo, Norway.
Background
Genetic testing for susceptibility for type 1 diabetes was performed 
for a cohort of Norwegian newborns in the prospective study “Envi -
ronmental Triggers of Type 1 Diabetes” (MIDIA). This study assesses 
whether mothers of the children that test positively suffer from poorer 
mental health and well-being after receiving genetic risk information 
about their children.
Methods
The study was based on data from the Norwegian Mother and Child 
Cohort Study (MoBa). Many of the mothers in the MoBa study took 
part in the MIDIA study where their newborn child was tested for ge -
netic susceptibility for type 1 diabetes.
We used MoBa questionnaire data from the 30th week of pregnancy 
(baseline) and 6 months post partum (3 months post test). We mea -
sured maternal symptoms of anxiety and depression (SCL-8), mater -
nal self-esteem (RSES) and satisfaction with life (SWLS). We com -
pared questionnaire data from mothers who had received information 
that their newborn had high genetic risk for type 1 diabetes (N=166) 
with data from mothers who were informed that their baby did not have 
a high-risk genotype (N=7224). The association between risk informa -
tion and maternal mental health measures was analysed using mul -
tiple linear regression analysis, controlling for baseline mental health 
scores.
Results
Information on genetic risk in their newborns showed no significant 
impact on maternal symptoms of anxiety and depression (p=0.9), self 
esteem (p=0.2) or satisfaction with life (p=0.2).
Conclusions
This study did not support that genetic risk information about their 
newborns has a negative impact on the mental health in Norwegian 
mothers.
Ec5.2  short-term psychological outcomes of ovarian cancer 
screening in women at high genetic risk
K. Brain1, K. J. Lifford1, J. Austoker2, L. Bayne3, A. Clements2, L. Fraser4, R. 
Iredale1, I. Jacobs4, D. Lancastle5, U. Menon4, C. Phelps6, M. T. Rogers1, A. 
Rosenthal4,7, E. Watson8;  
1School of Medicine, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom, 2Primary Care Research Education Group, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Ovacome, London, United Kingdom, 
4Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute for Women‘s 
Health, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 6School of 
Psychology, Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 
7Institute of Cancer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University London, London, United Kingdom, 8School of Health 
and Social Care, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Purpose: PsyFOCS is an ongoing multi-centre, prospective cohort 
study of the psychological effects of screening in women taking part in 
Phase 2 of the UK Familial Ovarian Cancer Screening Study. Phase 2 
screening involves an annual scan of the ovaries and 4-monthly CA125 
blood tests, with further tests prompted by receipt of either an interme -
diate blood result (rising CA125) or abnormal scan. These analyses 
examine the short-term outcomes for women who have received their 
first Phase 2 blood test result. Method: Women who received a nor -
mal result (n=799) and women who received an intermediate result 
(n=105) completed questionnaires at baseline and one week after re -
ceiving their results. The questionnaires included measures of cancer-
related distress (Impact of Event Scale) and general anxiety and de -
pression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale). Results: There was 
a significant overall effect of time, with women reporting significantly 
greater levels of cancer-related distress one week after receiving a 
screening result compared to baseline (p<.001). However, women who 
received an intermediate result reported significantly greater increases 
in cancer-related distress compared to women who received a nor -mal result (p<.001). No significant changes in general anxiety (p=.25) 
or depression (p=.64) were observed. Conclusion: These preliminary 
results suggest that participating in ovarian cancer screening leads to 
increased cancer-related distress in the short-term, but not increased 
general anxiety or depression. Future analyses will compare longer-
term changes in distress and anxiety over time between women with 
normal results and women with intermediate results who are returned 
to routine screening following further tests.
Ec5.3  Psychological distress in high-risk individuals 
undergoing pancreatic cancer screening
T. Nagtegaal1, F. Harinck2, I. Kluijt1, C. M. Aalfs3, E. Smets3, J. Poley2, A. 
Wagner2, J. van Hooft3, P. Fockens3, M. J. Bruno2, E. M. A. Bleiker1;  
1The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 
3Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction In a research setting, individuals identified by clinical ge -
neticists to be at high-risk for pancreatic cancer (PC) are offered PC 
screening (MRI and endoscopic ultrasound). However, it is yet unclear 
what the benefits, in terms of mortality are. This study investigates the 
psychological burden of, and experiences with, the PC surveillance 
program.
Methods Either mutation carriers of PC prone hereditary tumor syn -
dromes (HTS; p16-Leiden, BRCA, p53, Peutz Jeghers Syndrome), or 
first degree relatives of patients with familial-PC (FPC) were invited 
to undergo PC screening. After screening, a questionnaire was sent 
assessing reasons for, and experiences with, screening, benefits and 
barriers of screening, concerns about cancer (Cancer Worry Scale), 
and anxiety and depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale).
Results Forty-seven individuals (85%) completed the questionnaire 
(49% male, 26 HTS, 21 FPC). Most respondents underwent both EUS 
and MRI (94%). Most reported reason to undergo screening was: 
“Possible early detection of PC” (100%). Screening was reported as 
“very to extremely uncomfortable” by 13% for MRI, and 19% for EUS. 
Furthermore 32% worried most about the chance that relatives get 
cancer and 32% are “often” or “almost always” concerned about devel -
oping cancer themselves. Eight respondents (17%) have clinical levels 
of depression or anxiety. Almost all respondents (92%) reported that 
perceived advantages outweighed disadvantages of screening.
Conclusion Results indicate that one third of the respondents worry 
frequently about cancer, both for themselves and relatives. A minority 
seem to be in need of professional psychosocial care. However, the 
benefits of screening outweigh the barriers.
Ec5.4  Applying measures of informed decision making to 
population carrier screening for fragile X syndrome
S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Ames1, A. Archibald1, J. Cohen2, J. Emery3, M. Hill4,5, M. 
Martyn4, O. Ukoumunne1;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Fragile X Alliance Inc and Monash 
University, Melbourne, Australia, 3University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia, 4Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 
5Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Informed decision making (IDM) is important in order for individuals to 
make autonomous decisions without coercion or deception. Tools have 
been developed to measure IDM in prenatal Down syndrome screen -
ing, eg the multidimensional measure of informed choice (MMIC), 
plus a deliberation scale (MMIC+D). We are currently offering carrier 
screening for fragile X syndrome (FXS) to women from the general 
population and applying existing tools to examine IDM in this context.
Women completed a questionnaire at the time of deciding about test -
ing and provided a saliva sample (if tested). The questionnaire con -
tained measures of FXS knowledge, attitudes and deliberation, as well 
as other questions derived from the Health Belief Model. The MMIC 
model was applied to these data, including that of test uptake. A sub-
group of women were also interviewed. Responses in the structured 
interviews were compared with corresponding responses in the ques -
tionnaires to triangulate the findings. Interview responses were sub -
jected to content analysis, coded by three independent researchers.
Results are summarised in the table. 73% of women were classified as 
having made an ‘informed choice’ based on MMIC. Adding the deliber -
ation scale resulted in 65% of women having made an ‘informed deci -EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 0sion’. While interview and questionnaire findings concurred, interviews 
highlighted factors other than poor knowledge, which contributed to 
the apparent lack of IDM. These factors are not captured by these 
measures, requiring different approaches.
Questionnaire measures N = 118
• Test uptake 83%
• Good knowledge (K) 81%
• Positive attitudes (A) 87%
• Deliberated (D) * 86%
mmic - ‘informed choice’  
(tested, good K, +ve A or not tested, good K, -ve A)73%
mmic+D * - ‘informed decision’  
(tested, good K, +ve A, D or not tested, good K, -ve A, D)  
* N = 116  65%
EC5.5  Parental feelings towards the unsought identification 
of newborns as carrier of sickle cell anaemia through newborn 
screening
A. C. Plass1,2, M. Westerman3,2, M. C. Cornel1,2;  
1VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO-institute 
for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3VU University, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
In 2007, the neonatal screening programme in the Netherlands was 
expanded to include sickle cell anaemia. Besides identifying patients, 
this also leads to unsought identification of sickle cell carriers. Since 
the latter is not directly in the child’s’ best interest, parents may ‘opt-out’ 
from receiving this information. The most important reason to disclose 
this information to the parents is to enable them to base their future 
reproductive choices on this. The aim of this study was to explore how 
parents perceive their child’s carrier status being disclosed to them, 
and to see whether they take this information into account regarding 
their future reproductive choices.
Method
From March to September 2007, parents of newborns identified as 
sickle cell carriers, were invited to take part in a qualitative semi-struc -
tured face-to-face interview.
Results
48 parent-couples were invited, 19 accepted; eventually 13 interviews 
could be held. Parents were unaware of the possibility to ‘opt-out’ from 
receiving information about their child’s carrier status. Initially, parents 
were shocked after receiving carrier information. Parents did not un -
derstand the proper meaning of carrier status. They had not under -
stood that their child would not suffer from sickle cell anaemia. They did not link their child’s carrier status to their own future reproductive 
choices.
Conclusion
The way in which information on carrier status of sickle cell anaemia 
is being disclosed needs to be improved. The most important reason 
for disclosing this information - to enable the parents to make future 
reproductive choices - is not yet being achieved.
Ec5.6  Knowledge and perceived risks in couples undergoing 
genetic testing after recurrent miscarriage or in men with poor 
semen quality.
F. Vansenne1, M. Goddijn1, B. Redeker1, S. Snijder1, K. Gerssen-Schoorl2, H. 
H. Lemmink2, N. J. Leschot1, F. van der Veen1, P. M. M. Bossuyt1, C. A. J. M. de 
Borgie1;  
1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
In reproductive medicine, couples with recurrent miscarriage (RM) and 
men with poor semen quality may undergo genetic testing as part of 
the diagnostic work-up. We explored the knowledge and perception of 
genetic testing in those couples, evaluated their psychological well-be -
ing and identified associated variables.
A prospective questionnaire study was conducted in 7 Clinical Genet -
ics Centres and referring gynaecological departments in couples with 
RM or poor semen quality. Questionnaires were completed before dis -
closure of genetic test result. Main outcome measures were knowl -
edge, perceived risk, anxiety and depression.
Almost 60% of participants (256 of 439) were not aware genetic testing 
was part of their diagnostic work-up. One third (36% RM, 33% poor 
semen quality) indicated they had not received information about the 
genetic test from their doctor. Perceived risk of receiving an abnormal 
genetic test result was higher than objective risk. Anxiety was highly 
correlated with perceived risk. Women with RM were more anxious 
than women in the poor semen quality group or men (p<0.01). There 
were no higher levels of depression.
Couples undergoing genetic testing after RM or with poor semen qual -
ity have a suboptimal understanding of the nature of testing, overes -
timate the risks of receiving an abnormal result, and some indicate 
high levels of anxiety. Improved knowledge of genetic testing in these 
couples is needed before a genetic test is performed. This could lead 
to more realistic expectations of patients about the consequences of 
the genetic test and to less anxiety before disclosure of the genetic 
test result.EMPAG Concurrent Sessions 1Abstracts of EmPAG Workshops
EWs1.1  t eaching counselling skills for genetic counselling 
practice
R. M. MacLeod1, D. Scotcher1, J. Hodgson2, M. Sahhar2;  
1The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Teaching counselling skills for genetic practice is a core element of 
most genetic counselling programmes. In Europe there has recently 
been an increase in the number of Master level genetic counselling 
programmes with more due to start. The University of Manchester and 
University of Melbourne have been involved in teaching counselling 
skills to genetic counselling students since 1992 and 1996 respectively. 
A workshop is planned to discuss our combined experiences highlight -
ing the need to balance theory with acquisition of skills, and to foster 
both relationship skills and reflective practice. This will be set against 
the competencies expected for professional certification. In addition 
we will demonstrate how new genetic counselling research evidence 
is integrated into the curriculum. Both programmes emphasize the im -
portance of students having the opportunity to tape their own consulta -
tions/role plays, reflect on the process and receive feedback from their 
peer group and lecturer. The way role plays are set up for students and 
how feedback is provided will also be discussed. Excerpts from a pre -
pared teaching videotape, using an actor as a simulated patient, will 
be shown. The second half of the workshop will include small group 
discussions with a facilitator to exchange views and ideas on methods 
of teaching counselling skills and theories considered relevant to ge -
netic counselling practice.
EWs2.1  Embedding genetic counsellors into clinical genetics in 
Europe
H. Skirton1, M. Voelckel2;  
1Faculty of Health, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, 
Marseille, France, Marseille, France.
Across Europe there are wide variations in the roles and duties under -
taken by genetic counsellors. In some countries, there are few genetic 
counsellors and no structure for involving them in clinical healthcare, 
while in other countries genetic counsellors have a formal registration 
system and are integral to the delivery of specialist genetic services. 
However, there is increasing evidence of the need for genetic counsel -
lors to contribute to patient care in many contexts. For example, the 
guidelines on genetic testing developed by the EuroGentest project 
indicate that health professionals with specific training in genetic coun -
selling should be involved in supporting patients in the pre- and post-
test periods. In this workshop, we will explore the developing involve -
ment of genetic counsellors in services across Europe. Perspectives 
from a range of cultural, national contexts and disciplinary contexts will 
be presented.
In the first session, patients who have experienced genetic services 
will contribute their perspectives on what the service user requires and 
expects from a genetic counsellor. The role of genetic counsellors in 
multi-disciplinary clinics and reference centres for rare diseases will be 
discussed by expert practitioners in the field of clinical genetics, while 
new and innovative approaches to embedding the work of genetic 
counsellors in other specialties will be presented by practitioners from 
Spain. Finally, the need to ensure patient safety through the use of 
counselling supervision for genetic counsellors will be explored. There 
will be opportunities for members of the audience to contribute their 
own opinions on the topic.
EWs3.1  Predictive testing for cardiogenetic conditions in 
children: practical considerations from a multidisciplinary team
A. M. Schiphorst , I. Christiaans, C. M. Aalfs;  
Academic Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
Background
Since 1996 we perform DNA-diagnostics for cardiogenetic conditions 
at our multidisciplinary outpatient clinic. In families with a pathogen -
ic mutation predictive genetic testing is offered to relatives. Cardiac 
evaluations and/or treatment to prevent sudden death are advised to 
carriers. Familial sudden death often hurries relatives to get tested. 
Especially parents can feel powerless in their care and responsibil -ity towards their children. Splitting up children and parents during the 
counselling may make children anxious. Counselling them together, 
however, gives little information on the psychosocial family background 
as parents may dread to speak openly. With this in mind we developed 
a counselling strategy with emphasis on support and protection of the 
children and their parents.
Methods and results
Our multidisciplinary team developed an informative booklet for par -
ents with information on communication with their children on the ge -
netic condition. Although this booklet helped parents to prepare their 
children, assessing the psychosocial family background remained dif -
ficult. Nowadays, parents receive the booklet and have a psychosocial 
intake by telephone with the psychosocial worker before the visit to our 
clinic. This provides us with enough information to tailor counselling to 
the needs and questions of the family.
Conclusion
By trial and error we developed a counselling strategy for families with 
children being tested for cardiogenetic conditions, which involves an 
informative booklet and telephonic consultation with a psychosocial 
worker before the counselling session. In a workshop we would like to 
discuss and present our strategy in more detail and exchange experi -
ences to optimise counselling for these families.
EWs3.2  cardiac chaos: A hypothetical about cardiac genetic 
services, issues and challenges.
I. Macciocca1, I. M. van Langen2, R. Duncan3, M. Nicol4,5, S. Jenkins6,7, P. 
James1;  
1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of 
Clinical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Centre 
for Adolescent Health, Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, 
Children’s Bioethics Centre, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute., Melbourne, 
Australia, 4All Wales Medical Genetics Service, Cardiff and Vale University 
Health Board, University Hospital of Wales Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 
5Association of Inherited Cardiovascular Conditions (AICC) UK, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom, 6The Heart Hospital, University College London Hospitals NHS 
Trust, London, United Kingdom, 7University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
Follow the journey of the main character, Olivia, who, in this interac -
tive hypothetical discovers that she has an inherited cardiovascular 
condition (ICC) in her family. Hear from an expert panel, how genetic 
counsellors, geneticists and cardiologists manage her problems and 
discover why researchers and ethicists have become involved. As ge -
netic testing for ICCs such as long QT syndrome and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy becomes more common, genetics professionals need 
to be familiar not only with the medical and genetic aspects of these 
conditions, but also the unique challenges faced by families with ICCs. 
Sudden death, a small but real risk in these conditions, can occur at 
any time in individuals who are unaware of their risk status. Thus, the 
stakes are high for members of these families, which raises many 
dilemmas: are the usual strategies used by genetic professionals to 
facilitate communication about genetic risk sufficient in these cases? 
Could a more proactive approach be taken that honours patient confi -
dentiality and respects individual autonomy? How should cardiac ge -
netic services be delivered to meet these needs?
It is hoped that this hypothetical will stimulate discussion about differ -
ent models of service delivery as well as the ethical issues and practi -
cal demands of ICCs on families and health practitioners. Audience 
participation will be encouraged to enable participants to compare 
and contrast approaches to the provision of cardiac genetic services 
around the world and reflect on counselling strategies that optimize 
outcomes.2 EMPAG WorkshopsAbstracts of EmPAG Posters
EP01.01  Genetic counselling for ambiguity: 46,XX/46,XY on 
chorionic villus sampling: what is the differential?
D. M. Lambert1,2, L. McArdle2, S. A. Lynch2, S. Roring2;  
1Children‘s University Hospital Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre 
for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
A G3P2 couple was referred to the local maternity hospital for chorionic 
villus sampling (CVS) as a large nuchal fold was detected at 12 weeks 
gestation. A dating scan at 7 weeks gestation had confirmed a nor -
mal singleton pregnancy. Cultured CVS showed 46,XX[17]/47,XY[3], 
and FISH XX in 294 cells and XY in 86 cells in 3 separate culture 
flasks. Rapid aneuploidy screen on direct CVS showed no Y chromo -
some contribution. The couple was referred for genetic counselling to 
discuss the possible range of outcomes. Maternal cell contamination, 
vanishing twin, and chimerism were discussed with the couple, as well 
as the pros and cons of parental genotyping, fetal ultrasound sexing 
and amniocentesis to resolve uncertainty. The likelihood of maternal 
cell contamination was reduced by the finding of a female fetus on ul -
trasound. Amniocentesis showed 46,XX[10] and FISH XX on 500 cells, 
with female sex confirmed by molecular techniques. The couple was 
informed that an early vanishing twin was most likely responsible for 
the XX/XY CVS result despite the normal 7 week scan. These results 
have important implications about how we discuss accuracy of CVS, 
fetal sexing on maternal blood, and first trimester screening with our 
patients. This case illustrates the limitations of the technologies that 
we use and the challenges in explaining uncertain information to pa -
tients.
EP01.02  counselling on reproductive options in marfan 
syndrome
N. Bosch1, V. Seidel2, M. del Campo3,4;  
1Fundació Institut de Recerca Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut 
Municipal d‘Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad 
de Genética, Departamento de Ciencias Experimentales, UPF, Barcelona, 
Spain, 4Programa de Medicina Molecular y Genetica, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain.
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a progressive disorder with autosomal 
dominant inheritance and variable expression, that affects connective 
tissues. Cardinal manifestations involve the ocular, skeletal, and car -
diovascular systems and strict criteria are used to establish the clinical 
diagnosis. MFS is caused by a defect in the fibrillin gene ( FBN1 ) and 
mutations are found in ≈ 80% of families with positive Ghent criteria. 
The search for these mutations is often driven by the reproductive risks 
and wishes of the affected individuals. This study was aimed at ex -
ploring the understanding of patients and their partners regarding re -
productive risks and options, through questionnaires before and after 
counselling, in the setting of the Marfan clinic in Hospital Vall d’Hebron. 
A total of 36 individuals answered this survey and the major conclu -
sions were: 1. Their understanding of the inheritance pattern, recur -
rence risks, medical risks of pregnancy and reproductive options were 
deficient even in those previously diagnosed, and improved markedly 
after counselling. 2. Those individuals who ignored their diagnoses 
or had not received appropriate counselling when they had their first 
offspring, showed anxiety and guilt. 3. Most individuals perceived the 
counselling as being useful and reducing their uncertainties and anxi -
ety. 4. Every participant accepted prenatal and preimplantation (PGD) 
diagnoses as a method for avoiding having affected offspring. 5. Pre -
natal diagnosis with the option of termination of pregnancy was the 
first choice among most individuals, particularly in those looking for 
their first child. PGD was second. Globally, reproductive counselling 
appears to be essential in this group of patients.
EP01.03  PGD for cancer predisposition syndromes
M. Malcov1, D. Ben-Yosef1, V. Gold1, T. Frumkin1, A. Carmon1, A. Amit1, Y. 
Yaron2;  
1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky 
Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic 
Institute, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Introduction: Most cases of cancer are sporadic. Nonetheless, ~ 5-
10% of the cases demonstrate an autosomal dominant inheritance 
pattern with variable penetrance. Prevention of unaffected offspring 
may be achieved by preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). How -ever, is PGD always justified?
Aim: To describe our experience in 41 PGD cycles for cancer predispo -
sition syndromes that were approved by a Scoring System appraising 
PGD justification.
Methods: A semi-quantitative Scoring System was developed by 
evaluation of the disease characteristics (onset, severity, risk for off -
spring and penetrance) and patient variables (co-requirement for IVF, 
objection to TOP). PGD cycles were performed by blastomere biopsy 
of cleavage stage embryos or polar body biopsy, followed by single 
cell multiplex PCR that amplifies the cancer mutation and 3-5 flanking 
polymorphic markers.
Results: 17 couples applied for PGD for cancer predisposition. Four -
teen couples were accepted according to our Scoring System and 3 
couples were rejected due to under-thershold scoring values. Of the 
accepted couples, 9 were affected with cancer, 13 had at least one 
family member affected and 11 couples co-required IVF. In total, 6 
pregnancies were achieved and 2 healthy children were born.
Conclusion: We envision that the continuous discovery of cancer pre -
disposition mutations and identification of at-risk-families will result 
in an ever-increasing demand for prevention by PGD. We propose a 
Scoring System that takes into account the disease characteristics as 
well as the patients‘ clinical variables to determine which of these con -
ditions and in which patients is PGD justified.
EP01.04  choosing a hearing child: Attitudes towards the 
possibility of prenatal diagnosis for deafness in hearing parents 
of deaf children with cochlear implants
A. Taylor1,2;  
1Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Prenatal diagnosis (PND) of deafness in some families is now a theo -
retical possibility. At present, this is controversial and is neither rou -
tinely asked for nor routinely offered by genetics services. The majority 
of deaf children are born to parents with normal hearing, and it is these 
people whose decisions may be affected if PND for deafness were 
more widely available. This study investigates the attitudes of a subset 
of these parents whose deaf child has had a cochlear implant fitted. 
In opting for cochlear implantation, this group have actively chosen for 
their child to hear, so their views on PND are particularly pertinent.
These parents gave qualified support for PND for deafness, but were 
unanimous in their opposition to subsequent termination of pregnancy, 
the prevailing theme being that deafness was not serious enough to 
warrant such action. Their accounts demonstrate they are well in -
formed and highly motivated to obtain the best possible treatment and 
support for their child, particularly with reference to participation in the 
hearing world. However, they describe their children as deaf, support 
their Deaf identities and do not perceive deafness as a serious disabil -
ity. They have not ‘chosen a hearing child’, and are not interested in 
using genetic technology to ensure a hearing child in future pregnan -
cies. Their point of view is closer to the cultural model than the medical 
model of deafness, which may be of some reassurance to those in the 
Deaf community who have viewed cochlear implantation as a threat 
to their future.
EP01.05  Psychological impact of preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis: A prospective Australian study.
J. C. Karatas1, K. Barlow-Stewart2, B. Meiser3, C. McMahon4, K. Strong5, C. 
Roberts6;  
1Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for 
Genetics Education, NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 3Psychosocial Research 
Group, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 4Centre for Emotional 
Health, Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 
5Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia, 6Sydney IVF Limited, Sydney, Australia.
The psychological impact of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) 
was prospectively explored with fifty women from Sydney, Australia, 
using self-administered questionnaires. At pre-treatment (T1), anxiety 
and depression rates were similar to normal population data. State 
anxiety was associated with degree of financial worry and living in an 
inner metropolitan area. The women’s perception of their chance of 
achieving a viable pregnancy were higher than the actual clinic rate 
and was positively associated with financial worry. The degree of finan -
cial worry may reflect the cost of PGD in Australia compounded by the Reproductive issues in genetics, prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis high cost of home ownership in Sydney, despite these women having 
on average high household incomes. The need for information about 
coping strategies if PGD was unsuccessful was identified. Unmet in -
formation needs were low but positively associated with women’s edu -
cation levels and information-seeking behaviours. Women completed 
follow-up questionnaires assessing anxiety and depression following 
embryo transfer (T2), pregnancy result notification (T3) and, for wom -
en who achieved a pregnancy, at 24 weeks of pregnancy (T4). Anxi -
ety levels significantly increased following T2 and T3, though they re -
turned to baseline levels at T4. Depression levels did not significantly 
fluctuate over time in this group. At T4, maternal-fetal attachment was 
assessed and found to be sound. A deeper understanding of these 
results was gained through additional in-depth interviews conducted 
with a subset of women (n=14). While describing PGD as stressful, 
women also reported PGD as empowering. Women reported previous 
reproductive trauma affected their PGD experience and their bonding 
with their fetus in early pregnancy.
EP02.01  Pregnant women‘s beliefs about prenatal testing for 
chromosome abnormalities.
M. R. Susman , D. Amor, J. Bayer, J. Halliday;  
MCRI, Parkville, Australia.
Current prenatal screening focuses on Down syndrome, whilst diag -
nostic testing gives information about all chromosomes. If noninvasive 
prenatal diagnosis for Down syndrome replaces current screening 
programmes, some non-Down syndrome chromosome abnormalities 
will no longer be detected. One way of minimizing reduced detection 
is inclusion of other chromosome abnormalities in noninvasive tests. 
Pregnant women’s attitudes about appropriate inclusion may differ 
from that of experts and health professionals, as is seen with newborn 
screening programmes.2
The aims of our study are to determine pregnant women’s opinions 
on which chromosome abnormalities should be included in prenatal 
testing and the beliefs underpinning those opinions. Using a health 
behaviour model based on the theories of Planned Behaviour and 
Reasoned Action, questionnaires were designed. A leaflet describing 
the outcomes of seven different chromosome abnormalities, including 
Down syndrome, was also provided.
The preliminary questionnaire elicits the beliefs from approximately 
160 pregnant women. Using content analysis, the beliefs will be cate -
gorized into themes based on the main variables of the model;  attitude 
toward the behaviour (positive or negative values towards the test), 
subjective norm (social pressure that may influence their decisions), 
and perceived behavioural control (what might get in the way of them 
actually having a test). The results will inform the main study question -
naire and ultimately assist in finding out what pregnant women want 
from prenatal testing for chromosome abnormalities.
References:
EP02.02  Acceptance of novel molecular techniques for prenatal 
screening of chromosomal alterations
C. Serra-Juhé1, L. Fernández2, N. Bosch1, N. Capdevila1, M. Cendrós1, F. 
García-Santiago2, C. Giménez1, E. Mansilla2, I. Valenzuela1, M. Del Campo1,3, 
P. Lapunzina2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,3;  
1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 
2Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, 
Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
Pregnant women with an indication of prenatal invasive sampling due 
to risk for foetal anomalies, visited in Vall d’Hebron (Barcelona) and 
La Paz (Madrid) hospitals during 2009, were offered to take part in a 
study of the feasibility and cost-efficiency of novel methods for pre -
natal screening of chromosomal abnormalities (MLPA, aCGH), and a 
parallel study to identify factors influencing their acceptance of these 
screening tests. We provided pre-test genetic counselling to all women, 
including information on risks, expected detection rates and potential 
findings of unknown significance, as well as post-test genetic counsel -
ling when genomic alterations were detected. A short questionnaire 
about social and demographic characteristics and reasons to accept 
or refuse advanced prenatal testing was obtained.
The analysis of 450 surveys indicated that the great majority of women 
agreed to extend prenatal studies (94%). All women considered they 
had enough information, provided by pretest counselling, in order to take decisions. The average anxiety level was in the intermediate-high 
range, mostly related to the indication for testing and previous history 
(previous offspring, assisted reproductive technologies, other …). The 
academic level of progenitors also influenced the reasons to partici -
pate and their understanding of the benefits and limitations of these 
techniques. Refusal of the study was related to anxiety, birth place and 
the indication for the invasive sampling.
In conclusion, our data show a high level of acceptance of new mo -
lecular techniques in prenatal setting and provide information about 
the most important aspects to discuss during genetic counselling con -
cerning these novel molecular techniques.
EP02.03  Providing genetic risk information to parents of 
newborns with sickle cell trait: Role of the general practitioner in 
neonatal screening.
F. Vansenne, C. A. J. M. de Borgie , M. Peters;  
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
In 2007 the newborn screening programme in the Netherlands includ -
ed national screening of sickle cell disease (SCD). In addition, sickle 
cell trait (SCT) is identified and disclosed to parents of carriers. Since 
the introduction of this disclosure of SCT, general practitioners (GP’s) 
are expected to play an important role in providing genetic risk infor -
mation and refer at-risk couples appropriately. We aimed to investigate 
disease related knowledge, intention and motivational factors in order 
to evaluate this new role of GP’s.
An assessment questionnaire was send in May 2009 to 285 GP’s who 
received notice of a child with SCT in 2007 or 2008. The questionnaire 
contained questions on clinical experience and knowledge with SCD 
and SCT, communicating the result and potential barriers in the com -
munication.
Response rate was 49%. Most GP’s did not report barriers in counsel -
ing parents about SCT and providing risk information, even though 
the majority indicates they lack clinical experience with and knowledge 
about SCD and SCT. In our study only 23% of the identified couples 
at risk were tested for hemoglobinopathy, whereas 90% of GP’s stated 
they informed parents. There was a great variation in knowledge of 
GP’s in both the information they provided and the steps they took.
This study shows that disclosure of SCT in the newborn screening at 
this moment only in a small percentage of cases leads to consecutive 
testing of parents for hemoglobinopathy. Much more effort is needed to 
provide better information to GP’s and to help facilitate their work.
EP02.04  the changing landscape of genetic screening criteria
C. G. van El , M. C. Cornel, T. Pieters;  
VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
In the past three decades in the Netherlands remarkable changes 
have occurred in population genetic screening. Governmental re -
straint in reproductive screening, based on an enduring emphasis on 
treatability as screening criterion, has given way to prenatal screening 
being available to all pregnant women, and neonatal screening has 
expanded dramatically, as in many countries.
Based on interviews, literature research, and results from a witness 
seminar, we will highlight three mechanisms that can put these chang -
es into perspective.
1.Widening circles:
In the 1980s and 1990s the pros and cons of genetic prenatal testing 
on medical indication were known and weighed by a small circle of 
experts and health professionals. With the introduction of new tech -
niques, making it possible to screen all pregnant women, wider circles 
(in society and Parliament) were confronted with ethical issues. When -
ever circles widen ethical issues have to be assessed anew.
2.Differentiating between screening aims:
Where population screening is seen as a public health instrument (aim -
ing for health gain by prevention or treatment through early detection) 
it is ill at ease with genetic screening providing reproductive options. 
Countries differ in their solutions to differentiate these domains.
3. Balancing protection and autonomy:
Traditional screening policy emphasized the protection of citizens 
against harmful or unsound screening, as is laid down in the Popula -
tion Screening Act (1996). In the age of preventive genomics more 
tests and screening becomes available, and the demand for tests in -
creases. These developments call for transparent alternatives to cre -
ate a new balance between protection and autonomy. Prenatal and newborn screeningEP02.05  POPULA tiON cARRiER scREENiNG FOR FRAGiLE X 
sYNDROmE: cHALLENGEs FOR GENEtic cOUNsELLiNG
A. D. Archibald1,2, A. M. Jaques1, S. Wake1,2,3, C. Hickerton1, J. Cohen4, S. A. 
Metcalfe1,2;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia, 4Fragile X Alliance Inc, Melbourne, Australia.
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading cause of inherited intellec -
tual disability. Carrier screening can provide individuals with informa -
tion about their health and their risk of having a child with FXS. This 
study explored views about population carrier screening for FXS and 
here we discuss the relevance of these findings to genetic counselling. 
Interviews and focus groups were conducted with 141 participants: 
healthcare providers (81), relatives of individuals with FXS (29) and 
women from the general population who were offered carrier screen -
ing for FXS (31). Participants discussed issues relevant to genetic 
counselling including: challenges relating to decision-making; consid -
erations about the most appropriate stage of life at which to offering 
carrier screening; the counselling needs of individuals who receive a 
grey zone, premutation, or full mutation result and perceptions of the 
role of genetic counselling in a population carrier screening program 
for FXS. The results indicate that there is support for preconception 
population-based FXS carrier screening, however, due to limited 
awareness of the condition, individuals from the general population 
will face unique challenges when making a decision about screening. 
Further, individuals should be supported to consider the best time in 
their lives to learn their carrier status. The most appropriate setting for 
offering screening was primary care, with genetic counsellors provid -
ing the service. These results will help inform future development of 
genetic counselling practice in this context and suggest that develop -
ing counselling protocols tailored to offering screening in the general 
population should be considered.
EP02.06  Haemoglobinopathy screening in the Netherlands: 
witnessing the past, lessons for the future.
S. M. P. J. Jans1,2, C. G. van El1, A. M. C. Plass1, T. M. Lagro-Janssen2, E. 
Houwaart1, M. C. Cornel1;  
1EMGO Institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
2Institute for Gender Studies, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
In The Netherlands there were no formal recommendations for haemo -
globinopathy (HbP) screening until recently. In 2007 neonatal screen -
ing was expanded to include sickle cell disease. As a result carriers of 
this disease are also identified.
This study aimed to explore the decision-making process in the past: 
why had it been decided that HbP-screening was not ‘opportune’, and 
to investigate the role of ethnicity in the Dutch debate on haemoglo -
binopathy screening.
Methods: Literature search identifying key-figures involved in the de -
cision-making process. They were telephone-interviewed, and invited 
to attend a so-called witness-seminar: i.e. elaborating on traditional 
sources of historical research, and adding new perspectives on past 
events. The transcript was content analyzed.
Results: During the 1980s and 1990s official screening policy was 
restrained regarding reproductive issues. Political parties expressed 
concerns about eugenics. However, locally screening practices did oc -
cur. In the nineties a research report requested by the government 
played a central role: Screening was considered not opportune due 
to low prevalence, and lack of knowledge amongst both professionals 
and high-risk groups. The heritage of WWII seemed to have influenced 
the decision-making process: registration of ethnicity surfaces as an 
important impeding factor.
Future issues for debate: Restrictive attitude to registration of ethnic -
ity seems to have been relevant, but is changing as a result of in -
creasing multi-ethnicity. The prevalence of haemoglobinopathies has 
increased. For future decision-making on haemoglobinopathy screen -
ing programmes, it is important to include representatives of high-risk 
groups in the discussion. These challenges will need to be addressed 
in policymaking.EP03.01  Family construction of genetic meaning
J. Karwoski ;  
University of Nevada-Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, United States.
Testing minors to determine carrier status in X-linked disorders has 
generally been discouraged by professional organizations. One point 
of concern has been that of potentially harmful psychosocial impact 
upon the minor. Whether knowledge of carrier status will have a nega -
tive effect on minors, however, depends upon its meaning within the 
family system. Since testing is increasingly commercially available, 
health professionals now serve less often as gate-keepers, but can 
retain a valuable advisory role. Professionals who are asked to test 
the sister of an affected child can assess what implications a positive 
result might have within that particular family, being alert to the pos -
sibly great difference between parents‘ and daughter‘s perspective. 
Some parents may overestimate risk due to a cognitive error known 
as the availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). This short -
cut in reasoning makes unlikely events that have actually happened, 
and are therefore readily available to memory, seem more likely than 
objective estimates would indicate. Thus, parents‘ sense of the likeli -
hood of grandchildren being born with a disorder that has affected a 
child of their own may be substantially elevated. Consequently, they 
may wish to protect their daughter, at all costs, from the ordeal they 
themselves have experienced, exerting undue pressure upon her to 
abandon hopes of child-bearing. Such parents who view the risk faced 
by carriers, or potential carriers, as overwhelming, need help in appre -
ciating the dangers inherent in usurping control over future reproduc -
tive decisions that rightfully belong to their daughter.
EP03.02  Opening the psychological black box in genetic-
counselling: the counsellees‘ perception explains the 
psychological impact of DNA-testing, pathogenic-mutations the 
medical impact
J. Vos1, R. Stoel2, J. C. Oosterwijk3, E. Gomez4, F. Menko5, C. J. Van Asperen1, 
A. M. Stiggelbout6, A. Tibben1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, Netherlands, 2Netherlands Forensic Institute, The Hague, Netherlands, 
3Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical 
Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Medical 
Decision-Making, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background- It is often hypothesized that the Outcomes of DNA-test -
ing (O) are better predicted and/or mediated by the counsellees‘ Per -
ception (P) than by the actually communicated genetic-Information (I).
Method- Women tested for BRCA1/2 5 years before (sd=2.0), par -
ticipated in a retrospective questionnaire study. Communicated In -
formation was (I): cancer-risks and BRCA1/2-test result, i.e. unclas -
sified-variant testresults (n=76), uninformative (n=76) or pathogenic-
mutations (n=51). Four perception-variables were included (P): the 
counsellees‘ recollections and interpretations of both the cancer-risks 
and the likelihood that the cancer in their family is heritable. The 25 
outcome-variables (O) included life changes, medical decision-mak -
ing, BRCA-self-concept, current psychological well-being and qual -
ity-of-life. Bootstrapping mediation analyses determined whether re -
lationships were direct (I->O or P->O) or indirect via the mediation of 
perception (I->P->O).
Results- Only the communication of pathogenic mutation or uninfor -
mative directly predicted medical-outcomes (I->O),viz. performed and 
intended surgery. All other outcomes were predicted by the coun -
sellees‘ recollection and interpretation of their own cancer-risks and 
heredity-likelihood (P->O), or this perception mediated all effects 
(I->P->O). However, this perception was significantly different from 
actually communicated cancer-risks (I->P). The misperception of un -
classified-variants predicted both psychological outcomes and radical 
medical decisions.
Discussion- Genetic-counsellors need to explicitly address the coun -
sellee‘s interpretations and intended medical decisions. In case of 
rigid misinterpretations additional psychological counseling might be 
offered. Communication of unclassified-variants needs close attention 
given the pitfall of ambiguity.Risk perception and genetic testing EP03.03  Overestimated lifetime breast cancer risk can be 
reduced by feedback on preexisting risk estimation.
P. Stam, E. van der Looij , I. van der Burgt, N. Hoogerbrugge;  
Department of Human Genetics Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The majority of women with a family history of breast cancer estimate 
their lifetime risk (LTR) of breast cancer too high, even after genetic 
counseling. By discussing the counselee’s estimation and emphasiz -
ing the actual risk during counseling, a more accurate LTR estimation 
is expected afterwards.
Counselees estimated their LTR in a pre- and post-counseling ques -
tionnaire. Their actual LTR was calculated using Claus tables and 
standardized breast cancer risk percentages. The intervention during 
counseling beholds a dialog on a counselee’s LTR estimation and the 
actual LTR. This intervention was compared to standard counseling.
Results confirm women in intervention and control group overesti -
mate their LTR prior to counseling with an average overestimation of 
43% and 42% respectively. Both groups showed a reduction of their 
overestimation after counseling. However the average overestimation 
of the actual LTR in the intervention group is significantly lower than 
the control group (11% to 31%, p = 0,016). In the control group 76% 
overestimate their LTR for at least 10% versus a significantly lower 
36% doing so after intervention (p = 0,034).Conclusion: Integration of 
counselee’s pre-existing risk estimations and feedback on actual LTR 
during counseling results in counselees estimating their breast cancer 
risk more accurately and therefore improved risk communication
EP04.01  Access to the Genetic services in cyprus
T. Delikurt1, E. S. Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2;  
1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, 
Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Service, Makarios Medical Center, Nicosia, Cyprus.
In the recent years the bicommunal composition (Greek and Turkish 
Cypriots) of Cyprus has further diversified with the increase in “ethni -
cally mixed” marriages (Cypriots with spouses mostly of Eastern-Euro -
pean and Asian ethnicity) and the increase in migration rates from both 
EU/non-EU countries. The Clinical Genetics Clinic (CGC), established 
in 1994, is the only reference center for clinical genetics and genetic 
counselling on the island. The CGC is therefore accessed by over 3500 
patients and their families from all over Cyprus who are living with or 
are at risk of inheriting genetic conditions. The CGC offers diagnostic 
assessment, management/ treatment and genetic counselling in adult, 
prenatal, cancer and pediatric genetics for the whole spectrum of ge -
netic conditions including chromosomal aberration syndromes, single 
gene disorders, mitochondrial diseases, multifactorial conditions and 
prenatal exposure syndromes. In accordance to changing popula -
tion composition, the CGC-patient-population has shown a gradual 
increase in diversity. Patients/families may face challenges in access 
if i) language needs aren’t met by the staff or a professional-transla -
tor ii) geographical location is unfavourable iii) religious/cultural beliefs 
(e.g emotional reactions/disbelief on genetic testing) are diverse iv) 
physicians knowledge/understanding of clinical genetics is insufficient 
v) low socioeconomic status vi) patient is from a ‘paternalistic health 
care’ culture, may view MD as the only expert over non-MD genetic 
counsellor. Such challenges are important to the members of the CGC 
who has to further enhance their cultural competence and adapt to the 
increasing diversity.
EP04.02  Dealing with sudden cardiac Death. A comparison 
between Welsh (UK), Australian and North American Practice
M. C. Nicol1, D. Kumar1, A. Clarke1, I. Macciocca2, M. Care3;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Victoria Genetic 
Services, Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3The 
Fred Litwin Family Centre, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Genetic counselling for Inherited Cardiovascular Conditions (ICCs) 
is challenging to most Genetic Counsellors and Geneticists. Sudden 
unexplained/cardiac death (SUD/SCD) is a recognised (and often the 
first) presentation in Mendelian ICCs. The chapter 8 (Standard 5 for 
Wales) National Service Framework (NSF) in England for Coronary 
Heart Disease includes recommendations and sets out quality require -
ments, criteria and systems needed to provide diagnosis, treatment, 
information and support to families affected by SCD, in particular the 
sudden arrhythmic death syndrome (SADS). It states, ‘When sudden 
death occurs, NHS services have systems in place to identify family members at risk and provide personally tailored, sensitive and expert 
support, diagnosis, treatment, information and advice to close rela -
tives’.
In Wales and parts of the UK there is a ‘fragmented’ approach to meet -
ing the NSF quality requirements and recommendations due to ( a) 
Inadequate funding and service infrastructure to meet the rapidly in -
creasing referral numbers ( b) New technologies are available enabling 
gene testing before patient pathways / protocols can be put in place ( c) 
Multiple professionals being involved in SCD families, e.g. the inves -
tigation of the Coroners and Police may cause delay in referral of ‘at 
risk’ relatives for cardiac screening and clinical genetic assessment. A 
Florence Nightingale Travel Award to MN facilitated an observational 
study in Australia, Canada and Wales, to compare the delivery of clini -
cal genetic services to family members affected by SCD/SADS.
EP04.03  Genetic counsellor: the swiss experience.
V. Cina1, A. Ayme2, A. E. Murphy2;  
1Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 
Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Oncogenetics Unit, University Hospital of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
In Switzerland, genetic counselling is mainly provided by board certi -
fied clinical geneticists or oncologists. The medical genetic services of 
five university hospitals cover a population of 7.5 million inhabitants. 
A few private laboratories also provide genetic testing and counsel -
ling. Specific genetic counselling training is not available and genetic 
counsellors are not officially recognised by the Swiss Confederation. 
However, a step forward was made in 2008 when this profession was 
recognised in the Canton de Vaud , one of the 26 regional structures 
of the country.
We show the activity of three genetic counsellors working in the French 
speaking part of Switzerland and the evolution of their role. We also 
discuss the challenges and the aspects that have facilitated the devel -
opment  of this new profession.
Two genetic counsellors work in Geneva in cancer genetics. The third 
works in Lausanne in a general genetic counselling setting. We ob -
serve an evolution towards a diversification of the activity and a more 
autonomous role. The organisation of the clinical activity within the 
services, the lack of legal recognition and the lack of colleagues with 
the same background represent some of the challenges encountered. 
On the other hand, the establishment of a trust relationship with the 
colleagues and the hierarchy as well as the support from international 
networks have been helpful for the development of the role of genetic 
counsellor.
In the future, we will work towards a wider recognition of the profession 
in the country and the implementation of more genetic counsellor job 
positions.
EP04.04  Organisation and development of cancer genetics in 
sweden.
A. Baan ;  
Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to descibe the organizational 
background and developments at cancer genetic centres in Sweden, 
as well as associated ethical issues.
Selection: Six cancer genetic centres were included in the study. In the 
initila phase the individuels in charge of their respective clinics were 
contacted and requested to select actors who participated in the de -
velopment of the centres´ operation.
Method: Qualitative content analysis was used to assess the material. 
The goal of content analysisi is to provide knowledge and understand -
ing of the phenomenon under study. Narrative content is analysed to 
discern themes and categories.
Conclusion: In summary, study findings showed that cancer genetics 
teams in Sweden need additional expertise. This line of work also re -
quiresconstant ethical reflection to keep pace with technical and medi -
cal developments involving the human genome. As information related 
to these issues reaches the public through communication channels 
such as the mass media andscientific publications, expextations of 
helth care resources are based on what published, and not what is 
technically possible and ethically jusfiable. These considerations de -
termine the planning and they shape the life choices made. Access to genetic services (challenges in Europe)EP05.01  Declining genetic testing for hereditary breast cancer: 
psychological issues.
P. De Wilde , B. Poppe, A. De Paepe;  
Centre for Medical Genetics Gent, Gent, Belgium.
Empirical studies show that only about 50 percent of women followed 
in high risk hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) clinics opt to be 
tested.
The most common reasons for declining are concerns about the emo -
tional impact, concerns about insurance issues, concerns about the 
absence of a concrete benefit on surveillance, worries about the limita -
tions of screening and concerns about test accuracy.
To our knowledge, all studies so far which have investigated the emo -
tional functioning and motivations of test decliners included only indi -
viduals enrolled in HBOC clinics and thus were focused on a relatively 
selected group of persons who all received genetic counseling or took 
part in a surveillance program. People who are anxious or unfavorable 
about testing are not likely to participate in this type of research.
In the presented study we specifically aim at interviewing people who 
are unknown to the genetic center. Recruitment of individuals is done 
through a tested family member who is willing to participate. We use 
semi-structured interviews and qualitative data analysis (IPA).
The study is ongoing and so far, recruitment has proven to be difficult. 
Preliminary results indicate deeply rooted fatalistic beliefs and doubts 
about the idea of manageability.
Investigating these psychological issues can also be important in the 
light of a more general debate about the role of genetic services in 
disclosing genetic information within families.
EP05.02  Debating genetics with young people: the GAmY 
(Genetics and merthyr Youth) Project
N. V. Taverner , K. Madden, R. Iredale;  
University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom.
Purpose: Young people’s opinions about genetics are rarely heard, 
although they are most likely to be affected by advances in genetic 
knowledge. The GAMY (Genetics and Merthyr Youth) Project worked 
with teenagers from South Wales over a two year period to explore 
how confident they felt about discussing genetics and investigate their 
attitudes.
Method: Participants (aged 16 to 19 years old) engaged in four group 
days involving learning and discussion about genetics topics including 
inheritance, risk, family history, genetic testing and ethical issues. They 
completed genetics tasks, expressing their ideas through creative me -
dia such as digital photography and storytelling. A mixed methods ap -
proach was used to collect a variety of data from all aspects of the 
project.
Results: 21 young people were recruited, though participation declined 
over time. They had learned about genetics at school, but did not un -
derstand how to relate this to their own lives. Through involvement with 
the project, most became more confident to discuss genetic issues 
and their understanding increased, although they retained some mis -
conceptions and their opinions can be resistant to change. In general, 
they were interested in genetic advances, though found it difficult to 
appreciate the potential psychosocial impact.
Conclusions: With appropriate support and information, young people 
become more genetically literate, and acquire the skills and confidence 
to discuss genetics issues. Further research is needed to explore how 
genetic literacy can be promoted more broadly within this age group to 
enable them to be involved in debates about genetic developments.
EP05.03  Perceptions of Genetic counseling from Adults with 
Bipolar Disorder
S. M. Perschke, BS , E. A. Gettig, MS, GCG, R. E. Grubs, PhD, CGC;  
University of Pittsburgh, Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, 
United States.
Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder that affects about 1% of the popu -
lation. Twin studies provide evidence that genetics plays a role in the 
etiology of bipolar disorder with heritability estimates as high as 93% 
in some studies. Molecular genetic studies were initially promising, but 
no genes with large effect sizes have been discovered. There is also 
evidence that suggests a multifactorial inheritance pattern. Genetic 
testing is not yet available. However, as advances are made in the 
understanding of genetics and psychiatric disorders, it is expected that the demand for genetic counseling for bipolar disorder will increase. 
Genetic counselors are well-equipped to educate patients and family 
members about the condition, to discuss their concerns about the risk 
of bipolar disorder, and to offer genetic testing should it become avail -
able. For this qualitative study, interviews were conducted to explore 
the opinions and perceptions of individuals with bipolar disorder and/or 
their siblings. The open-ended questions were designed to elicit the 
thoughts and attitudes about bipolar disorder and genetic counseling. 
Thematic analysis was performed on the transcripts from 12 inter -
views. Data analysis is ongoing, but the preliminary analysis reveals 
some common themes. These include: 1.) a perceived need/interest 
for a diagnostic test, 2.) excessive disease burden on patients and 
family members, 3.) individuals sometimes use their family history to 
make reproductive planning decisions, 4.) the causal attributions for 
bipolar disorder vary among individuals, and 5.) an interest in genetic 
counseling to learn more about bipolar disorder.
EP06.01  Psychological follow-up after disclosure of cancer genetic test results in BRcA ½ mutated families
A. Bouhnik1, I. Pellegrini1, C. Noguès2, P. Berthet3, P. Berthet3, O. Caron4, J. 
Fricker5, M. Gauthier-Villars6, L. Gladieff7, C. Lasset8, E. Luporsi9, C. Julian-
Reynier1;  
1INSERM-U912, Marseille, France, 2Centre René-Huguenin, St-Cloud, France, 
3Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 4Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 
France, 5Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 6Institut Curie, Paris, 
France, 7Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France, 8Centre Léon Bérard, 
Lyon, France, 9Centre Alexis Vautrin, Nancy, France.
Objective: To describe the psychosocial support of BRCA1/2 carriers/
non carriers by two years after test result delivery.
Methods: French national cohort of unaffected carriers/non carriers 
(N=622) within BRCA1/2 families. Questionnaires including medical, 
psychosocial (IES, CES-D, BIS, social support …) and socio-demo -
graphic characteristics were completed before and 15 days, 12 months 
and 24 months after test result disclosure.
Results: Answer rate (N=533; 86%, 40 years old on average; SD=12). 
Psychological referral has been offered to 72% and 32% of carriers 
(n=232) and non carriers (n=301) respectively (p<0.001). After multi -
variate adjustment, carriers were more frequently offered referral when 
they were younger, when a psychologist attended at the result consul -
tation, and when they had a higher psychological distress. Among the 
non carriers, the level of distress was the only factor correlated to psy -
chological referral. By one and 2 years, 20% of the carriers attended 
at a psychological consultation, compared to 8% of the non-carriers 
(p<0.05). Related factors will be detailed.
EP06.02  Predictive genetic testing in adolescents for late-onset 
conditions: First-hand accounts from minors
C. Mand1,2, L. Gillam1,3, R. E. Duncan1,3, M. B. Delatycki1,4;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department 
of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 3Children‘s Bioethics 
Centre, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Austin Health, 
Melbourne, Australia.
Due to advances in genetic technology, asymptomatic individuals at-
risk of genetic conditions can undergo predictive testing (PT) to find 
out if they will develop the condition later in life. PT is routinely offered 
to adults at-risk of late-onset conditions (eg: Huntington’s disease, 
BRCA, HNPCC). More controversial is the application of PT in minors 
for late-onset conditions where no effective treatment or prevention 
is available. The ethical discourse concerning PT in minors is lively, 
yet it remains one of speculation, with a relative scarcity of empirical 
evidence. While sporadic reports of PT in minors and the rise of the 
‘mature-minor’ doctrine have led to slightly greater flexibility in recom -
mendations worldwide, most maintain a general position against PT in 
minors for conditions without effective medical intervention.
This study employed a qualitative methodology to explore young 
people’s experience of being tested for an adult-onset genetic con -
dition (including a range of cancers and neuorogenetic disorders). It 
entailed semi-structured interviews with adolescents and their families. 
Ten interviews were conducted. Interviews were transcribed and the -
matically analysed to reveal a range of harms and benefits associated 
with participants’ PT experience, many of which were unrelated to the 
actual test result.Lay beliefs and public understanding of genetics 7Through the presentation of detailed case-studies, this paper will de -
scribe a range of harms and benefits associated with PT in minors. 
For the first time this study gives a voice to the adolescents who are 
the centre of this debate, provoking consideration of current guidelines 
and questioning whether we have reached the correct balance in exist -
ing recommendations.
EP06.03  Quality assessment of genetic counselling process in 
predictive testing for late-onset disorders: What we know?
M. Paneque1, J. Sequeiros1, H. Skirton2;  
1IBMC - University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2School of Nursing and Midwifery, 
University of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom.
Little is known about the impact of the amount and quality of genetic 
counselling on the psychosocial sequelae of genetic testing for late-
onset disorders. Although some guidelines have been written regard -
ing number of sessions, involvement of multidisciplinary teams and 
topics for pre-test discussions, more understanding about what helps 
consultands prepare effectively for testing is needed.
We conducted a systematic review of papers reporting reviews on 
the quality of genetic counselling aiming at: 1) exploring the current 
evidence available; 2) identifying quality assessment indicators for the 
genetic counselling process in late-onset disorders; and 3) proposing 
some recommendations for genetic services to improve the quality of 
health care. After quality appraisal of the papers thus identified, four 
were included.
Our preliminary findings revealed that research on counselling in the 
context of genetic testing for cancer tends to be related to outcomes 
and process indicators for quality assessment. Research concerning 
testing for other late-onset diseases is mainly focused on the psycho -
logical impact of the results, but much is insufficiently articulated re -
garding quality and content of the whole process. Number of sessions, 
time spent, consultation environment, follow-up, multidisciplinarity, 
among others are identified as measures for quality assessment.
However, despite the fact that presymptomatic testing for disorders 
such as Huntington disease and other degenerative conditions has 
been offered for more than 20 years, good methodological approaches 
to assess the quality of genetic counselling for predictive remain elu -
sive. This restricts improvement of the protocols for genetic services 
and in general health care for the at-risk population.
EP07.01  t racking coping responses over time with the Genetic 
Risk Assessment coping Evaluation (GRAcE).
C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, J. Hilgart2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray2;  
1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Objective: To develop and evaluate the effectiveness of a cancer-ge -
netic specific measure of coping (The Genetic Risk Assessment Cop -
ing Evaluation (GRACE).
Method: GRACE measures the degree of stress associated with 11 
stressors for individuals undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment, 
and the use of up to eight coping strategies they may elicit.  
Results: 194 patients completed GRACE upon referral to the All-Wales 
Medical Genetics Service and one month later whilst awaiting genetic 
risk information. The most highly endorsed source of stress at both 
time points related to the implications of risk for family members, en -
dorsed by 72% of patients at Time1 and 57% at Time 2. Patients made 
use of multiple coping strategies across different sources of stress. 
There was a significant decrease over time across all stressors in in -
formation-seeking (23.9% to 14.7%) and emotional expression (13.2% 
to 8%). Positive appraisal remained one of the most commonly used 
coping strategies across all stressors ranging from 24%-45% at Time 
1 and 16%-47% at Time 2.
Conclusions: Responses suggested that patients were using appropri -
ate coping strategies for the type of stressor faced. The completion 
rates for the matrix and specificity of responses provided suggests the 
GRACE may be an acceptable and useful measurement tool and may 
also help genetic counsellors identify individuals in need to extra sup -
port.EP07.02  Development and testing of a screening questionnaire 
for psychosocial problems in genetic counseling and testing for 
cancer.
W. Eijzenga , N. K. Aaronson, D. E. E. Hahn, I. Kluijt, E. M. A. Bleiker;  
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Approximately 20% of all individuals undergoing genetic 
counseling and testing for cancer experience significant psychosocial 
problems during or after the counseling process. However, in approxi -
mately 30%, of these cases, such problems remain undetected. The 
aim of this study is to develop and validate a psychosocial screening 
questionnaire for use in genetic counseling for cancer.
Methods: EORTC Quality of Life Group guidelines for questionnaire 
development are being used to develop the questionnaire. This in -
volves four phases: 1) generation of relevant issues, 2) operational -
ization of these issues into a set of items, 3) pre-testing, and 4) larger 
scale field testing.
Results: To identify relevant problems, we carried out a literature 
search and interviewed 26 experts and 5 former counselees. Twenty-
six issues were identified and operationalized into items covering the 
following six problem-areas: family, children, genetics, cancer, prac -
tical issues, and emotions. The screening questionnaire has been 
transferred to a web-based platform with touchscreen computer facili -
ties in the clinic. In total, 120 counselees will be invited to complete 
the screening questionnaire, along with the Hospital Anxiety and De -
pression Scale and the Distress Thermometer. The questionnaire data 
will be compared with data obtained from a semi-structured interview 
conducted by an experienced psychosocial worker (“gold standard”).
Conclusion: This project will yield a screening questionnaire that can 
aid in systematically identifying counselees with specific psychosocial 
problems in cancer genetics. Subsequent to validation, a trial will be 
carried out to investigate the effectiveness of the screening question -
naire in facilitating communication and triggering appropriate counsel -
ing and referrals.
EP07.03  “I have always believed I was at high risk...“  the role 
of expectation in emotional responses to the receipt of a cancer 
genetic risk assessment result: A thematic analysis of free-text 
questionnaire comments.
C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, J. Hilgart2, K. Hood2, K. Brain2, A. Murray3;  
1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Service for Wales, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Background: The receipt of cancer genetic risk information can evoke 
a mix of both positive and negative emotional responses. Objective 
risk itself is not necessarily predictive of emotional response to receipt 
of risk information and the Cue Adaptive Reasoning Account (CARA; 
Renner, 2004) suggests that that the degree to which level of risk is 
consistent with expectations may influence emotional responses.
Method: Free-text questionnaire data was analysed from 123 women 
and 15 men, after receiving their cancer genetic risk assessment re -
sult. A thematic analysis was structured around spontaneous respons -
es to the three risk labels: average, moderate or high.
Results: Reactions to risk information appear to be dependent upon 
participants’ pre-conceived expectations about their level of cancer 
risk, often due to family or personal history of cancer. Many average 
risk respondents questioned the accuracy of their result, whereas high 
risk information was often expected.
Discussion: The current findings provide support for the CARA model, 
as receiving a high risk result may have been consistent with expec -
tations and therefore did not evoke an extreme emotional response 
in many respondents. The CARA model provides a theoretical expla -
nation for the negative reaction from respondents at average risk, as 
unexpected risk information may require high cognitive effort and a 
tendency to downplay the accuracy of the information.
EP07.04  An online screening decision aid for men with a family 
history of prostate cancer: development and pilot-testing
K. J. Watts1,2, C. E. Wakefield3,4, B. Meiser1,2, U. Sansom-Daly4,5, A. Barratt6, M. 
A. Patel7, E. A. Lobb8,9, C. L. Gaff10,11,12, K. Howard6, G. J. Mann13;  
1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 3School of Women’s and Children’s Health, University 
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 4Centre for Children’s Cancer  Predictive testing: process and impactand Blood Disorders, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 
5School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 6School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 7Department of Surgery, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 8Calvary Health Care Sydney, Kogarah, NSW, Australia, 9WA Centre 
for Cancer & Palliative Care, Curtin University of Technology and Edith Cowan 
University, Wa, Australia, 10Genetic Health Services Victoria, VIC, Australia, 
11Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Vic, Australia, 12Departments of 
Paediatrics and Medicine, University of Melbourne, Vic, Australia, 13Westmead 
Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium 
Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Background: Men with a family history of prostate cancer have unmet 
information needs relating to how best to manage their cancer risk. 
This study aimed to develop and pilot test an online decision aid (DA) 
tailored to men with a family history of prostate cancer to assist them 
to make an informed choice about screening.
Methods: Men aged 40-79 years with a family history of prostate can -
cer were invited to participate in the study by a letter conveyed to them 
by an affected male relative who attended a urology outpatient clinic. 
The DA was evaluated by eligible men in two stages. First, men evalu -
ated the acceptability of a paper-based version of the DA in a ques -
tionnaire (N = 22). Second, the same men were asked to appraise 
the functionality of an online version of the DA and to provide their 
feedback in a telephone interview (N = 20).
Results: Ninety-one percent of participants reported that they found 
the paper-based DA useful, and that it contained enough information 
to make a decision about screening (73%). All men reported that the 
online DA was easy to use, with the majority reporting that they would 
recommend the website to other men. Most men also reported that 
they would prefer to receive information about screening via a website 
rather than in a booklet (78%).
Conclusions: This study provides a valuable insight into the optimal 
design and distribution of information about prostate cancer screening 
for men who are at increased risk of this disease.
EP07.05  Women‘s decisions to withdraw from a familial ovarian 
cancer screening programme
K. J. Lifford1, K. Brain1, L. Fraser2, J. Austoker3, L. Bayne4, A. Clements3, R. 
Iredale1, I. Jacobs2, D. Lancastle5, U. Menon2, C. Phelps6, M. T. Rogers1, A. 
Rosenthal2,7, E. Watson8;  
1School of Medicine, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom, 2Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute 
for Women‘s Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Primary Care Research 
Education Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Ovacome, 
London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 6School of Psychology, 
Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 7Institute of 
Cancer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary 
University London, London, United Kingdom, 8School of Health and Social 
Care, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background: A prospective psychological evaluation study (PsyFOCS) 
is underway in partnership with a familial ovarian cancer screening 
study (UK FOCSS, Phase 2). The screening study aims to detect ovar -
ian cancer at an early stage when treatment is most effective, using 
4-monthly CA125 blood tests and annual scans. Cross-sectional data 
are presented describing the factors associated with women’s deci -
sions to withdraw from screening.
Methods: 1,390 out of 2,395 women completed a baseline question -
naire. Measures included cancer-related distress (Impact of Event 
Scale), anxiety and depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale), and illness representations (adapted Illness Perceptions Ques -
tionnaire-Revised; IPQ-R), along with a free text section. 77 women 
withdrew from screening before their first Phase 2 blood test. 
Findings: The main reason women withdrew from screening was to 
have their ovaries removed to reduce their risk of developing ovar -
ian cancer. Logistic regression indicated that previous experience of 
requiring repeat tests for non-normal screening results was associated 
with withdrawal from screening ( p<0.01), as was testing positive for a 
gene mutation known to increase the risk of ovarian cancer ( p<0.05) 
and greater cancer-related distress ( p≤0.05). Marginal associations 
were found for greater IPQ-R illness coherence ( p=0.08) and marital 
status ( p=0.09). Thematic analysis of free text data highlighted factors 
such as the practicalities and emotional impact of screening, and strat -egies for coping with risk. 
Discussion: Withdrawal from familial ovarian cancer screening may be 
influenced by both clinical and psychological factors. This may reflect 
women’s clearer understanding of ovarian cancer risk and the pros 
and cons of screening.
EP07.06  Genetic counseling and hereditary cancer. A 
prospective study with emphasis on psychosocial aspects
C. Bjorvatn1,2, H. H. Vetti1;  
1Haukeland University Hospital, Western Norway Familial Cancer Center, 
Bergen, Norway, 2University in Bergen, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Health Care, Bergen, Norway.
Background: During the last few decades there has been an increased 
demand for genetic counseling (GC). This trend is expected to con -
tinue. Thus, we need more knowledge of patients undergoing GC and 
tools that can identify those in need of extra attention from the counsel -
or, and those who will manage with an ordinary counseling session.
Aims: The overall aims of the present study were to describe and study 
the course and outcome of GC for hereditary cancer and to identify 
characteristics of vulnerable subjects, in order to tailor and increase 
the efficiency of the GC process.
Methods: A prospective multicenter study was undertaken among sub -
jects undergoing GC for hereditary breast- ovarian cancer and heredi -
tary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. 
Results: On the average, the participants reported high levels of social 
support, GC-specific self-efficacy, general self-efficacy and physical 
functioning. The average levels of anxiety, depression was low and 
cancer-related intrusion and avoidance was moderate. Both anxiety 
and depression declined over time and both more social support and 
GC-specific self-efficacy predicted lower anxiety and depression af -
ter GC. Subjects reporting lower level of GC-specific self-efficacy and 
high level of worry were vulnerable to both intrusion and avoidance.
Conclusion: The majority of the subjects undergoing  GC for hereditary 
cancer were coping well. Still, we identified a subgroup that seems to 
be more vulnerable during follow-up. They were characterized by less 
social support, lower GC-specific self-efficacy, higher level of worry, 
and by young age. In the years to come a tailored, individualized coun -
seling approach may be necessary.
EP08.01  The views of health professionals regarding the 
management and care of families affected by sudden arrhythmic 
death syndrome
K. Brain1, B. Henderson2, D. Kumar3, M. Nicol3, R. Iredale4, A. Clarke1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom, 2School of Psychology, Bangor University, Bangor, United 
Kingdom, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom, 4Genomics Policy Unit, Glamorgan University, Pontypridd, 
United Kingdom.
Purpose:  Intense media and public pressure led to the inclusion of sud -
den death related to a genetic cause in the UK National Service Frame -
work for heart diseases. However, there is no agreed process for provid -
ing adequate support to families affected by sudden arrhythmic death 
syndrome (SADS). Method:  Focus groups were carried out with health 
professionals and patient representatives in Wales to explore views on 
the current management of families affected by SADS and how ser -
vices could be improved. Results: Focus group participants described 
the often ad hoc nature of current service provision, the difficulties in 
informing families about the possibility of inherited risk in a sensitive 
and timely manner, and lack of awareness of SADS in people potentially 
working with these families. Family members were described as having 
different information needs at different stages in their dual process of 
grieving and adapting to genetic risk. Possible solutions proposed by fo -
cus group participants centred on the need for an adequately resourced, 
uniform approach combining cardiology and genetics. Key components 
of this approach included having a dedicated coordinator who could 
work proactively across professional boundaries, raise awareness of 
SADS, and take an individualised approach with families; recognition 
of the therapeutic nature of encounters with families; and access to 
specialist bereavement counselling where appropriate. Conclusions:  As 
cardiac genetic knowledge increases, families affected by SADS are 
increasingly likely to benefit from referral to joint cardiology and clinical 
genetic services. A coordinated, sustainable approach would meet the 
complex, evolving needs of families affected by SADS.Psycho-social issues in cancer genetics EP08.02  The psychosocial impact of a complex genetic results 
in a family with Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm).
C. Lim , N. Khan, L. Kerzin-Storrar, W. Newman;  
Genetic Medicine, St.Mary‘s Hospital,, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Screening for mutations in 4 of the 8 genes associated with HCM is 
available clinically and identifies mutations in 70-80% of cases. The 
use of genetic testing in HCM families has helped to clarify individuals’ 
risks and to guide clinical management including cardiac screening. 
There is increasing recognition of the importance of digenic inheritance 
in inherited cardiac conditions, however, when an additional unclassi -
fied variant is identified this can increase uncertainty for the family .
We present a case where a variant of uncertain significance, in addi -
tion to a known pathogenic mutation, was identified which highlights 
the difficulty in communicating complex results to the family and the 
psychological impact. A 45 year old man with HCM was tested. His 
results showed a known pathogenic mutation in the MYH7 gene and 
an unclassified variant in the MBPC3 gene. The variant had not previ -
ously been reported, but is predicted to result in an amnio acid substi -
tution leading to an exchange of an uncharged polar amino acid with 
a non-polar amino acid, at a position conserved across some species, 
suggesting the potential for pathogenicity. With these provisos, cas -
cade screening in the next generation was initiated. The results raised 
several issues for the family: i)the change in dynamics within the family 
with the carriers being more protected, ii) anxiety caused by cardiac 
screening for the asymptomatic children and iii) uncertainty due to the 
variability in phenotype in the context of two variants.
EP09.01  Attitudes toward hypothetical genetic testing, 
satisfaction with clinical care, and information needs among 
high risk melanoma survivors: A mixed methods study
K. Watts1,2, N. Kasparian1,3, J. McLoone1,2, B. Meiser1,2, P. Butow4, K. Barlow-
Stewart5, S. Menzies6, G. Mann7;  
1Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 2Prince of Wales Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of New South Wales, Kensington NSW, Australia, 3School of Women’s and 
Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, 
Kensington NSW, Australia, 4Centre for Medical Psychology and Evidence-
Based Decision-Making, School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia, 5Centre for Genetics Education, Royal North Shore Hospital, 
St Leonards, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6Sydney Melanoma Diagnostic Centre, 
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown NSW, Australia and Discipline 
of Dermatology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 7Westmead 
Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium 
Institute and Melanoma Institute Australia, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
Background: A previous diagnosis of melanoma plus multiple dysplas -
tic naevi, or multiple primary melanomas constitute a 10 to 20-fold risk 
of developing further melanomas; a risk comparable to that of indi -
viduals with a strong family history of the disease. Currently, genetic 
testing for melanoma risk is not available. The High Risk Clinic (HRC) 
at the Sydney Melanoma Diagnostic Centre provides a specialist ser -
vice dedicated to the treatment and follow-up of high-risk melanoma 
survivors. The aim of this mixed methods study was to explore high-
risk melanoma survivors’ attitudes toward hypothetical genetic testing, 
satisfaction with clinical care at the HRC, and their support and infor -
mation needs.
Methods: Twenty patients at increased risk of developing further mel -
anomas, who had attended the HRC, were invited to take part in a 
semi-structured telephone interview. Information preferences were as -
sessed with structured questions at the end of each interview.
Results: Participants appraised their experience of clinical care positive -
ly with most reporting that they felt well informed and supported. More 
information regarding the role of genetics and moles in the development 
of melanoma was identified as an unmet need. Despite limited knowl -
edge of genetic risk assessment for melanoma, 70% of participants en -
dorsed hypothetical genetic testing. A consultation with an expert or a 
pamphlet was the preferred source of information about melanoma.
Conclusions: High-risk melanoma survivors expressed satisfaction 
with the clinical care received at the HRC and more than half endorsed 
hypothetical genetic testing. The development of tailored written infor -
mation in addition to expert clinical consultation is warranted.EP09.02  Finding contentment after prophylactic interventions in women with BRcA1 or BRcA2 mutations.
A. Baan ;  
Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Purpose: To describe the decision-making process for women who are 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers and choose to undergo a prophy -
lactic operation. 
Method: A qualitative cross-section analysis in which eleven women 
are interviewed who have undergone genetic screening for cancer at 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital in Gothenburg, Sweden. The material 
has been subjected to qualitative content analysis.
Results:  The decision-making process is part of a time flow in which 
various components stand out as important conditions that enable de -
cisions to be made about prophylactic operations:
Threat against life , which comprises both a subjective threat in the 
form of the woman’s familial history and an objective threat in the form 
of the results of the genetic testing.
Time - a space for manageability , a meaningful time during which both 
internal and external resources provide support for the woman in her 
process.
The experience and insight that the woman is at a crossroads  where 
she has an opportunity to make a choice, which means that she is 
given the opportunity to choose life . Many times there will be a specific 
event that has a very strong effect on the woman and facilitates the 
decision to have a prophylactic operation.
Finding contentment  is the theme that deals with where the woman 
finds herself today, and gives expression to what has come of the pro -
cess. 
EP10.01  communication of genetic information by other health 
professionals: the role of the genetic counsellor in specialist 
clinics.
R. O‘Shea1, E. Treacy2, A. Murphy3, S. Lynch4, K. Thirlaway5, D. Lambert1;  
1Department of Genetics, Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 
2National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Dublin, Ireland, 3The 
National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Dublin, Ireland, 4National 
Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 5University of Wales in Cardiff, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Many children with chronic genetic diseases are followed by specialty 
clinics who address the family‘s genetic issues as part of the child‘s 
care. Health services restrictions can make accessibility for an ap -
pointment with a genetic counsellor difficult. We examined whether 
genetic information was being adequately understood when presented 
by medical, but non-genetics staff to long term patients, using our Na -
tional metabolic service as an example. Little research has been car -
ried looking at communication of genetic information with metabolic 
conditions. This study aimed to inform health professionals about the 
need or role of a genetic counsellor in specialist settings. We investi -
gated knowledge about recessive conditions and the reproductive im -
pact of the information in patients with Galactosemia and Maple Syrup 
Urine Disease (MSUD) and their parents. Adult patients and parents 
of affected children were interviewed in person using a questionnaire 
to focus on disease and genetic knowledge of these conditions. Par -
ents showed a good level of knowledge but there were misunderstand -
ings about the risk or implications of carrier status. Adult patients with 
Galactosemia had more misunderstandings in relation to inheritance, 
recurrence risks and carrier status than their parents. We found that 
there was a statistically significant difference between adult patients 
and their parents for Galactosemia and between Irish and Irish Trav -
eller parents. The knowledge difference between parents and adults 
may reflect a reluctance to transmit genetic information within families. 
Results suggest that patients with inherited conditions under long-term 
care of other health conditions could still benefit from input from a ge -
netic counsellor.
EP10.02  impact of genetic testing in couples with recurrent 
miscarriage or with poor semen quality: anxiety and distress 3 
and 12 months after disclosure.
F. Vansenne , M. Goddijn, B. Redeker, S. Snijder, N. J. Leschot, F. van der 
Veen, P. M. M. Bossuyt, C. A. J. M. de Borgie;  
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Most research on the consequences of genetic testing is performed in 
persons with an increased risk for a specific disease (pre-symptomatic 0 Psychosocial issues in cardiac geneticssubjects) but not in patients already affected by disease. In reproduc -
tive medicine, couples with recurrent miscarriage (RM) and men with 
poor semen quality may undergo genetic testing as part of the diag -
nostic work-up. It is unknown if psycho-social outcomes are influenced 
when receiving an abnormal genetic testresult in these couples.
We conducted a prospective index-control questionnaire study in 7 
Academic Medical Centres at the departments of Clinical Genetics and 
their referring gynaecological departments. Questionnaires were sent 
to both partners of couples with RM or poor semen quality (between 
2006-2009). Questionnaires were completed before disclosure, and 
3 and 12 months after disclosure of the genetic testresult. Main out -
comes were anxiety and depression. Anxiety was measured with the 
State Trait Anxiety Inventory and depression with the Beck’s Depres -
sion Inventory. Participants in whom a genetic abnormality was found 
were compared to participants in whom no genetic abnormality was 
found. Questionnaires were returned by 439 participants (222 men 
and 217 women), 172 participants with RM (39%) and 267 participants 
with poor semen quality (61%). A genetic abnormality was found in 36 
couples with RM and in 48 couples with poor semen quality. At the time 
of submission of this abstract, the database is being finalized, with clo -
sure scheduled on April 1st 2010. Definite data on the 3 and 12 month 
follow-up will be presented at the EMPAG meeting in June 2010.
EP10.03  the family secret in cyprus. Health professionals’ 
accounts of family communication for Huntington’s disease.
D. Georgiou1, M. Arribas-Ayllon2;  
1MSc Genetic Counselling, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2ESRC 
Centre for the Economic and Social Aspects of Genomics (Cesagen) Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Facilitating risk communication among HD families is challenging for 
health professionals in Cyprus. Given the availability of options such 
as PND and PGD, it is crucial that families at risk are informed by the 
proband. This paper presents an illustrative case of how cultural and 
institutional practices in Cyprus have shaped current patterns of risk 
communication.
This paper investigates factors that influence family communication in 
Cyprus and how health professionals experience such factors in clinic. 
Health professionals working at the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 
Genetics were interviewed in 2009. Semi-structured interviews (n = 5) 
were conducted in Greek. Data was translated, transcribed and anal -
ysed using thematic analysis and grounded theory.
Cultural factors such as discrimination, over-protectiveness, family 
duty and the value of “philotimo” greatly influence communication and 
decision making in Cypriot families. Professionals perceive their re -
sponsibilities and roles differently according to their background and 
training. For instance, neurologists tend to focus on medical options 
and hold a public health perspective, while professionals with psycho -
social training were more client-centred, less directive and less judge -
mental. Elements of medical paternalism were identified and linked 
with health professional-client relationship. Existing structural and 
organizational problems increase the burden on health professionals 
and cause mistrust towards the health system.
Cultural awareness and understanding of client experience within 
health care settings might help professionals who work with HD fami -
lies. Psychosocial counselling and unconditional positive regard are 
important when dealing with clients who have been exposed to dis -
crimination and paternalism.
EP10.04  Familial Hypercholesterolaemia: the challenge of 
implementing the NicE guidelines.
M. S. Watson1, D. Townsend2, I. McDowell2;  
1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, 
2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Clinical guidance from the National Institute of Clinical Excellence 
(NICE) have recently made recommendations regarding the identifi -
cation and management of Familial Hypercholesterolaemia. The key 
priorites for implementation include DNA cascading testing if the family 
mutation is known.
Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor -
der with a prevalence of 1 in 500, approximately 110,000 people are 
thought to be affected in the UK, but unfortunately the majority remain 
undiagnosed. Effective preventative treatment is available, if untreated 
it leads to premature Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) and death. Cas -cade testing using genotyping has recently become available in South 
Wales on a research basis.
The main aims of this study were to explore how patients and their 
family members receive, make sense of and transmit genetic informa -
tion and the impact this dynamic process has on perceptions of risk.
Face to face semi structured interviews were conducted with seven 
patients in whom a clinical diagnosis of FH had been made and who 
had recently undergone genetic testing and received a mutation posi -
tive result. A further seven interviews were conducted with members of 
their families who had also undergone genetic testing to follow the flow 
of this genetic risk information. The interview transcripts were themati -
cally analysed to gain insight into their experiences.
The findings suggest that this genetic information help the patients to 
make sense of their condition. Family members reported an open style 
of communication although this process and emotional responses to 
genetic risk information were complex.
EP10.05  t actile Diagrams to improve communication 
with patients with severe visual impairment in the genetic 
counselling clinic.
A. R. Clarke , G. E. Hall, A. Turgut, D. Trump, G. Black;  
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Tr, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Genetic counselling for inherited blindness presents communication 
challenges. Traditionally, genetic services use diagrams to explain in -
heritance patterns and recent evidence also suggests that the “per -
sonalised diagram” helps families put the scientific information into the 
context of their family experience (Gale T et al, 2010). Patients with 
a visual impairment (VI) are not able to access traditional drawings 
or diagrams and are therefore disadvantaged in the genetic counsel -
ling clinic. Within the UK, it is our legal obligation to provide equal 
access to services for patients with disability (UK Disability Act, 1995) 
and therefore we are undertaking a project to evaluate communication 
tools within genetic ophthalmic service including summary letters and 
leaflets in audio files and email and computer technology for enlarging 
diagrams in clinics.
Patients with a severe visual impairment require tactile diagrams to 
explore pictures of inheritance. However, we do not know the accept -
ability to the patient, the skills needed by the clinician or which dia -
grams may be most useful. Tactile diagrams for inheritance patterns 
were developed using focus groups composed of visually impaired 
patients and representatives from specialist organisations for people 
with visual problems including Action for Blind People and the Royal 
National Institute for the Blind (RNIB). We will present outcomes from 
the focus groups and the use of tactile diagrams in the genetic clinic 
which reveal how these might be successfully introduced in clinical 
practice. We hope to show how these communication aids improve 
communication with VI patients in the genetic clinic with minimal cost 
or effort.
EP10.06  Knowledge about hereditary nonplyposis colorectal 
cancer; mutation carriers and physicians at equal levels
C. Carlsson , K. Domanska, P. Bendahl, M. NIlbert;  
Institute of Clinical Sciences, Lund, Sweden.
Background: Identification and adequate management of individuals at 
risk for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is crucial 
since surveillance programmes reduce morbidity and mortality. We in -
vestigated knowledge about key features of HNPCC in at risk individu -
als and physicians in surgery, gynecology and oncology.
Methods: Data were collected using a questionnaire which was an -
swered by 67 mutation carriers and 102 physicians from the southern 
Swedish health care region. The statements were related to colorectal 
cancer, heredity and surveillance and the physicians were also asked 
questions about cancer risks and surveillance strategies.
Results: Both groups answered questions on colorectal cancer risk, 
surveillance and genetic
testing well, whereas answers about inheritance and risks for HNPCC 
associated cancer were less accurate. Only half of the family members 
and one third of the physicians correctly estimated the risk to inherit 
an HNPCC predisposing mutation. Among family members, young age 
(<57 years), female sex and recent genetic counseling significantly 
correlated with better results. Physicians generally underestimated the 
risk of HNPCC associated cancers and three out of four suggested a Genetic counselling: communicating genetic information 1later starting age for surveillance than recommended.
Conclusion: The finding of similar levels of knowledge about key fea -
tures of HNPCC in at risk
individuals and physicians reflect the challenge physicians face in 
keeping up to date on hereditary cancer and may have implications 
for the clinical management and professional relations with HNPCC 
family members.
EP10.07  Factors influencing the uptake of genetic counselling 
in female relatives of people with haemophilia.
B. J. Greyling1, S. Gillham2;  
1Genetic Counsellor, Division of Human Genetics, National Health 
Laboratory Service and School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa, 2Haemophilia Nurse Coordinator, Haemophilia 
Comprehensive Care Centre, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic 
Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Since 1988, about 200 people with haemophilia (PWH) and their 
families have been seen by genetic counsellors at the Haemophilia 
Care Centre at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital. 
However, very few of their at-risk female relatives have attended ge -
netic counselling to discuss their reproductive risks and options or their 
potential bleeding risks. Minimal research has been conducted inter -
nationally or in South Africa around the factors influencing uptake of 
genetic counselling and testing amongst female relatives of PWH.
This prospective qualitative study aims to: (a) determine what factors 
influence obligate and potential carriers’ uptake of genetic counsel -
ling and testing, (b) determine what would assist subjects in managing 
their carrier status, and (c) assess what would help these women to 
obtain genetic counselling and testing.
An open-ended semi-structured interview schedule was developed 
to incorporate potential predictors of genetic counselling and testing 
uptake as well as recommendations for improved carrier care and ge -
netic service. Subjects include female relatives of PWH who at least 
have a family member who has been counselled. Content analysis will 
be used to identify themes in the 20 subjects interviewed.
Preliminary findings indicate that some of the deterrents to uptake of 
genetic counselling and testing include: misunderstanding its purpose, 
fear of knowing carrier status, lack of knowledge about reproductive 
risks and potential bleeding symptoms.
The information gained from the research will be used to provide a 
better service to female relatives of PWH; with a goal being to set up a 
dedicated clinic for these women.
EP10.08  Factors influencing uptake of cascade carrier testing 
by adult relatives after a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis through 
newborn screening
B. J. McClaren1,2, M. A. Aitken1, D. J. Amor1,3, J. Massie4, O. C. Ukoummune1, 
S. A. Metcalfe1,2;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2The University of 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia, 4Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
In Victoria, Australia, carrier testing for cystic fibrosis (CF) is performed 
by a state-wide laboratory and counselling service. CF carrier testing 
(cascade testing) is offered free to relatives of babies diagnosed with 
CF through newborn screening. Although cascade testing is known 
to detect carriers for CF, its effectiveness has been questioned be -
cause most babies with CF are born to couples who do not have a 
family history. Uptake of testing was audited by examining pedigrees 
of newborns diagnosed with CF, and performing data linkage to the 
laboratory database records. Uptake of carrier testing amongst adult 
relatives was adjusted for clustering within families; three relatives per 
family, other than the parents, have had carrier testing. The majority 
of relatives have not had cascade carrier testing despite being at high 
risk. We identified factors influencing uptake of CF carrier testing by 
administering a questionnaire to a sample of relatives, and interview -
ing parents of children with CF. The response rate was 79% (n=225). 
The results of logistic regression analysis are summarised in the table. 
Qualitative data from the questionnaire and interviews indicate the 
main barrier to testing was lack of awareness that cascade testing was 
available through the clinical service. Findings provide insight into the 
characteristics of relatives who are tested and those who are not, and 
inform clinical service delivery around offering carrier testing to family 
members.VariableProportion
testedUnadjusted 
analysis
OR (95% ci)Adjusted 
analysis
OR (95% ci)
Gender of relative
Female 42% 1.8 (1.1 to 3.1) 2.0 (0.9 to 4.3)
Male 29% reference group reference group
p=0.02 p=0.07
category of 
relationship
Parent 53% reference group reference group
Aunt/uncle 53% 0.9 (0.4 to 2.3) 1.4 (0.5 to 4.2)
Grandparent 35% 0.4 (0.2 to 1.1) 0.6 (0.2 to 1.5)
Other 16% 0.1 (0.0 to 0.3) 0.2 (0.1 to 0.7)
p<0.001 p=0.01
Have children 
already
Yes 40% 2.6 (1.5 to 4.5) 2.9 (0.9 to 8.7)
No 21% reference group reference group
p<0.001 p=0.06
Plan to have 
(more) children
Yes 30% reference group reference group
No 38% 1.3 (0.5 to 3.2) 0.4 (0.1 to 1.7)
Currently pregnant 75% 5.7 (1.0 to 33.0) 2.5 (0.0 to 123.6)
Don’t know 43% 1.6 (0.5to 5.4) 0.9 (0.1 to 7.1)
p=0.1 p=0.4
Knowledge score 2.7 (1.8 to 4.2) 2.0 (1.1 to 3.8)
p=<0.001 p=0.03
Attitude score 1.5 (1.2 to 2.0) 1.3 (0.9 to 1.8)
p=0.003 p=0.1
EP10.09  Quality assessment of genetic counseling with focus 
on prenatal diagnoses -Bilateral survey of counseling staff and 
clients-
M. Mizoguchi1, K. Akane2, S. Izumi2, H. Maeda3, M. Morita4, Y. Nishimura5, K. 
Shibue6, H. Yokoyama1, K. Takahashi7, Y. Onuki8;  
1Sch. of Health Sciences,Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Dept. of 
OB/GYN, Sch. of Medicine, Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 3Liberal 
Arts Education Center, Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan, 4The Japanese 
Red Cross College of Nursing, Tokyo, Japan, 5Center for the Study of 
Communication-Design, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, 6Shizuoka University, 
Shizuoka, Japan, 7Dept. of OB/GYN, Sch. of Medicine,Tokai University, 
Kanagawa, Japan, 8Dept. of Neurology, Sch. Medicine, Tokai University, 
Kanagawa, Japan.
Objective: Tokai University Hospital is a core regional medical facil -
ity with 800 beds offering advanced, and emergency medical care. 
Genetic counseling was started in 2007, and geneticists, nurses, and 
clinical psychologists provide counseling to approximately 200 clients/
year (2009), regarding prenatal diagnoses (90%), congenital abnor -
malities, and genetic disorders. Counseling quality was surveyed in 
the largest body of clients seeking prenatal diagnoses and medical 
staff, in the interest of improving service quality.
Method: Clients and two attending staff (physician and nurse) were 
asked to complete an 8-item 5-point Likert scale_the Genetic Coun -
seling Satisfaction Scale (adapted from K.P. Tercyak, 2001) directly 
after counseling. Client-version questionnaires carried additional items 
addressing age, objective/reason for seeking counseling, accompany -
ing persons, extent of prior knowledge, waiting/consulting time, deci -
sion-making, and budgetary concerns. The study was conducted from 
March 2009 through January 2010. Responses were obtained from 64 
clients and 128 staff members.
Results: Most clients were in their 30s, and 60% of the consultations 
were age related. Following counseling, 33% elected to undergo amnio -
centesis, 8.6% against, with the remainder postponing decisions pend -
ing further consultation. Mean client Satisfaction Scale scores for items 
ranged between 4.3-4.7, higher than staff scores by 0.5-1.7 points. Low -
est evaluation by clients (4.3 points) was for „Readily understandable 
explanations,“ and among staff, „Explanation of basic knowledge“ (2.8 
points). Client comments requesting information on fees, test sched -
ules, and need of genealogical data when making the initial appointment 
indicated their wish to approach the consultation well prepared.2 Genetic counselling: communicating genetic informationEP10.10  Adaptation of a cancer communication skills training 
model for professional development in genetic counseling: 
description and evaluation
K. L. Dunlop1, K. Barlow-Stewart1,2;  
1Centre for Genetics Education NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney 
Medical School, Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
Ongoing professional development for genetic counselors is critical 
in maintaining best practice in knowledge and skills. Communication 
skills training (CST) workshops for doctors and nurses in oncology to 
provide counseling skills, utilizing trained actors in role plays with fa -
cilitator and group feedback, have been implemented for many years 
in Australia. This model has been adapted in the provision of continu -
ing professional development in counseling skills for practicing genetic 
counselors in Australia since 2002, providing a unique opportunity for 
reflection and focus on practice rather than teaching new skills. Pre-
workshop, actors worked with a director to develop their characters 
and explore responses in scenarios designed to illustrate issues de -
rived from reported challenges in genetic counseling practice. Evalua -
tion of participants’ experience and impact included surveys following 
immediately post the one day workshops (2002, 2004, 2005 and 2008 
(x2); n= 88/100) and 2-5 years later, (2007; n=21/38) and a focus group 
with previous participants (2007; n=7). All rated the workshop as effec -
tive methodology for professional development. Aspects highly valued 
included facilitator feedback; actors rather than role-playing with peers 
and so being able to stop and try things differently; group feedback; 
addressing new challenges; reassurance about their own practice and 
”material to work on in the workplace”. Perceived outcomes on prac -
tice included the opportunity to reflect, bring focus to communication, 
increase motivation and confidence. The high level of satisfaction is a 
strong endorsement for ongoing communication skills training in this 
format as part of professional development for genetic counselors.
EP11.01  Facilitating decision making and providing support in 
the face of uncertainty
L. A. Boyes ;  
Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.
Many families pursue genetic counselling in the hope of obtaining a 
greater level of certainty around the condition in the family, the risks 
to them and their children, and information about possible options to 
manage these risks. Genetic testing aims to help provide answers to 
some of these questions. However, in some cases testing fails to pro -
vide a confirmatory diagnosis. Genetic counselling in these circum -
stances can be challenging. Individuals may find it more difficult to 
make decisions in the face of uncertainty. This can leave both patients 
and professionals feeling powerless.
Here we present 2 cases illustrating the difficulties inherent in facilitat -
ing decision making in the absence of a confirmed genetic diagnosis. 1) 
A couple presenting at 9 weeks of pregnancy whose previous daughter 
died aged 3 months from Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) 
where genetic testing has not identified a causative mutation. 2) Two 
sisters in their early twenties concerned about a strong family history 
of young onset breast cancer where no mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 
or p53 were found.
We describe the counselling techniques and models utilised in these 
cases to assist the decision making process and consider the impact 
of these scenarios on the families.
EP11.02  cross-cultural values of ‚informed choice‘ in antenatal 
genetic screening
S. Ahmed , Z. Tizro, L. D. Bryant, D. Shickle;  
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
Policies for UK antenatal genetic screening programmes state that 
their primary aim is to facilitate ‘informed choices’. These policies are 
largely guided by Western ethical principles of autonomy but imple -
mented within a multi-ethnic population. Building on the evidence for 
cultural differences with respect to patient autonomy, this is the first 
study to explore values of informed choice within a multiethnic popula -
tion within the context of antenatal genetic screening. The study used 
Q methodology to characterise understandings of informed choice in 
a multiethnic sample of postnatal women. Ninety-eight participants of 
African, British white, Caribbean, Chinese and Pakistani origin com -
pleted a 41-statement Q-sort, which was also translated into French, Mandarin and Urdu. Statements reflected different values of informed 
choice in antenatal screening in terms of understandings of the test; 
the role of health professionals in decision-making; social influences; 
autonomy; structural factors; values of diagnostic testing, termina -
tion of pregnancy and religion. Q-Factor analysis produced statisti -
cally independent viewpoints of the value of informed choice. These 
were interpreted using comments participants made in post-Q-sorting 
interviews. The findings show that women hold a variety of views of 
the nature of ‘informed choice’, and that, contradictory to policies of 
non-directiveness many women seek and value the ‘advice’ of health 
professionals. The findings have implications for the role of health pro -
fessionals in facilitating informed choice, quality of care and equity of 
access.
EP12.01  case study: Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa. 
Genetic counselling challenges in a highly consanguineous new 
migrant family.
K. N. LeMarquand1, J. Jonasson2, A. Colley1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, NSW, Australia, 2Clinical 
Genetics, Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital of Umea, Sweden.
This case study involves a large Iraqi family with multiple consan -
guineous loops with a devastating family history of Herlitz junctional 
epidermolysis bullosa (H-JEB). H-JEB is a rare autosomal recessive 
skin disorder, usually fatal in infancy. It is characterized by skin fragil -
ity and blistering, nail inflammation; granulated wounds particularly on 
the face and a hoarse cry due to laryngeal involvement. The defective 
protein is laminin 332, a key component of the junction of the epider -
mis and dermis. Mutations in four genes have been described in JEB 
with the LAMB3 mutation accounting for 70% of all cases, including 
this family.
The family believes at least 30 babies have died with this condition 
in the past 100 years and until 2008 the diagnosis was not known. 
The psychosocial issues in counseling this large extended family were 
complex and challenging. All communication was with an Arabic inter -
preter. Interviews with the women in this family revealed they: feared 
for every pregnancy, grieved for previous losses, experienced guilt 
from the perception of passing on faulty genes, had their religious be -
liefs challenged, and struggled to make reproductive choices.
A Swedish branch of the family was the first to have mutational analy -
sis and following this Dr Jonasson and associates in Sweden provided 
mutation testing on the Australian branches of the family. The mutation 
was found in the LAMB3 gene in exon6 (c.430C>T) introducing a stop 
codon p.R144X. Four branches of the family in Australia have now had 
mutational analysis for carrier diagnosis and reproductive options.
EP12.02  How often is disclosure of genetic information 
important in genetic counselling?
J. Halliday1,2, J. Paul3,2, C. Gaff4, L. Skene5, J. Hodgson3,2;  
1Public Health Genetics, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, 
Australia, 2The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetics 
Education and Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia, 4Genetic Health Services Victoria, Royal Children‘s 
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Melbourne Law School, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Section 95AA of the Australian Privacy Act addresses the potential 
need for health professionals to disclose genetic information to rela -
tives, even without consent, when there is a “ …serious threat to life, 
health or safety of their genetic relatives …”. These guidelines (October 
2009) provide examples of how this might eventuate.
We are undertaking a RCT of a genetic counselling intervention to fa -
cilitate communication of genetic information within families, expecting 
that disclosure issues would be prevalent amongst the clientele in our 
population.
Four participating clinics were asked to audit their clients for approxi -
mately 3 months to determine the number eligible for recruitment i.e. 
there was a need for disclosure of genetic information within the family. 
If they were ineligible, the genetic counsellors were asked to provide 
a reason.
There were 513 clients attending the clinics and 27 (5%) clients who 
were eligible for recruitment in the audit period. Seven exclusion cat -
egories emerged:Strategies to facilitate decision making in genetics Exclusion 
categoryNot 
index 
casePrenatal 
testingNo family 
implications*ReviewResults 
pendingNo genetic 
diagnosisOther#
Number of 
clients 
(% of total 
clients 
attending 
clinics)91 
(18%)106 
(21%)82 (16%)72 
(14%)33 (6%) 86 (17%)19 
(4%)
* e.g. sporadic chromosome mutation, teratogen, de novo mutation, condition may not be 
genetic  
# e.g. interpreter required, cancer patients, genetic counsellor not present, hereditary 
haemochromatosis, client already recruited, parent with an intellectual disability .
In only 5% of genetic counselling sessions was disclosure of genetic in -
formation to relatives found to be applicable. As previous studies have 
indicated that instances of non-disclosure within families are rare, in 
the professional experience of a genetic counsellor the magnitude of 
the need for disclosure without consent is going to be extremely small; 
although where they arise the Section 95AA guidelines can now be 
used.
EP12.03   
communication of risk in families living with Huntington’s 
disease: a web survey to explore what they think, what they do.
P. Zinzi1, I. Carriero2, D. Salmaso3, A. Cordi2, M. Frontali4, G. Jacopini1;  
1Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, National Research Council, 
Rome, Italy, 2AICH-Roma Onlus, Rome, Italy, 3Institute of Cognitive Science 
and Technologies, National Research Council, Padua, Italy, 4Institute of Institute 
of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Research Council, Rome, 
Italy.
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative, autosomal domi -
nant, late-onset disease neither curable nor preventable.
We explored parental practices of informing children of risk for HD 
and the differences, if any, in truth disclosure from a generation to the 
other. An anonymous Internet survey was proposed to visitors from HD 
families on the lay Association website www.aichroma.com .
The survey explored the following issues:
• The way they, as children, had been informed of risk for HD
• The best age to receive the information and the ideal provider
• Whether being informed is useful or not
• The way they, as parents, had informed (or planned to inform) their 
children
Eighty-five individuals responded: 80 were HD families members and 
5 partners.
Preliminary data show that parents have difficulty communicating chil -
dren about disease and risk. The majority of respondents had children 
in condition of risk: about 80% of children had a parent who was carrier 
or symptomatic or at risk. Among respondents, those who did not have 
children stated they would inform them in case they had while the ma -
jority of those who actually had children did not provide any information 
nor showed any clear intention of doing it in the future.
Telling children the truth about HD and risk raises ambivalence. The 
opportunity to access good sources of counseling and support seems 
relevant in order to enable families to manage the emotional distress 
of giving such information.
EP12.04  Ethical aspects of genetics; testing asymptomatic 
minors: our experience
B. A. H. Caanen1, L. H. A. Dols2, M. I. Schouten1;  
1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, Netherlands.
When a genetic disorder is diagnosed other family members, includ -
ing minors, can also be at risk for the disorder. For many medical is -
sues parents give informed consent for their children. In genetic test -
ing of children there are some special points of interest. It has to be 
considered what the advantages are of testing during childhood. An 
important factor is the possible onset of the disorder in childhood and 
the opportunity to decrease the risk of health problems with a specific 
periodic control scheme. The choice of the moment of testing depends 
on several factors. If there is an adult onset of the disorder there are 
less advantages of testing in childhood. A comparable issue is test -ing of carriership of a balanced chromosomal translocation in child -
hood. Then the preference is to give the children their own choice to 
know their genetic status in adulthood. As long as they are minors 
counsellors have to consider that the child is not (fully) aware of all 
the consequences of the test-outcomes. Off course there are excep -
tions, there are some reasons to test during childhood on a disorder 
with adult onset. Preferably this decision is made by parents and the 
child together. Psychosocial support during and after the test period is 
important We give some examples of testing of (adult-onset) genetic 
disorders in childhood.
EP12.05  Experiences in men belonging to a family where 
women have a risk to fall ill with hereditary breast and ovarain 
cancer.
A. Baan ;  
Dept of oncology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Introduction: At present, focus is mainly on the women in families un -
dergoing screening for familial breast cancer and/or ovarian cancer. 
This is only to be expected, since this involves the risk of develop -
ing cancer diseases primarily in the female organs. The family being 
screened have often experienced the devastation of the family when 
female relatives have died, which is perceived as an imminent threat. 
The men in the family are often contacted after confirmation of a muta -
tion in the family. The men may thus be carriers of the mutation and 
pass it on to any children.
Purpose: The purpose of the literature review was to gain deeper un -
derstanding of how men think and feel when they may be carriers of 
a known mutation, aimed at expanding the communicative arsenal for 
genetic counsellors / nurses in their encounters with these men.
Method: The material included in the literature review was analysed 
using content analysis and the findings presented in two themes: deci -
sion-making and communication.
Findings: The findings are reported in sub-themes, which clarified 
how the family influences men in their decisions prior to carrier test -
ing. These are related to worries about their own health as well as 
thoughts about whether their carrier status implies a responsibility to 
refrain from reproduction. Men also have personal experience of can -
cer through their mothers, sisters and daughters. The study findings 
reveal the key role of the genetic counsellor / nurse in the human en -
counter and communication with men in the healthcare setting.
EP12.06  the baby who was not born after a prenatal diagnosis: 
the un-tkinkable hole in the family’s net.
A. Sá Leonardo ;  
Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal.
In this presentation I hope to show how prenatal diagnosis (PND) can 
be revolutionary for the couple and family dinamics. Since 2001, I have 
accompanied in the Genetics Department more than 200 couples who 
went through termination of pregnancy (TOP) for medical reasons. 
Drawing from these clinical cases, we will see how the experience 
of TOP is a de-meshing attack on the couple’s mesh, and how a psy -
chotherapeutical intervention assists in the family’s re-meshing (Beng -
hozi,2009, 2005) .
The techniques of PND take place in the most dynamic phase of the 
baby’s representation. Although the baby is still unborn, at this stage 
future parents are organising a new intersubjective link (Benghozi, 
2009, 2005)  with the baby, as are other family members. In a word, 
broadening of the familiar net is already taking place. Could the experi -
ence of TOP tear the mesh that unites the couple and family?
The baby who was not born becomes a hole in the family’s net, a 
“ghost” with an un-thinkable , un-nameable  and un-confessable1 
representation. This may explain why women often go alone to the 
therapeutical sessions. This “ghost” bears also the power to haunt the 
family’s capacity to dream of the next baby, the one not yet conceived 
but who already carries the risk of inheriting a family’s psychic material 
which could not be elaborated by the previous generations (Benghozi, 
2005) .
Psychoterapeutical intervention should help the couple make this hole 
nameable and go through the work of re-meshing the intersubjective 
links of the family’s net. Family dynamics and genetic conditionsEP12.07  Familial breast cancer: incongruence between the 
understanding of an inconclusive test result and informing 
relatives at risk.
C. M. Aalfs1, S. Ten Kate2, A. Onderwater3, E. Smets3;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Psychology, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Objective:  In many families with a strong history of breast cancer no 
mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes is identified. In these families, rela -
tives may nevertheless need to be informed about their increased risk 
and screening advices. Little is known about this group and the aim of 
this study was to explore index patients’ perspective on whether rela -
tives at risk were informed, to what extent relatives were informed and 
which difficulties they experienced when transmitting risk information.
Methods:  Semi-structured interviews were performed by telephone 
with eighteen index patients who had attended genetic counselling. 
Transcribed interviews were analyzed qualitatively.
Results:  Nearly all first degree relatives at risk were informed about 
the test result and their screening advice, second and third degree 
relatives were not. Most participants interpreted the test result as ‘truly 
negative’. In some cases this misunderstanding led to non-disclosure 
because according to the index patient there was no or little risk. How -
ever, in others cases it facilitated disclosure because no mutation be -
ing found was seen as a reassuring message. Several other factors 
influencing the process of disclosure emerged, including the degree 
of contact with relatives, the sense of responsibility to inform and the 
attitude of relatives towards genetic testing.
Conclusions : Informing relatives about their increased risk for develop -
ing breast cancer is influenced by many factors. It appeared that impli -
cations of inclusive test results are complex and difficult to understand. 
Despite this, nearly all first degree relatives were informed. Second 
and third degree relatives, however, were not.
EP13.01  Development of a new measure of adaptation to living 
with a genetic condition or at risk.
B. B. Biesecker1, L. Erby2;  
1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 
2Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
We propose a new scale for measuring adaptation to a genetic condi -
tion or risk. Living with a genetic condition or risk often leads to stress 
that patients learn to cope with. Adaptation refers to the process of 
coming to terms with the health threat and the observable outcomes of 
that process. Definitions of adaptation and synonyms like “adjustment” 
and “acceptance” differ in the literature. A variety of scales have been 
used to measure these related concepts. There is need for an adapta -
tion scale based upon stress and coping models that captures both 
intrapersonal and interpersonal outcomes of the process. Based on 
the theoretical and empirical evidence, we identified four primary do -
mains of adaptation: coping responses to the condition, self-esteem, 
social relationships, and the search for spiritual or existential mean -
ing. Using items available in the PROMIS “positive outcomes of ill -
ness” item bank, we constructed a scale with five items for each of the 
four domains. The scale has been used in six studies of adaptation to: 
Huntington disease risk (n=191), a child with pervasive developmental 
disorder (n=324), neurofibromatosis (n=482), a child with Down syn -
drome (n=546), XXY syndrome (n=249), and a child with Rhett syn -
drome (n=400). The Cronbach alpha measures of reliability exceed 0.8 
in each study and confirmatory factor analysis suggests that each set 
of five items converge on a single domain. Use of the scale is intended 
to lead to comparisons across different populations of individuals living 
with a genetic condition or at risk.
EP13.02  Epidermolysis Bullosa - exploring the experiences of 
affected individuals and families of living with an inherited skin 
condition
S. Gibson1, P. Price2, A. Clarke3;  
1Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 
2Department of Wound Healing, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 
3Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) is a rare inherited skin disease, affecting 
at least 5000 people in the UK. It is a genetically and clinically hetero -
geneous disorder, which encompasses a broad spectrum of symptoms 
of varying clinical severity. As found in many other skin diseases it may also have significant associated psychosocial issues, which add to the 
already challenging role faced by those affected by the condition and 
health professionals. A review of recent literature revealed limited pub -
lished qualitative work on the psychosocial needs and experiences of 
individuals and families affected by EB, particularly those affected by 
the more common but generally less severe form of the disease, EB 
Simplex. This study involved semi-structured interviews with 7 people 
with a personal or family history of EB who were members of D ebRA. 
The verbatim transcripts were thematically analysed to identify impor -
tant and common issues. The issues raised were varied, which was to 
be expected, given the complex and multi-faceted nature of the condi -
tion. These were divided into two main themes of ‘awareness’ and ‘bur -
den of illness’, which included both physical and psychological chal -
lenges, such as pain, appearance, visibility and quality of life issues 
caused by the constant need to plan ahead and adapt. The theme 
of awareness covered issues such as education, knowledge amongst 
health professionals and other people’s awareness of EB. The experi -
ences and attitudes of those affected by EB are vital to broadening our 
understanding of this complex condition and improving treatment and 
care of families.
EP13.03  EXtERNAL VALiDA tiON OF tHE HEREDit ARY 
NONPOLYPOs cOLOREct AL cANcER sELF-cONcEPt scALE 
iN tHREE cOUNtRiEs
H. V. Petersen ;  
Hvidovre University hospital, Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark.
Purpose Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) renders 
high risks of colorectal and gynecological cancer and implies life-long 
surveillance. Knowledge of an increased risk of cancer offers possibili -
ties for prevention, but may also influence self-perception and increase 
psychological distress. A 20-item self-concept scale has recently been 
developed with the aim to capture HNPCC-specific psychosocial diffi -
culties. We assessed the external validity of this instrument, using data 
from three HNPCC populations in Denmark, Canada, and Sweden.
Methods Self-concept scores were available from 591 individuals with 
HNPCC-predisposing germline mutations. The subgroups included 
415 Danes, 108 Canadians, and 68 Swedes without differences in 
sex and age between the populations and with 43-63% being affected 
with cancer. ANOVA analyses were used to test for differences in the 
subgroups and principal component analysis was used to explain vari -
ance.
Results Overall, the HNPCC self-concept scale provided similar re -
sults in the three countries, through differences were recognized for in -
dividual questions. Danes expressed lower degrees of guilt, but more 
pronounced worries for cancer, whereas Canadians more often ex -
pressed feelings of isolation and loss of privacy. PCA analysis demon -
strated that all 20 items contribute to variability with questions related 
to gastrointestinal anxiety being major determinants.
Conclusion The HNPCC self-concept scale was found to be valid and 
reliable. Subtle differences in feelings of guilt, worries for cancer, isola -
tion, and loss of privacy were identified between the countries.
All items contributed to the variation in scores with items linked to gas -
trointestinal anxiety central.
EP13.04  A review of the literature comparing the burden of 
disability and social factors on living with charcot-marie-t ooth 
or myotonic Dystrophy
C. V. Lamb , D. Scotcher;  
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
The burden of living with a progressive neuromuscular condition has 
received very little attention in the literature. A total of 15 papers were 
identified as satisfying the inclusion criteria that examined the burden 
of living with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) or Myotonic Dystrophy (DM). 
The majority used quantitative research methods to measure quality of 
life (QoL), while one paper used qualitative methods. CMT is classed 
as a relatively mild condition with variable but often late onset. DM 
also has variable onset but is associated with increased cognitive and 
physical impairment which becomes worse in successive generations. 
In the papers examined, higher levels of disability were found to cor -
relate with decreased QoL. In these progressively deteriorating con -
ditions it is often assumed that as the individual gets older, and the 
disease progresses, that QoL would deteriorate. This is not always the Living with genetic disease case. A “response shift” (Bostrom and Ahlstrom, 2004) is thought to oc -
cur between expectations and reality, making disability easier to cope 
with over time, despite the progression of the condition. Interestingly 
in DM, social factors were found to have a greater impact on QoL than 
level of disability. Lower levels of education and employment were ob -
served in DM compared to CMT. Lack of education or employment 
was found to negatively influence QoL. The study identifies areas of 
concern for patients that have relevance in clinical practice in Genetic 
Medicine, as well as possibilities for future research in this subject.
EP13.05  Huntington Disease - A practical cD-guide
U. M. Hösterey Ugander1, C. Hvalstedt2;  
1Clinical genetics, Sahlgrenska Univeristy Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden, 
2Dahlheimers Hus, Göteborg, Sweden.
Background: Huntington disease is rare and knowledge about the dis -
ease varies among professionals. A person affected by the condition 
who needs healthcare often meets professionals who lack adequate 
knowledge and may have have to inform the professionals about Hun -
tington disease. Within affected families many questions arise, espe -
cially among children at risk of inheriting the disease.
Aim: The purpose was to create and disseminate easily accessible, 
detailed resources about Huntington disease, directed to profession -
als, the affected, and to families.
Method: We made a detailed description of the progressive illness in 
five phases, connecting the different needs in each phase to special 
training, healthcare and social services. This was sent to all Hunting -
ton disease teams in Sweden for comments, which were incorporated 
into the resource. Researchers and persons with connections to Hun -
tington disease were interviewed and the recorded interviews were 
included in the final resource, a CD-Rom.
Result: T resource was presented at the national Huntington disease 
meeting in January 2010 but was already well known by the specialist 
teams through their participation in creating the CD. We are spreading 
information about the CD through patient organizations and media. 
The anticipated outcome is that this resource should fill the knowledge 
gap for professionals and affected families.
Future plans
-Write a guide for professionals who work with affected patients in daily 
care.
-Create an e-learning program from the resource material for profes -
sionals.
-Develop information for children in different ages.
-Translate the CD to English through the Euro-HD-network.
EP14.01  Development and evaluation of a telephone counselling 
strategy to enhance family communication about genetics
J. M. Hodgson1,2, J. Paul1,2, C. Gaff3,2;  
1Genetics Education and Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Dept Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
Individuals who receive a diagnosis of a genetic condition are gener -
ally advised to inform at-risk family members of this information. How -
ever, many family members appear to remain uninformed about their 
risk status. The responsibilities of health professionals towards these 
family members and ethical approaches have been debated but with 
little resolution.
Instead, we focus on the affected individual and present a client-cen -
tred genetic counselling strategy to facilitate family communication of 
genetic information. This can be delivered by telephone and comple -
ments face to face consultations. Development of the strategy was 
iterative and informed by empirical research about family communica -
tion. Counselling and communication theories were drawn on in order 
to optimise clinical feasibility and maintain congruence with the tenets 
of genetic counselling.
The process of evaluation of the strategy and the training protocol for 
genetic counsellors will be described. We will reflect upon the ethical 
challenges presented and the ways in which these were resolved.
The efficacy of the intervention is currently being tested by means of 
a randomised controlled trial funded by the Australian National Health 
and Medical Research Council. (NHMRC).EP15.01  statutory Regulation for Genetic counsellors in the UK.
G. Hall1, C. Patch2, C. Barnes2, C. Jacobs2, S. Durell3, J. Birch4, L. Snadden5, 
A. Middleton6;  
1Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Tr, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Guy‘s and St. 
Thomas‘ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Churchill 
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Liverpool Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Ferguson-Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, 
Yorkhill Hospitals, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6University of Cardiff, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom.
Professional registration for UK genetic counsellors began in 2001 and 
over half of the UK genetic counsellors now have a voluntary certifi -
cate of registration. Regulation of health care professionals has been 
prominent on the UK government agenda over the last few years and 
the resulting White Paper, “Trust, Assurance and Safety: The regu -
lation of health professionals” (2007) highlighted the need for public 
protection and proportionate regulation for new and emerging health 
professions.
Within clinical genetics, doctors and clinical scientists are registered 
with statutory regulation bodies such as the General Medical Council 
(GMC), genetic counsellors are not statutory regulated with growing 
numbers of non-regulated MSc trained genetic counsellors and nurse 
trained genetic counsellors now working within a new scope of practice. 
The Association of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors formed a steering 
group in 2006 to prepare an application for statutory regulation to the 
Health Professions Council (HPC). In order to join the HPC, profes -
sions must have evidence that they are an autonomous, stand-alone 
profession with evidenced based practice, a code of conduct, defined 
entry level criteria and demonstrate a registration process with fitness 
to practice and commitment to continuing professional development.
We will present the case for statutory regulation of genetic counsel -
ling, the importance of public protection, and the professional achieve -
ments in the UK, which lead to the approval of genetic counsellors 
by the HPC in December 2009. The profession is now awaiting the 
government’s consideration, including public consultation, for the nec -
essary changes in law for statutory regulation in the UK.
EP15.02  Genetic counsellors‘ perceptions of the blurred 
boundaries between clinical research and clinical care
M. R. Bogwitz ;  
Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
As genetics embeds itself in mainstream medicine, the degree of spe -
cialisation of genetic counsellors is growing and we are finding our -
selves with increasing opportunities to be involved in research as part 
of our everyday clinical care.
We recognise that research improves our clients’ lives, and that our 
involvement in research helps to develop genetic counselling as an 
independent profession.
Research and clinical care are theoretically distinct due to their dif -
fering motivations, aims, and outcomes. However in practice, these 
activities can become blurred in the eyes of both the clients and the 
genetic counsellors, creating a sense of unease for both groups for 
differing reasons.
This study uses an online survey to investigate practising genetic 
counsellors’ experiences in introducing clients into, or actively recruit -
ing them for, clinical research. It aims to uncover some of our appre -
hensions about this process in the hope that our awareness of the 
issues can help us distinguish these two parts of our roles, enhancing 
the overall care for the client in an ethical and responsible way.
Some of the concerns include the appropriateness of timing of recruit -
ment (soon after or during clinical care sessions), the feelings of coer -
cion associated with development of client rapport, the ethical dilem -
mas associated with having incentives to recruit clients to projects, and 
being unable to ensure our clients are aware of the distinction between 
the clinical and research activities.
EP15.03  A pilot study of music therapy in the treatment of 
children with developmental delay
D. R. Aldridge1, I. Fernandez Carvajal2;  
1Nordoff/Robbins Zentrum, Witten, Germany, 2IBGM-UVA, Valladolid, Spain.
Music therapy is known as an anxiolytic and musical play promotes 
non-verbal interaction and dialogue, specifically enhancing the pro -
sodic elements of communication. Other relevant psychological and social topics in geneticsGoal: To assess what changes occur in developmentally delayed chil -
dren when treated with active music therapy.
Methods: A crossover study of music therapy in twelve developmen -
tally delayed patients were assessed, selected and randomly allocated 
into two groups.Each child received individual music therapy.
This formed a treatment group and an initial non- treatment group to 
serve as a waiting-list control. The non-treatment group received mu -
sic therapy after waiting for three months, while the previously treated 
children had a break from therapy.The main assessment was develop -
mental according to psychological and functional criteria (the Griffiths‘ 
test), and musical.
Results: The children in the initial treatment group change more than 
the children on the waiting list. Such changes can be demonstrated at 
a level of clinical significance (p <0.05, Cohen’s d 1.7796).
When the waiting list group are treated and then tested, the newly 
treated children catch up in their development.There is a continuing 
improvement in hearing and speech, hand-eye co-ordination, and per -
sonal-social interaction.
Summary: Music making and music therapy brings about some of the 
developmental changes necessary to achieving communicative inter -
action, and this is the basis of social ineraction and independence. 
That these factors are pre-verbal and not lexically dependent, arguea 
for the importance of music making in the treatment of developmental -
ly delayed infants. Music therapy is a suitable integrative psychosocial 
treatment for children with developmental delay.
EP15.04  Participation in biobanks and research: motivations 
and expectations of cancer patients
I. Pellegrini1, C. Chabannon2,3, J. Mancini1,4, F. Viret2, N. Vey2, C. Julian-
Reynier1;  
1INSERM UMR912, Marseille, France, 2IPC, Marseille, France, 3INSERM 
UMR891, Marseille, France, 4CHU Timone, Marseille, France.
Background: Biobanks have become strategic resources for biomedi -
cal and genetic research. Few empiric data exist describing patients’ 
views.
Objectives: To investigate motivations and expectations of cancer pa -
tients when they are solicited to grant access to their own biological 
specimen for research projects.
Methods: The point of view of patients (n=19, aged 28-82) treated for 
colorectal cancer or leukaemia was explored by in depth interviews. 
Grounded theory was used to guide sampling, data collection and 
analysis.
Findings: All patients were willing to participate in biobanking and first 
motivated by a desire to help others and to contribute to advances in 
cancer research. Their attitudes were modulated by the context of the 
disease and by their previous attitudes towards donation in general, or 
in medical research context. Contribution to biobanks was further de -
scribed as an act of solidarity and reciprocity, which makes patients as 
being part of a community (they benefit from past research and future 
patients may benefit from present research), but also as an individual 
experience with psychological issues (dimension of hope associated 
to research, of self rewarding and of personal empowerment).
Discussion: The results reported here are in support for a benevolence 
account of the act of contribution to biobanks, and urge on getting 
out of the cleavage between participants being truly altruistic or driven 
by personal gain. Knowledge of patients’ perspective may guide the 
governance of biobanks, and facilitate the (re-)writing of information 
documents and consent forms, as well as establishment of institutional 
policies to collect these consents.
EP15.05  the course of human genetics for the students of the 
Family and childhood Psychology Faculty of st.Petersburg University of culture
M. O. Mkheidze1,2;  
1Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St.Petersburg University of Culture, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Hereditary and congenital disorders result in early and severe physical 
and mental disability. Interpersonal relations are tense and nervous in 
the families having children handicapped and psychological climate 
is far from positive one. More often a father can not bear it any lon -
ger and a marriage is broken down. These families stand in need of psychological support. Psychologist has to understand and sense of 
these problems and difficulties. Knowledge of the milestones of hu -
man genetics gives good grounds for successful professional activity 
of the psychologists. In 2006 year a course of human genetics (28 
hours) was included in the curriculum of the third year students of the 
Family and Childhood Psychology Faculty of St. Petersburg University 
of Culture. This course includes basic genetics, molecular and bio -
chemical genetics, cytogenetics. The chromosomal and monogenic 
diseases are discussed using a lot of clinical cases. Roleplay in small 
group learning is used for teaching communication skills. The students 
have to create and analyze their own pedigrees. This task is one of the 
most important and difficult for them. All students studied with interest 
and showed enthusiasm. They confirmed that the knowledge of basic 
genetic problems were very important for their professional skill. In 
the context of the psychological problems of the families with children 
handicapped the psychologists will integrate the tools of genetics in 
their practice for the most successful prediction and prevention psy -
chological conflicts.
EP15.06  An unexpected finding in the NF1 clinic
A. Turgut , S. Huson;  
Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom.
This case report reflects on the genetic counselling implications of an 
unexpected new differential diagnosis in a 13 year old girl (LS) at -
tending a NF1 Management clinic. It will discuss the implications of 
both breaking and receiving bad news in this context and the specific 
counselling considerations when the patient is an adolescent and ac -
companied by both her parents.
LS was referred by a paediatrician for diagnostic and management 
advice where NF1 was suspected but not confirmed by genetic test -
ing. The patient had presented with neurofibromas of the tongue and 
thickened corneal nerves. Following clinical examination a diagnosis 
of NF1 was excluded but this was replaced by a new, potentially life 
threatening diagnosis requiring an urgent surgical assessment. How 
this information was communicated, the medical and psychosocial im -
plications for LS and her family and the counselling implications will 
be discussed.
Kessler (1992) refers to the importance of transitions in genetic coun -
selling consultations. In this case the shift in tone and nature of the 
information to be conveyed was traumatic for the family. With no prior 
preparation the medical consultant and genetic counsellor were faced 
with breaking bad news, outlining an urgent management plan and 
ensuring appropriate on-going support to the family. This paper will 
consider the counselling strategies adopted and the advantages and 
challenges of the co-counselling model in a complex and evolving situ -
ation.
EP15.07  Diamonds in the defects: logotherapy in medical 
genetics
N. E. Gregersen ;  
National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
Introduction: Logotherapy (LT) is a form of psychotherapy based on 
the premise that we find healing through finding meaning. Meaning 
can be found in every situation in life, including the ‘tragic triad’ of pain/
suffering, guilt and death. Logotherapy’s founder, Viktor Frankl, was 
clear that it should be used in medical practice, but, to date, LT’s main 
application has been in palliative care, psychiatry and the treatment of 
addictions. Presented here is my experience, as a clinical geneticist, 
with the use of LT in the field of medical genetics, a new application 
for this therapy.
Methods: During my year of advanced training in LT, I provided LT 
to four individuals, or their mothers, who either had birth defects or 
genetic disorders. All sessions were voice recorded, transcribed, and 
submitted for supervision. They were studied to identify the present -
ing logoproblem, achievements of each session, common emerging 
themes, and individual gains.
Results: Each participant will be briefly discussed in terms of back -
ground and presenting logoproblem. Common emerging themes will 
be highlighted, and individual meaning-making will be discussed.
Conclusion: All the participants found meaning in their suffering. Logo -
therapy is suitable for use in the context of medical genetics, and it Genetic analysis, linkage ans association 7
transcends cultural, educational and language barriers. Protracted 
counseling is not required to facilitate meaning-making..
EP15.08  Direct to consumer genetic testing : marketing strate -
gies and ethical and societal issues.
P. Ducournau1,2, A. Bulle1, A. Cambon-Thomsen1, P. Gourraud1,3, E. Rial-
Sebbag1;  
1INSERM U 558, Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique: risques, 
maladies chroniques, handicaps, Toulouse, France, 2CUFR J.F. Champollion, 
Albi, France, 3Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, United States.
Direct to consumer genetic testing on Internet for various pathologies 
and behaviour traits appears as a marketing success. What kinds of 
commercial strategies use the companies offering these genetic tests 
and on what categories of social expectations do they play at the same 
time? Through a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the web sites 
offering such tests, it seems that these companies develop on the ba -
sis of the exploitation of a triple market: that of the „healthism“ (evolu -
tion of the mentalities by which health and hygiene are raised to the 
pantheon of the social values), that of the contemporary demands of 
the users of health systems to be able to become actual actors of 
the decisions concerning their health, and finally that of the bio-social 
relationship. Each of these three commercial strategies underpins vari -
ous ethical and societal stakes that need to be explored in the context 
of this important and unprecedented development of this market of 
genetic tests.
EP15.09  Breast and ovarian cancer screening practices for 
non-carriers from BRcA1/2 mutation-positive families: t wo-
year follow-up of prospective cohorts from France and Quebec, canada
M. Dorval ;  
Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada.
Background: We described and compared breast and ovarian screen -
ing practices in the 2-year period following test result disclosure in 
female non-carriers from BRCA1/2 mutation-positive families living in 
two countries, France and Quebec, Canada, which provide universal 
health care.
Methods: 402 (France n=293; Quebec n=109) unaffected female non-
carriers from BRCA-proven mutation families provided information 
about the uptake of mammography, clinical breast examination, breast 
self-examination, and ovarian ultrasounds using self-administered 
questionnaires. The frequency of screening practices between study 
cohorts were compared using logistic regression.
Results: Annual mammography was conducted in 23% and 43% of 
French and Quebecer women participants <50 years of age, respec -
tively (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 2.72; 95% CI, 1.08-6.81). In women 
>50 years of age, mammography was conducted in 49% and 65% of French and Quebecer participants (aOR = 1.77; 95% CI, 0.07-4.51). 
Overall, 33% of French women and 39% of Quebecer women under -
went at least one ovarian ultrasound during the 2-year period following 
BRCA1/ 2 test result with no significant difference between cohorts of 
women <50 years of age. Among older women, Quebecers reported 
more frequently than French women that they had undergone ultra -
sound once (aOR = 3.00; 95% CI, 1.02-8.83).
Conclusions: The frequency of cancer screening practices for female 
non-carriers from BRCA1/2  mutation-positive  families in both France 
and Quebec exceeded those recommended for similarly aged women 
in the general population. Our findings highlight the need for clear-cut 
recommendations on the follow-up of women from BRCA1/2  families 
who are not themselves carriers of a BRCA1/2  mutation.
EP15.10  Producing genetics education resources for 
primary care practitioners is just the beginning: challenges in 
dissemination and engagement.
K. Barlow-Stewart1,2, L. Forrest3, L. Purser1, S. Metcalfe4, J. Emery5;  
1Centre for Genetics Education NSW Health, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney 
Medical School, Sydney, Australia, 3Australian Primary Health Care Research 
Institute, Canberra, Australia, 4Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
Genetics in Family Medicine: The Australian Handbook for General 
Practitioners (GPs)  (http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/your_health/egenetics/
practitioners/gems.htm) was developed by the Genetics Education in 
Medicine consortium for the Australian Government in both print and 
on-line formats (June 2007). A summary sheet ( Genetics at a Glance  
(G@G)) contained guidelines for practice from the 17 modules, con -
tacts for genetics services throughout Australia and a web-link to the 
full resource which was also available in hardcopy ($A40). Promotion 
included a small launch at a national GP conference and a mail-out 
of the G@G with the October 2007 edition of the journal Australian 
Family Physician to every registered medical practitioner. Two years 
later, 768 GPs working in an urban or a rural and remote area were 
approached to participate in a survey of the dissemination strategy and 
use and relevance of the resource to GPs’ practice. While participation 
in the survey has been small (14% RR), early findings confirm the con -
sortium’s concerns that the dissemination strategy and lack of associ -
ated educational activities has resulted in extremely limited awareness 
of the resource: 17% remember receiving G@G and 6% can still locate 
it while only 4% and 1% have accessed the resource on-line or in print 
format, respectively. However, of those who opted into the learning 
activity for 2 CPD points, the vast majority found the information useful 
or very useful in completing the activity and the modules of informa -
tion were rated highly as relevant to GP practice. Educational activities 
suggested by GPs to promote the resource will be presented.Genetic analysis, linkage ans association