European Journal of Human Genetics (2019) 27:1174 –1813
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0494-2
ABSTRACTS COLLECTION
Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG)
Conference: Posters
Published online: 10 October 2019
© European Society of Human Genetics 2019
Volume 27 | Supplement 2
The Swedish Exhibition & Congress Center, Gothenburg, SwedenJune 15-18, 2019
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was
reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scienti ﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract
selections.
Disclosure Information: In order to help readers form their own judgments of potential bias in published abstracts, authors
are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests.
Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered
"Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Signi ﬁcant".
Posters
P01
Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics
P01.01A
Prenatal whole exome sequencing in agenesis of the
corpus callosum
S. Heide
1, B. Keren1, M. Moutard2, T. Billette de
Villeumeur2, M. Spentchian1, C. Garel3, C. Mignot1,
J. Buratti1, V. Layet4, V. Tsatsaris5, S. Moutton6,
M. Milh7, M. Gorce8, M. Spodenkiewicz9, G. Quenum
Miraillet10, S. Chantot-Bastaraud10, d. Vincent11,
L. Guibaud12, J. Jouannic13, S. Valence2, D. Heron1
1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and
Pitié Salpêtrière hospital, Reference Center for Intellectual
disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France,2APHP,
Department of pediatric neurology, Armand Trousseauhospital, Paris, France,
34. APHP, Department of pediatric
radiology, Armand Trousseau hospital, Paris, France,
4Department of genetics, Le Havre hospital, Le Havre,France,5APHP, Departement of obstetrics, Cochin
hospital, Paris, France,6Reference Center for
Developmental Anomalies, Department of Medical
Genetics, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France,
7APHM, Department of pediatric neurology, La Timone
hospital, Marseille, France,8Department of clinical
genetics, CHU d ’Angers, Angers, France,9Department of
clinical genetics, CHU de Reims, Reims, France,10APHP,
Department of cytogenetics, Trousseau hospital, Paris,
France,11HCL, Department of pediatric neurology, HFME,
Bron, France,12HCL, Department of radiology, HFME,
Bron, France,1314. APHP, Fetal Medicine Department,
Trousseau Hospital, Sorbonne Medicine University, Paris,
France
Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) is usually
diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound examination. In case of
isolated ACC (iACC), neurodevelopment is within normal
range in 80 % of cases whereas 20 % of children presentmild to severe intellectual disability (ID). Among genetic
etiologies, only chromosomal causes are investigated
(karyotyping and microarray) during prenatal period whileACC with ID is due to a single gene mutation in most cases.1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:Thus, parents make the decision to continue or terminate the
pregnancy on statistics.
Our study aims to evaluate the feasibility of prenatal
testing of all known ACC genes using whole exome
sequencing (WES).
Eighteen fetuses with ACC were included (ongoing
inclusions): 14 iACC and 4 cases of ACC associated to
other anomalies (aACC). Trio WES were performed on fetal
DNA extracted from amniotic ﬂuid sampling. Only patho-
genic variants in known ACC genes were considered.
Variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) and secondary
ﬁndings were not reported. WES results were available
within an average of 21 days. Thirteen WES (72%) were
normal (11 iACC, 2 aACC). A pathogenic variant in an
ACC with ID gene was identi ﬁed in two cases (11%):
BRAT1 (aACC) and PPP2R1A (iACC). A pathogenic 6q27
deletion was identi ﬁed in one case (aACC). We identi ﬁed a
VUS in 2 cases.
Our preliminary results suggest feasibility of prenatal
WES in fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of ACC. In case of
etiological diagnosis, WES helps the parents to make adecision for the pregnancy. However, WES in the prenatal
period arises ethical questions.
S. Heide: None. B. Keren: None. M. Moutard: None.
T. Billette de Villeumeur: None. M. Spentchian: None.
C. Garel: None. C. Mignot: None. J. Buratti: None. V.
Layet: None. V. Tsatsaris: None. S. Moutton: None. M.
Milh: None. M. Gorce: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None.
G. Quenum Miraillet: None. S. Chantot-Bastaraud:
None. D. Vincent: None. L. Guibaud: None. J. Jouannic:
None. S. Valence: None. D. Heron: None.
P01.02B
Results of karyotype analysis of 8361 pregnancies in
prenataly identi ﬁed cases with amniocentesis from south
of Turkey
A. Pazarbasi
1, D. Alptekin1, I. N. Uslu1, N. S. Ilgaz1,
L. Ozpak1, G. Comertpay1,G .A y1, N. Cetinel1, E. Akbal-
Isık1, G. Evyapan1, S. Kocaturk-Sel1, U. Luleyap1,
M. B. Yilmaz1, S. Buyukkurt2
1University of Çukurova, Faculty of Medicine, Dept of
Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey,2University of Çukurova,
Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology,Adana, Turkey
Objectives: Amniocentesis is a very crucial diagnostic
procedure for preventing the birth of genetically defective
fetuses in order to decrease the prevalence of genetic
diseases in populations. Methods: A retrospective review ofour amniocentesis database for the period from January
2000 to February 2019 was carried out. The karyotyping of8361 fetuses was carried out in Department of Medical
Biology from the samples of amniotic ﬂuids which were
sent from Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of
Balcali Hospital. A standard nomenclature has been
developed to describe each of types of abnormality found
in human chromosomes.
Results: A total of 8361 amniocentesis specimens were
processed during the study period. 601 fetuses (7.18%) had
various chromosomal abnormalities. 54.4% of abnormalkaryotypes (329 cases) were numerical and 43.09% (259
cases) were structural. Both numerical and structural chro-
mosomal aberrations were observed in 13 cases (2.16%).The ratios were as: trisomy 21 (48.93%), trisomy 18
(17.93%), monosomy X (9.72%), trisomy 13 (6.99%),
Triploidy (4.86%), Klinefelter Syndrome (3.34%), TrisomyX (1.21%), XYY Syndrome (0.91%), and the others in all
numerical abnormalities. The frequent structural abnormal-
ities were as: 46,XX/XY, inv(9) (p11;q12)/(p11;q13)(29.34%), 46,XX/XY, 1qh( +)(11.58%), 46,XY, Yqh(-)
(7.33%), 46,XX/XY, 16qh( +)(7.33%), 46,XX/XY, 9qh( +)
(4.63%) and 46,XY, Yqh( +)(4.24%). Balanced and unba-
lanced translocations, deletions and duplications were also
found in less ratio.
Conclusions: According to the literature and our results,
advanced maternal age is the main cause of fetal chromo-
somal abnormalities. Fetal chromosomal abnormality ratio
that we found was 7.18%. This ratio emphasizes theimportance of prenatal diagnosis.
A. Pazarbasi: None. D. Alptekin: None. I.N. Uslu:
None. N.S. Ilgaz: None. L. Ozpak: None. G. Comertpay:
None. G. Ay: None. N. Cetinel: None. E. Akbal-Is ık:
None. G. Evyapan: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None.
U. Luleyap: None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S. Buyukkurt:
None.
P01.03C
Biallelic variants in AMPD2 gene cause prenatal isolated
agenesis of corpus callosum
L. Mouthon
1, S. Heide1, C. Depienne2, C. Nava3,
A. Rastetter4, D. Lacombe5, T. Attie Bitach6, D. Héron1
1UF Génétique Médicale, APHP Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière,
Paris, France,2Institüt für Humangenetik,
Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany,3UF de Génomique
du Développement, APHP Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris,
France,4Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris,
France,5Service de Génétique Clinique Médicale, CHU
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,6Département de Génétique,
Hôpital Necker -Enfants Malades, Paris, France
Introduction: Recessive mutations in AMPD2 gene cause
Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH) type 9. This severeAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1175neurodevelopmental disease is characterized by intellectual
disability associated with epilepsy and spasticity. Brain
imaging shows the association of pontocerebellar anoma-
lies, agenesis of corpus callosum (ACC) and microcephaly.
The 2 fetuses already reported with mutations in this gene
had HPC associated with ACC on prenatal ultrasound orMRI. We report two cases of AMPD2 mutations in sibling
fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of isolated ACC (iACC).
Cases: Male fetus 1 : prenatal iACC at 32 gestational
weeks (GW) ; termination of pregnancy (top) at 37GW,
normal CGH array; postnatal iACC (neuropathological
examination). Male fetus 2: prenatal iACC ; top at 31 GW;normal CGH array; postnatal iACC (neuropathological
examination).
Method: Whole exome sequencing (2 fetuses and 2
parents).
Results: Identi ﬁcation of two compound heterozygous
AMPD2 mutations (c.751C>T, p.Arg251Trp; c.1648G>A,
p.Glu550Lys) in the 2 fetuses.
Discussion: We report here an unusual prenatal pre-
sentation of PCH9 in 2 sibling fetuses, limited to a prenataland postnatal iACC. ACC is one of the most frequent brain
malformations, usually detected by prenatal ultrasound.
Prognosis is variable and correlates with the presence orabsence of other malformations. When isolated, the neuro-
development is within a normal range in 80 % of cases
whereas 20 % have mild to severe intellectual disability.Establishing an etiological diagnosis of a prenatal appar-
ently iACC is essential to assess neurodevelopmental
prognosis. AMPD2 should be considered as a gene
responsible for isolated prenatal ACC.
L. Mouthon: None. S. Heide: None. C. Depienne:
None. C. Nava: None. A. Rastetter: None. D. Lacombe:
None. T. Attie Bitach: None. D. Héron: None.
P01.04D
Rare autosomal abnormalities detected using
noninvasive prenatal screening
J. Shubina, I. Y. Barkov, O. K. Stupko, L. V. Kim,
T. O. Kochetkova, A. Y. Goltsov, I. S. Mukosey,
M. V. Kuznetsova, N. A. Karetnikova, N. K. Tetruashvili,V. A. Bakharev, D. Y. Tro ﬁmov
National medical research center for obstetrics, gynecology
and perinatology named after academician, Moscow,
Russian Federation
Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal DNA screening (NIPS)
is believed to be highly sensitive to common aneuploidy
detection. Since some NIPS technologies use whole genomesequencing, aneuploidies and large CNV of any chromo-
some could be detected. Although detection of rareaneuploidies and large CNV is possible it is not
recommended in Obstetricians and Gynecologists guide-
lines. Majority of NIPS providers do not report this
information.
Materials and Methods: NIPS was carried on Ion
S5 sequencer with in-house developed data analysis pipe-line. 1300 samples collected at 11-20 weeks of gestation
were analyzed. NIPS results were con ﬁrmed with kar-
yotyping of invasively obtained samples or blood cellsobtained postnatally. Four biopsies of placental tissue were
performed to assess placental karyotype.
Results: High aneuploidy risk was detected in 39 cases.
14 - trisomy 21, 3 - trisomy 13, 15 sex chromosome
abnormalities (4 due to maternal mosaicism) and 7 rare
autosomal abnormalities (trisomies 7, 8, 10, large CNV). Inone case large CNV was con ﬁrmed in the fetus. In two
cases of rare trisomies, placental tissue was available, in
both cases, mosaic trisomy was con ﬁrmed in the placenta.
Conclusions: High risk of rare autosomal abnormality
could be associated with miscarriage, con ﬁned placental
mosaicism, true fetal mosaicism, and uniparental disomies.Whole genome analysis may identify pregnancies at risk of
miscarriage and other complications.The study is supported
by the Ministry of Healthcare of Russian Federation
J. Shubina:
None. I.Y. Barkov: None. O.K. Stupko:
None. L.V. Kim: None. T.O. Kochetkova: None. A.Y.
Goltsov: None. I.S. Mukosey: None. M.V. Kuznetsova:
None. N.A. Karetnikova: None. N.K. Tetruashvili: None.
V.A. Bakharev: None. D.Y. Tro ﬁmov: None.
P01.05A
Array CGH and next-generations sequencing in
diagnostics of fetal skeletal dysplasia
I. Dimova1, V. Peycheva1, P. Chaveeva2, R. Bozhilova1,
K. Mihova1, K. Kamenarova1, A. Kanev3, A. Todorova1,
V. Dimitrova4, R. Kaneva1
1Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2SAGBAL "Dr
Shterev", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Military Medical Academy,
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4SBALAG "Maichin dom", So ﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Background: Array CGH is routinely used in prenatal
diagnostics of structural fetal defects where the possibilitytoﬁnd genomic aberrations is high. This technique is
especially suitable in a history of repeated pregnancy failure
together with structural defects.
Materials and Methods: We report here the results from
genomic analysis in fetal skeletal dysplasia (SD) - we per-
formed arrayCGH in cases with repeated abortions and fetalskeletal anomalies and next-generation sequencing (NGS) -1176in cases with lack of diagnosis after aCGH or phenotypes,
strongly suggestive for monogenic disorder.
Results: Theﬁndings from arrayCGH and NGS analyses
are presented in the Table below.
Clinical manifestation Genomic/gene aberration
Limbs anomalies and 3
previous abortions7q21.3(94,214,445 - 95,257,297)x1
(1.04Mb) Split hand/foot malformation
3rdpregnancy with
phocomely and limbs
aplasia1q21.1 (145425395 -146507577)x1
(1.08 Mbp) TAR syndrome
Skeletal dysplasia and 2
previous abortions17q21.33(48,264,999-48,277,988)x3
(12.99 Кbp, including COL1A1 gene)
2ndpregnancy with
arthrogryposisXq28(154,974,667-155,208,354)x0
(234 Kbp) VOUS: c.357T>G, p.
Ile119Met (NM_017946.3) inFKBP14 gene
1
stpregnancy with dwar ﬁsm Possibly damaging variants:
c.6117C>G (p.Ile2038Met) in HSPG2
gene; c.7223C>G (p.Ala2408Gly) in
PCNT gene
Conclusion: Genetic diagnosis of SDs is strongly needed
because there are so many diseases with complex pheno-types and identi ﬁcation of the responsible gene(s) is
important to understand the diseases themselves. We
demonstrated here the diagnostic utility of aCGH, whichcould be the ﬁrst-line test in prenatal settings. NGS is a very
powerful technique in diagnostics of very rare diseases, but
needs much longer time for analysis and additional steps forelucidations of the found variants.
I. Dimova: None. V. Peycheva: None. P. Chaveeva:
None. R. Bozhilova: None. K. Mihova: None. K. Kame-
narova: None. A. Kanev: None. A. Todorova: None. V.
Dimitrova: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P01.06B
Application of array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) for identi ﬁcation of lethal chromosomal
aberrations in spontaneous abortion
K. Sobecka, M. Smyk, M. Chojnacka, B. Wi śniowiecka-
Kowalnik, E. Michalak, T. Klepacka, B. Nowakowska
Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, PolandSpontaneous abortions occur in 8-20% cases of recognized
pregnancies. Most often, the miscarriage take place in theﬁrst trimester (7-11 weeks). There are many causes of
pregnancy loss, but the most important (~75%) is the
presence of chromosomal aberrations. A high percentage ofchromosomal aberration is caused by the abnormal genetic
material of germ cells. Research showed that 20-30% of ovaand 6-8% of sperm showed chromosomal abnormalities.
This percentage signi ﬁcantly increases with advancing age
in women and in cases of abnormalities of sperm in men.
We present the results of oligonucleotide array applica-
tion in a cohort of 31 cases of mothers with adverse preg-
nancy histories. DNA was extracted from trophoblast andumbilical cord. Array CGH was performed using 4x180K
microarrays from Oxford Gene Technology (CytoSure
ISCA, v3).
The detection rate in our cohort was 61,3% (19/31). The
most commonly found (73,7%) were aneuploidies: trisomy
of chromosomes 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, Turner syndrome andtriploidy. Other chromosomal abnormalities included
structural aberrations: deletion 7p22.3p12.3 and duplication
9p24.3p13.2 inherited from normal father, deletion3q13.31q22.2, deletion 3q22.3q23, duplication 17p12
inherited from father with foot malformations, deletion
17p13.1 inherited from normal mother, deletion 5q14.3 andde novo deletion 1q21.1q21.2.
Our research shows that microarray is the only method
permitting the identi ﬁcation of all unbalanced aberrations
(number and structure) with a much higher resolution than
karyotype.
The work was supported by project 2016/23/N/NZ2/
02364 from the National Science Centre, Poland.
K. Sobecka: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; National Science
Centre, Poland. M. Smyk: None. M. Chojnacka: None. B.
Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. E. Michalak: None. T.
Klepacka: None. B. Nowakowska: None.
P01.08D
Screening by Multiple ligation-dependent probe
ampli ﬁ
cation assay of AZF a, b, c regions in primary
infertile men with azoospermia
K. Haziyeva1, O. Cilingir1, B. Durak Aras1, I. Ure2,
E. Erzurumluoglu1, E. Tosumoglu1, S. Artan1
1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics, Esk ısehır, Turkey,
2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Urology, Esk ısehır, Turkey
Y chromosome microdeletions are the most common cause
of azoospermia and occur in 5-15% of infertile men with
azoospermia. Microdeletions/partial deletions of the azoos-permia factor(AZF) regions on the Y chromosome are a
well-known genetic cause of male infertility, resulting in
impairment of spermatogenesis. We sought to determine thefrequency and the character of AZF region microdeletions/
partial deletions in infertile men with azoospermia by usingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1177Multiplex Ligation-Related Probe Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA).
In total, 50 azoospermic infertile men without gene and
chromosome mutations, were screened for Y chromosome
microdeletions in AZF regions and 50 fertile men assigned
to control group. The total frequency of the microdeletions
was 16%. Most deletions (10%) were seen in the AZFcfollowed by the AZFb (4%). The partial BPY2 gene
deletions, located at AZFc region were detected in ﬁve
patients while partial EIF1AY gene deletions, located inAZFb locus were seen in two patients. The combined AZFb
and AZFc loci deletion was revealed in a patient. No AZFa
region deletion was detected among the azoospermic cases.In the literature, it has been shown that BPY2 gene is
effective in male germ cell development and loss of
EIF1AY gene function can result in azoospermia sporadi-cally. The present ﬁndings suggest that MLPA is more
appropriate compared to mPCR because it investigates
partial and complete deletions of AZF regions for malesterility compared to previous methods. Our study shows
that microdeletion and partial deletions, which are men-
tioned in the literature as the reason of azoospermia, can bedetected by MLPA method at the same time.
K. Haziyeva: None. O. Cilingir: None. B. Durak Aras:
None. I. Ure: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. E. Tosu-
moglu: None. S. Artan: None.
P01.09A
Characterisation of Bardet Biedl Syndrome in a foetus
by post-mortem microfocus computed tomography
A. Beleza-Meireles
1,2, S. C. Shelmerdine3,4, M. Singh3,
I. Simcock3,4, A. D. Calder3, M. Ashworth5, N. J. Sebire5,4,
O. J. Arthurs3,4
1Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom,2Centre for
Craniofacial & Regenerative Biology, King ’s College
London, London, Austria,3Department of Radiology, Great
Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK, London, United Kingdom,4UCL Great
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom,5Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,London, United Kingdom
Conﬁrmation of antenatally detected foetal anomalies is
vital following termination of pregnancy due to congenital
anomalies. Phenotypic information is essential for genetic
testing and counselling. However antenatal ultrasonographyidenti ﬁes only up to 68% of autopsy ﬁndings, which are not
always available.
Post-mortem imaging using microfocus computed tomo-
graphy (micro-CT) provides an alternative, or com-
plementary tool, to autopsy. It provides high-resolution, 3Ddigital images, which may enable accurate diagnosis of
complex multisystem syndromes, in particular in small early
gestation fetuses.
We describe the case of a 33 year old primigravida, who
attended for antenatal sonography at 12
+5weeks gestation.
An increased nuchal translucency and hypoplastic left heartwere observed; multicystic kidneys suspected. Array-CGH
was normal. The couple opted to terminate the pregnancy at
15
+6weeks.
Due to small foetal size, whole-body micro-CT was
performed. Image analysis revealed an atrioventricular
septal defect, mitral valve stenosis, left ventricular hypo-plasia, aortic atresia and ascending and aortic arch hypo-
plasia. Multiple renal cortical cysts and bilateral upper and
lower limb post-axial polydactyly were observed. Renalhistology con ﬁrmed extensive cystic dilatation of the renal
tubules.
Genetic testing identi ﬁed compound heterozygous muta-
tions in BBS7 [c.187G>A; p.(Gly63Arg)mat and c.973G>T;
p.(Glu325Ter)pat], consistent with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
Given a recurrence risk for future pregnancies at 25%, thecouple received counselling regarding future preimplanta-
tion genetic testing.
In conclusion, micro-CT is a non-invasive highly detailed
method for assessing early gestation foetal anatomy, and
provides an adjunctive or alternative tool to the standard
foetal autopsy technique.
A. Beleza-Meireles: None. S.C. Shelmerdine: None. M.
Singh: None. I. Simcock: None. A.D. Calder: None. M.
Ashworth: None. N.J. Sebire: None. O.J. Arthurs: None.
P01.11C
Preconception expanded carrier screening in adeveloping country: where does science exactly meet
bioethics?
S. Klumsathian
1, B. Panthan1, N. Iemwimangsa1,
I. Sensorn1, A. Charoenyingwattana1,
T. Chareonsirisuthigul2, Y. Worakijthamrongchai3,
M. Sukpraserrt3, W. Chantratita1, O. Trachoo4,1
1Center for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand,2Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok,Thailand,
3Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, Faculty
of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand,4Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand
Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) was
recently introduced to Thailand and other developing1178countries in Asia by a large number of international
laboratories. Several incidences were reported concerning
negative psychosocial impact, i.e., anxiety and dif ﬁculty in
making decision on reproductive option.
Material and Methods: Forty healthy Thai couples
visiting preconception clinic were enrolled. ECS was per-formed using 630-disease panel covering most autosomal
recessive and X-linked disorders. Thereafter, attitudes on
ECS and clinical application were interviewed. Genetic datawere then combined with previous in-house database,
pooling up to 355 unrelated individuals. Carrier identi ﬁca-
tion were interpreted using our developed bioinformatic andclinical criteria suitable for legal and ethical issues.
Results: The most common carrier frequency in our
cohort belonged to beta thalassemia (1/5) which was con-sistent with national statistics. Interestingly, primary
hemochromatosis H63D, which have never been recognised
in Southeast Asian populations, became the second com-mon (1/16). Other carriers detected as common in Thais
included alpha thalassemia, Gilbert syndrome, 21-
hydroxylase-de ﬁcient congenital adrenal hyperplasia and
spinal muscular atrophy. More than 95% of the subjects had
a positive attitude to ECS. They accepted preimplantation
genetic diagnosis as their reproductive option if they wereidenti ﬁed as couples at risk, either mild or severe condition.
Conclusions: ECS would be useful if the selection cri-
teria were clear and consistent with national regulation andethics. Pre-test genetic counseling was necessarily required
for the couples to understand further outcome.
Grants: Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital and
Center of Excellence on Medical Biotechnology, Mahidol
University.
S. Klumsathian: None. B. Panthan: None. N. Iemwi-
mangsa: None. I. Sensorn: None. A. Char-
oenyingwattana: None. T. Chareonsirisuthigul: None. Y.
Worakijthamrongchai: None. M. Sukpraserrt: None. W.
Chantratita: None. O. Trachoo: None.
P01.12D
Interest in expanded carrier screening among
prospective parents: systematic review of the literature
D. Chokoshvili, E. Van Steijvoort, P. Borry
University of Leuven, Leuven, BelgiumExpanded carrier screening (ECS) is a reproductive genetic
test aimed at identifying prospective healthy parents whoare at risk of conceiving a child affected with a recessive
disorder. ECS tests screen for large numbers of recessive
disorders and are currently available through variousgenetic testing laboratories. However, the extent to which
ECS can be successfully implemented in the context ofreproductive healthcare depends largely on prospective
parents ’interest in ECS. In this systematic review, we
synthesized evidence from empirical studies exploring
interest in ECS among individuals and couples in the
general population. Studies included in this review reported
prospective parents ’intentions to undergo a (hypothetical)
ECS test, uptake of an actual ECS offer, or both. Four
databases (Pubmed, Web of Science, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library) were systematically searched for relevant publica-tions and 12 empirical studies were included in the review.
Owing to the novelty of ECS, all the included studies were
relatively recent, having been published during 2015-2019.In the included studies, 33%-66% of respondents were
interested in a (hypothetical) ECS test, while uptake rates
for actual ECS offers were reported at 10%-50%. Thehighest uptake was observed in a study where ECS was
offered to pregnant women. By contrast, studies focusing on
the preconception population reported lower uptake rates,even though some of these preconceptional ECS tests were
provided free of charge. Our ﬁndings suggest that there may
be discrepancies between prospective parents ’self-reported
intentions to undergo ECS and their actual test-taking
behavior, particularly during the preconception period.
D. Chokoshvili: None. E. Van Steijvoort: None.
P.
Borry: None.
P01.14B
Prenatal clubfoot increases the risk for clinically
signiﬁcant chromosomal microarray (CMA) results -
analysis of 269 singleton pregnancies
A. Singer1, I. Maya2, B. Ehud3, H. Baris4, C. Vinkler5,
C. Vinkler5, S. Ben-Shachar6, A. Bar-Shira6, L. Sagi-
Dain7
1Community Genetics, Public Health Services, Ministry of
Health, Jerusalem, Israel,2Recanati Genetics Institute,
Beilinson Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva,
Israel,3Genetic Institute Kaplan Med Cntr, Rehovot, Israel,
4The Genetics Institute, Rambam the Technion, Haifa,
Israel,5Genetic Institute Wolfson Med Cntr, Holon, Israel,
6Genetic Institute Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel
Aviv, Israel,7Genetic Institute Carmel medical Cntr, Haifa,
Israel
Clubfoot, also known as talipes equinovarus, is a well-
recognized congenital foot deformity. It is diagnosed in
about 1:1000 pregnancies. Clubfoot can present as anisolated defect or as non-isolated, also called "complex" or
"syndromic", clubfoot, associated with additional
anomalies.
Objective: This work was done in order to examine the
detection rate of clinically signi ﬁcant chromosomalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1179microarray analysis (CMA) results in singleton pregnancies
with clubfoot.
Methods: Data from all CMA tests performed due to
sonographic abnormal ﬁndings between January 2013 and
September 2017 were retrospectively obtained from Min-
istry of Health computerized database. All singleton preg-nancies with sonographic diagnosis of clubfoot (talipes
equinovarus) and documentation of CMA result were
included.
Results: Of the 5750 CMA tests, a total of 269 (4.7%)
were performed due to demonstration of fetal clubfoot. Of
the 229 cases with isolated deformity, nine (3.9%) clinicallysigniﬁcant CMA results were detected. This detection rate is
signiﬁcantly increased compared CMA results in normal
pregnancies as previously reported. In 40 pregnancies withsyndromic clubfoot, seven (17.5%) clinically signi ﬁcant
CMA results were detected, a signi ﬁcantly higher frequency
compared to isolated clubfoot cases.
Conclusion: Sonographic diagnosis of clubfoot, whether
isolated or associated with additional sonographic anoma-
lies, seems to increase the risk for abnormal CMA ﬁndings.
Thus, CMA analysis, in conjunction with thorough sono-
graphic anatomic survey, should be recommended in such
pregnancies.
A. Singer: None. I. Maya: None. B. Ehud: None. H.
Baris: None. C. Vinkler: None. C. Vinkler: None. S. Ben-
Shachar: None. A. Bar-Shira: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None.
P01.15C
The in ﬂuence of prenatal chromosomal microarray
analysis on the decision on termination of pregnancy
T. Reischer, J. Brandstetter, R. Drahonsky, C. Fast-
Hirsch, B. Streubel
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, AustriaIntroduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)
was introduced to prenatal genetic diagnosis a couple ofyears ago. There have been many publications before
demonstrating the bene ﬁt of CMA in detecting micro-
duplications and microdeletions in the prenatal setting. Aimof this study is to evaluate the association between prenatal
CMA and the decision on termination of pregnancy.
Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective study of
a single prenatal center in Austria between 2011 and 2017,
including all fetuses that had prenatal diagnosis with CMA.
Results: In general highest rates of pathogenic CNVs
were found if the indication for prenatal diagnosis was
congenital heart disease or brain malformations. There was
a statistical signi ﬁcant association between pathogenic CNV
and the decision on termination of pregnancy (p<0,05). But
comparing pregnancy outcomes with prenatal CMA andwithout CMA, irrespective of the result of the CMA, we
found signi ﬁcant fewer terminations of pregnancies in the
group with CMA, even if the severity of malformations of
the fetuses were comparable.
Conclusions: In summary the decision on termination of
pregnancy is individual and there are many in ﬂuencing
factors to consider. However our data suggests that the
result of additional CMA can be a crucial factor in the
decision on termination of pregnancy.
T. Reischer: None. J. Brandstetter:
None. R. Dra-
honsky: None. C. Fast-Hirsch: None. B. Streubel: None.
P01.16D
Congenital anomalies in children born after assisted
reproduction in the Czech Republic: Population basedstudy
A. Sipek Jr
1,2, V. Gregor2,3, A. Sipek Sr2,3,4,5,
J. Klaschka6,7, M. Maly6,8, J. Jirova9
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Medical Genetics,
Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic,4Institute of
Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic,5GENNET, Prague,
Czech Republic,6Institute of Computer Science of the Czech
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic,7Institute of
Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
8National
Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic,
9Institute for Health Information and Statistics, Prague,
Czech Republic
Introduction: Assisted reproduction (AR) is nowadays
commonly-used method for treating various fertility
problems. However, several studies have shown a higher
incidence of selected types of congenital anomalies amongAR-conceived children. Our goal was to study this
association on a large population cohorts (over 3 millions
of live-births) using data from our population basedregistries.
Methods: Our retrospective epidemiological study is
based on the of ﬁcial data from the National Registry of
Congenital Anomalies and National Registry of assisted
Reproduction (run by the Institute of the Health Information
and Statistics of the Czech Republic). The registrationprocess is population-wide and compulsory by national law.
We evaluated the incidence of congenital anomalies (ICD-
10 diagnoses Q00-Q99) in AR-conceived children andcompared it to the incidence of congenital anomalies in
naturally-conceived children. Time period: 2013-2015.1180Results: The overall incidence of congenital anomalies
was slightly higher in the AR-children group however, the
difference was not statistically signi ﬁcant. The congenital
anomalies were more common in twins (p<0.005). The
incidence of congenital anomalies in AR-twins was sig-
niﬁcantly higher than the incidence of congenital anomalies
in non-AR-twins (p<0.005) while the difference of con-
genital anomalies incidence in AR and non-AR singletons
was not signi ﬁcant.
Discussion: We have found that the incidence of con-
genital anomalies was higher especially in twins born after
assisted reproduction while in singletons the difference wasnot signi ﬁcant. We will further analyze this ﬁnding during
the next phases of our population study.
Acknowledgments: The study is supported by the RVO
project: “Thomayerova nemocnice - TN, 00064190 ”.
A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Thomayer Hospital -
Research grant TN, 00064190. V. Gregor: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Thomayer Hospital - Research grant TN, 00064190. A.
Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Thomayer Hospital - Research
grant TN, 00064190. J. Klaschka: None. M. Maly: None.
J. Jirova: None.
P01.17A
Carriers for deafness and vision loss are identi ﬁed as
common autosomal recessive conditions in 40 healthy
Thai couples obtaining expanded carrier screening
S. Klumsathian
1, W. Lorlipiwong1, K. Sararat1,
N. Poolthong1, N. Iemwimangsa1, I. Sensorn1,
B. Panthan1, A. Charoenyingwattana1,
T. Chareonsirisuthigul1,2, O. Trachoo1,3, W. Chantratita1
1Center for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand,2Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand,3Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok,Thailand
Introduction: One of the applications for next-generation
sequencing (NGS) is expanded carrier screening (ECS)
which offer prospective parents to learn their carrier status
of many autosomal recessive (AR) and x-linked recessive(XLR) diseases at once. However, designing an ECS panel
for Thais can be dif ﬁcult due to insuf ﬁcient variantfrequency data. Therefore, we conduct a study to gather
the frequency of pathogenic variants in the associated
diseases by offering ECS to a Thai couple who plan to
conceive.
Methods: DNA samples of 40 non-consanguineous Thai
couples were underwent sequencing by NGS in 540 genesassociated with AR and XLR diseases. We classi ﬁed the
variants detected by NGS using population databases (1000
Genomes Project, gnomAD, and our in-house Thai exomedatabase) and diseases databases (Clinvar and HGMD
professional) to determine their pathogenicity.
Results: 76 variants with strong evidence for pathogeni-
city are identi ﬁed. Deafness is the most common AR dis-
eases with six individuals carry deafness-related variants in
these genes: SLC26A4 ,USH2A ,OTOF , and MYO3A fol-
lowed by ﬁve carriers of vision-loss variants in GRM6,
USH2A, EYS , and ABCA4 gene. One couple shared a dif-
ferent pathogenic mutation in the ABCA4 gene.
Conclusions: Though deafness and vision-loss are the
two most common AR carrier found in the Thai population,
consideration need to be taken if they were in the ECS panelbecause these phenotypes are not severe enough for a pre-
natal diagnosis.
Grant: The study is supported by the Faculty of Medi-
cine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University and Center
of Excellence on Medical Biotechnology (CEMB).
S. Klumsathian: None. W. Lorlipiwong: None. K.
Sararat: None. N. Poolthong: None. N. Iemwimangsa:
None. I. Sensorn: None. B. Panthan: None. A. Char-
oenyingwattana: None. T. Chareonsirisuthigul: None. O.
Trachoo: None. W. Chantratita: None.
P01.18B
High risk - what ’s next? Decisional con ﬂict, regret and
satisfaction among pregnant women making choices
about further prenatal testing after a high probabilityresult from the combined test
C. Ingvoldstad Malmgren
1,2,3, T. Schlaikjær Hartwig4,
C. Borregaard Miltoft5, A. Tabor5, F. Stener Jørgensen6
1Dept of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology,
Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Stockholm,
Sweden,2Department of Public Health and Caring Science,
Uppsala University,, Uppsala, Sweden,3Department of
Women ’s and Children ’s Health, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden,4Fetal Medicine Unit, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Copenhagen UniversityHospital Hvidovre, Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark,
5Fetal Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet,Copenhagen, Denmark,
6Fetal Medicine Unit, DepartmentAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1181of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Copenhagen University
Hospital Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: The aim was to investigate decision-making
among Danish high-risk pregnant women when choosing
between non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), invasivetesting or no further testing. Women with a high-risk result
from the combined ﬁrst trimester screening were invited to
ﬁll in two online questionnaires at GA 12-14(Q1) and GA
24(Q2). The scales used were Decisional Con ﬂict and
Regret Scales, Satisfaction with genetic Counselling Scale
and Health-Relevant Personality Inventory.
Results: In total, 339 women were included, and the
response rates were 76 % on Q1 and 88% on Q2, respec-
tively. Of the participants, 75.4% chose an invasive test and23.8% chose NIPT. The median DCS score among all
participants was within the level associated with imple-
menting decisions, whereas 13.3% had a high level ofdecisional con ﬂict. Choosing NIPT was associated with a
high decisional con ﬂict; receiving genetic counselling the
same day was associated with a high decisional con ﬂict; and
a high satisfaction with the genetic counselling was asso-
ciated with low decisional con ﬂict. Furthermore, ‘alex-
ithymia ’, the personality sub-trait that describes a disinterest
or inability in identifying and understanding feelings, was
associated with low decisional con ﬂict. High decisional
regret was associated with high decisional con ﬂict and low
satisfaction with genetic counselling.
Conclusion: The results from this study show that satis-
faction with, and timing of counselling are essential factorsto limit decisional con ﬂict. Also, the results indicate that
women choosing NIPT have more decisional con ﬂict
compared to women choosing invasive testing. There was asigniﬁcant association between high decisional con ﬂict and
later decisional regret.
C. Ingvoldstad Malmgren: None. T. Schlaikjær
Hartwig: None. C. Borregaard Miltoft: None. A. Tabor:
None. F. Stener Jørgensen: None.
P01.19C
A novel diagnostic panel of 15 STR markers used to
conﬁrm the detection of Duchene Muscular Dystrophy,
aneuploidy screening, and sample authenticity testing
Z. Shari ﬁ
1,2, F. Golnabi1,2, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Amini1,
H. Farahzadi3, S. Zeinali1,4
1Dr. Zeinali ’s Medical Genetics Laboratory, Kawsar
Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,2Department of Genetics, Faculty of Advanced
Science and Technology, Tehran Medical Sciences, IslamicAzad University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
3Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti Universityof Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
4Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology
Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Duchenne (DMD) and Becker muscular
dystrophy (BMD) are one of the most common genetic
muscular dystrophies. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) or Pre-
implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) could be attractiveoptions to prevent the birth of new affected cases.
Aneuploidies are the cause of over 50% of all miscarriages.
Early aneuploidy screening in conjunction with PND orPGD can decrease the subsequent complication of preg-
nancy termination.
Methods: This study aimed to develop a novel panel to
conﬁrm detection of DMD/BMD and aneuploidy screening
simultaneously. The panel functions on the principle of
hemizygosity mapping of the 6 novels STR (Short TandemRepeat) markers linked to dystrophin gene. Additionally,
this includes autosomal STR markers for the critical regions
of Chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y. These markers wereampli ﬁed in a time-saving and cost-effective multiplex PCR
reaction.
Results: Allele frequency and heterozygosity assessment
of STR markers were studied in 250 unrelated healthy
individuals. Totally, 85 alleles were detected. Hetero-
zygosity of markers was 75.7%-89.8%. Genotype fre-quencies of markers were found to be in agreement with the
Hardy –Weinberg equilibrium (P ≥0.1899). For further
conﬁrmation direct mutation analysis was also performed.
The results were compatible. The panel was used for more
than 150 PND cases and 15 PGD candidates and the results
were successful.
Conclusion: This panel increases the accuracy and sen-
sitivity of diagnosis. It can be easily applied for PGD/PND
of DMD, aneuploidy screening and sex determination. Alsoprovides extra advantages like ruling out maternal cell
contamination, paternity testing and avoidance of sample
cross-contamination.
Z. Shari ﬁ:None. F. Golnabi: None. F. Rahiminejad:
None. S. Amini: None. H. Farahzadi: None. S.
Zeinali: None.
P01.20D
Relative telomere length in women with early pregnancylosses
N. Huleyuk
1, D. Zastavna1,2, M. Tyrka2, I. Tkach1
1Institute of Hereditary Pathology NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv,
Ukraine,2Rzeszów University of Technology, Department
of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Rzeszów, Poland1182Introduction: Early pregnancy loss (EPL), a spontaneous
abortion before 14 weeks of gestation, occurs in ~ 15% of
clinically-recognized pregnancies and is the most common
complication of pregnancy. Recurrent early pregnancy loss
(REPL) affects 1-2% of couples and has a complex
etiology. Approximately half of miscarriages from EPLcases are caused by chromosomal abnormalities in the
embryo. Spontaneously lost pregnancies are characterized
by shortened telomeres, especially in embryos withaneuploidies. Thus, short telomere length may be more
frequent in women with REPL.
Material and Methods: Relative telomere length (RTL)
was measured in DNA isolated from the blood samples
using a real-time polymerase chain reaction approach. RTL
was examined in three groups of women with EPL(N=171): (i) patients with single EPL (EPL1) (N =52), (ii)
patients with two EPL (EPL2) (N =68), (iii) patients with
REPL (N =49); and control group (C) - women who had
healthy pregnancies with no history of infertility or mis-
carriage (N =113).
Results: The EPL group had signi ﬁcantly lower RTL
than control (EPL: 1.39±0.06 versus C: 2.23±0.01,
P=0.0000001). Average RTL were similar in EPL2 and
REPL groups (1.36 ±0.04 in EPL2 and 1.31±0.07 in RPL)and were signi ﬁcantly lower compared to control (EPL2:
1.36 ±0.04 vs C: 2.23±0.01, P =0.000001 and REPL: 1.31
±0.07 vs C: 2.23±0.01, P =0.000001).
Conclusions: Women experiencing two or more EPL
have shorter telomeres. We assume that short telomeres in
women are involved in complex factors that provoke earlypregnancy loss.
N. Huleyuk: None. D. Zastavna: None. M. Tyrka:
None. I. Tkach: None.
P01.21A
Endometrial receptivity revisited: endometrialtranscriptome adjusted for tissue cellular heterogeneity
M. Suhorutshenko
1,2, V. Kukushkina3, A. Velthut-
Meikas2, S. Altmäe2,4, M. Peters2,1, R. Mägi3,
K. Krjut škov2,5, M. Koel2,6, F. M. Codoñer7, J. Martinez-
Blanch7, F. Vilella8, C. Simón8,9,10, A. Salumets2,1,11,
T. Laisk2,1,3
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
2Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu,
Estonia,3Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,4Department of
Chemistry and Biotechnology, Tallinn University of
Technology, Tallinn, Estonia,5Research Program of
Molecular Neurology, Research Programs Unit, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,6Department of Cell Biology,Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,7Lifesequencing SL, Valencia, Spain,
8Igenomix Foundation/INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain,
9Research Department, Igenomix SL, Valencia, Spain,
10Department of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Valencia University, Valencia, Spain,11Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: The proportions of epithelial and stromal
cells vary in endometrial tissue during the menstrual cycle.
Each cell type has its unique gene expression pro ﬁle, that
compose whole-tissue expression pattern.
Materials and Methods: Using cell-type speci ﬁc tran-
scriptome data and computational deconvolution approach,we estimated the epithelial and stromal cell proportions in
whole-tissue biopsies taken during early secretory (ES) and
mid-secretory (MS) phases. The estimated proportions wereused as covariates in whole-tissue differential gene
expression (DGE) analysis. For RNA sequencing we used
paired ES and MS endometrial biopsies, obtained from 35healthy, fertile volunteers (23 - 36 years). DGE analysis was
performed using two approaches - with and without
deconvolution step, and results compared with each other.
Results: The estimated average proportions of stromal
and epithelial cells in ES phase were 65% and 35%, and
during MS phase 46% and 54%, that correlated with his-tological evaluation (r =0.88, p =1.1×10-6). Endometrial
DGE analysis showed 26% differentially expressed tran-
scripts (n =946) in receptive endometrium in both cell-type
unadjusted and adjusted analyses. However, the other 74%
(n=2,645) become statistically non-signi ﬁcant after cell-
type adjustment, underlining the impact of tissue hetero-geneity on DGE analysis. The results suggest new
mechanisms involved in endometrial maturation involving
genes like LINC01320, SLC8A1 and GGTA1P, describedfor the ﬁrst time in endometrial receptivity context.
Conclusion: The better understanding of molecular pro-
cesses during transition from pre-receptive to receptiveendometrium serves to improve the effectiveness of assisted
reproduction protocols. Biopsy cellular composition should
be taken into account in future endometrial ‘omics ’studies.
M. Suhorutshenko: None. V. Kukushkina: None. A.
Velthut-Meikas: None. S. Altmäe: None. M. Peters:
None. R. Mägi: None. K. Krjut škov: None. M. Koel:
None. F.M. Codoñer: None. J. Martinez-Blanch: None.
F. Vilella: None. C. Simón: None. A. Salumets: None. T.
Laisk: None.
P01.22B
A prospective evaluation of exome sequencing in 51fetuses with multiple congenital anomalies and lessons
for future prenatal implementationAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1183A. Yeung1,2,3, F. Chan4,3, A. Vasudevan5, J. Collett4,3,
S. Prystupa6, Y. Chan6, G. McGillivray1,5,3
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children ’s
Research Institute, Parkville, Australia,2Monash Genetics,
Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia,3Melbourne
Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia,
4Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal Women ’s
Hospital, Parkville, Australia,5Department of Clinical
Genetics, Royal Women ’s Hospital, Parkville, Australia,
6Department of Anatomical Pathology, Monash Health,
Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: Exome sequencing (ES) is a powerful
adjunct to post-mortem examination for investigatingfetuses with congenital anomalies. However, with the
implementation of rapid “in-utero ”sequencing becoming
eminently feasible, fetal phenotyping may, in future, rely onantenatal imaging alone.
Aim: To determine whether the diagnostic yield of ES in
fetuses with congenital anomalies following autopsy iscomparable to the yield of ES implemented at the time of
antenatal ultrasound detection.
Method: ES was prospectively performed on 51 fetal
probands following autopsy as part of the Perinatal Autopsy
Flagship of the Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance
Demonstration Project. Candidate variants concordant withphenotypic ﬁndings from fetal autopsy were classi ﬁed by
multidisciplinary review using ACMG guidelines. Inde-
pendently, a phenotype-driven virtual gene panel for eachproband was derived from antenatal imaging reports by
clinicians blinded to autopsy ﬁndings. Where a pathogenic
variant fell within this “pre-autopsy ”virtual gene panel, this
was viewed as a diagnosis that would have been made by
combining WES with antenatal imaging alone.
Results: The diagnostic rate in this cohort was 17/51
(33%) with 4 further variants awaiting functional validation.
Phenotypes with the highest diagnostic yield included
skeletal dysplasias (100%); multiple malformations (33%)and hydrops fetalis (33%). 14/17 of diagnoses would have
been made on antenatal ﬁndings alone while 3/17 additional
diagnoses were made with ﬁndings only apparent on
autopsy.
Conclusion: ES in pregnancy following the detection of
structural anomalies on ultrasound is feasible and returnscomparable diagnostic yields to ES combined with autopsy.
A. Yeung: None. F. Chan: None. A. Vasudevan: None.
J. Collett: None. S. Prystupa: None. Y. Chan: None. G.
McGillivray: None.
P01.23C
From diagnostic yield to clinical impact: implementation
of prenatal exome sequencing in routine carM. A. de Koning
1, M. C. Haak2, P. N. Adama van
Scheltema2, C. M. P. C. Peeters-Scholte3, T. T. Koopman1,
E. A. R. Nibbeling1, E. Aten1, N. S. den Hollander1,
C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, M. J. V. Hoffer1, G. W. E. Santen1
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands,2Dept. of Obstetrics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3Dept. of
Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,Netherlands
Introduction: Exome sequencing (ES) is an ef ﬁcient tool to
diagnose genetic disorders postnatally. Recent studies show
that it may have a considerable diagnostic yield in fetuses
with structural anomalies on ultrasound. We report on theclinical impact of the implementation of prenatal ES (pES)
for ongoing pregnancies in routine care.
Material and Methods: We retrospectively analyzed the
impact of pES on pregnancy outcome and pre- or perinatal
management in the ﬁrst 22, consecutively referred patients
to our department for pES because of one or more structuralanomalies on fetal ultrasound.
Results: In two cases, a diagnosis was made by chro-
mosomal microarray analysis after ES counselling. Theremaining 20 cases were divided in three groups; (1) pES to
aid parental decision making (n =12), (2) pES in the
context of late pregnancy termination requests (n =5) and
(3) pES to guide prenatal or perinatal management (n =3).
pES had a clinical impact in 75% (9/12), 40% (2/5) and
100% (3/3) respectively, showing an overall clinical impactof pES of 70% (14/20).
Conclusion: We show that clinical implementation of
pES is feasible and affects parental decision making orprenatal and perinatal management supporting further
implementation of ES in the routine prenatal setting.
M.A. de Koning: None. M.C. Haak: None. P.N.
Adama van Scheltema: None. C.M.P.C. Peeters-Scholte:
None. T.T. Koopman: None. E.A.R. Nibbeling: None. E.
Aten: None. N.S. den Hollander: None. C.A.L. Rui-
venkamp: None. M.J.V. Hoffer: None. G.W.E.
Santen: None.
P01.24D
Diagnosis of fetal structural abnormalities using whole
exome sequencing: a single centre study
S. Drury
1, L. Reed1, V. Ramachandran1, Y. Patel1,
A. Haworth1, J. Rizvi1, R. Dubis1, J. Anton1, J. Short2,
E. Dempsy2, S. Mansour2, T. Homfray2
1Congenica Ltd, Hinxton, United Kingdom,2South West
Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George ’s University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trus, London, United Kingdom1184Introduction: Fetal abnormality detected on ultrasound
occurs in up to 5% of fetuses. In the absence of aneuploidy
or cytogenetic causes, single gene disorders can be
responsible; a recent review of 31 prenatal exome
sequencing studies by Best et al., (2018) showed adiagnostic rate of 6.2% to 80%. We have undertaken
exome sequencing at a single centre for cases of
unexplained fetal anomaly in both ongoing and retro-spective pregnancies.
Materials and Methods: Patients with a fetal abnorm-
ality detected on ultrasound were referred to clinicalgenetics at St George ’s Hospital, London. Fetal DNA was
from CVS, amniotic ﬂuid, fetal blood or tissue. Maternal
cell exclusion was performed where relevant. DNA wasenriched using the Agilent SureSelect CREv2 and
sequenced using Illumina NextSeq 500. Variant analysis
performed using Sapienita ™. Gene panels and variant ﬁlter
settings including Exomiser prioritisation were pre-
conﬁgured to expedite analysis.
Results: In the ﬁrst year (2018), 42 families were referred
for exome sequencing due to fetal anomaly. A diagnosis
was made in 15 cases (36%); 9/17 singletons ( BICD2,
FGFR2, LZTR1, NIPBL, PTPN11, RAF1, RMRP,SLC26A2, TSC1 ), 1/1 duo ( UBE2A ), 4/23 trios ( CHD7 ,
PIEZO1, POMGNT1, SLC6A9, TUBA1A ) and 0/1 quad.
Updated ﬁgures will be presented.
Conclusions: The diagnostic rate for this selected group
is consistent with the literature and is higher than recent
unselected cohort studies (Petrovski et al 2019, Lord et al2019). In several cases the molecular diagnosis was not the
primary suspected clinical diagnosis emphasising the con-
tinued importance of expanding and publishing prenatalgenotype-phenotype associations.
S. Drury: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Ltd. L. Reed: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. V. Ramachandran: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Ltd.
Y. Patel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Ltd. A. Haworth: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. J. Rizvi: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. R. Dubis: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Ltd.
J. Anton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Ltd. J. Short: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; St George ’s University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust. E. Dempsy: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; St George ’s University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust. S. Mansour: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; St George ’s University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust. T. Homfray: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; St George ’s University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust.P01.25A
Chorionic villi sampling and QF-PCR +SNP-array
routinely offered in early pregnancy losses
A. Borrell1, M. Pauta2, M. Grande3, V. Borobio1,
C. Illanes1, L. Rodriguez-Revenga4, A. Soler4,
C. Badenas4
1BCNatal. Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain,2BCNatal. IDIBAPS. Hospital Clinic
Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain,3IDIBAPS.
Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain,
4Biomedical Diagnostic Center. Hospital Clinic Barcelona,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Background: Genetic investigation is not routinely offered
in early pregnancy loss due to its high failure and maternal
cell contamination rates.
Objective: To identify the genetic causes of early preg-
nancy losses, with the use of QF-PCR and SNP-array in
chorionic villi samples obtained previously to evacuation.
Methods: Women with a pregnancy loss before 13 weeks
were offered transcervical chorionic villi sampling prior to
surgical or medical uterine evacuation. During a 3-yearstudy period (September 2015-October 2018) 584 women
consented. A ﬁrst round of QF-PCR including chromo-
somes 21, 18, 13, X, Y and a second round with chromo-somes 15, 16, and 22 were assessed. Concurrent
karyotyping was also performed and SNP-array when the
chromosomes were normal.
Results: Fifty- ﬁve (9%) samples were excluded after
microscopic inspection because only maternal decidua
could be retrieved. Among the 529 samples suitable foranalysis, a chromosomal anomaly was found in 159 (30%)
cases at the ﬁrst QF-PCR round, and 128 (24%) at the
second round. The karyotype revealed 66 (12%) anomaliesundetected by QF-PCR. Among the 176 remaining early
losses with a normal karyotype, SNP-array was performed
in 90 cases with suf ﬁcient DNA ad 6 (2.4%) submicro-
scopic anomalies were found.
Conclusions: QF-PCR and SNP-array in chorionic villi
samples are able to provide a result in 91% of early preg-nancy losses. Two rounds of QF-PCR detected a chromo-
somal anomaly in 54% of the cases. If karyotyping is
replaced by SNP-array in QF-PCR normal cases, further12% chromosomal anomalies, 2.4% submicroscopic
anomalies and molar pregnancies will be revealed.
A. Borrell: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Illumina. M. Pauta:
None. M. Grande: None. V. Borobio: None. C. Illanes:
None. L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. A. Soler: None. C.
Badenas: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1185P01.26B
NGS based multigene panel analysis in cases of fetal
brain malformations
D. Liebrecht, C. Daumer-Haas, C. Bagowski,
N. Hirschberger, S. Minderer, T. Schramm,K. P. Gloning, M. Shoukier
Praenatal-Medizin München, Munich, GermanyIntroduction: Identifying the genetic cause of fetal brain
malformations is a diagnostic challenge due to the geneticheterogeneity. We present here the results of multigene
panel analysis (MGPA) of 65 fetuses with congenital brain
malformations.
Materials and Methods: From January to December
2018, 65 prenatal cases with fetal brain malformations (10
with minor extracerebral anomalies) were investigated bytargeted Next Generation Sequencing of the coding regions
of 262 genes. Genes were selected from the developmental
brain disorders database (DBDB) and results reportedwithin two weeks. Familial co-segregation analysis for
variant pathogenicity assessment was carried out, when
necessary. Karyotypes and array-CGH results of fetuseswere normal.
Results: Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 10 (15%)
out of the 65 cases. Mutations were found in a total of 8genes: TUBA1A and ASPM (2 cases respectively) as well
as in GPSM2, FKRP, KAT6B, OFD1, TSEN54 and TUBB
(1 case each). In addition variants of unclear signi ﬁcance
were detected in 4 cases (6%). No mutation was identi ﬁed
in a total of 51 fetuses (79%). Our ﬁndings show a strong
correlation between the detection rate of causative muta-tions and complexity of the fetal phenotype. Additionally,
Trio-based whole exome sequencing should be considered
in cases with negative MGPA results to further improve thedetection rate.
Conclusions: MGPA facilitates the identi ﬁcation of
genetic causes with a good diagnostic yield and should beused for routine molecular genetic diagnosis of fetal brain
malformations.
D. Liebrecht: None. C. Daumer-Haas: None. C.
Bagowski: None. N. Hirschberger: None. S. Minderer:
None. T. Schramm: None. K.P. Gloning: None. M.
Shoukier: None.
P01.27C
A case of fetal hydrops and FOXP3 - another argument
for using exomes in pregnancy for isolated hydrops
S. Ringsted
1, L. Andreassen1, C. Kamper2, N. Becher1,3,
I. Vogel1,3,41Departement for Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,2Department for Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N,
Denmark,3Center for Fetal Diagnostics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,4Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, Denmark, Denmark
Introduction: Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) is cur-
rently entering prenatal genetic diagnosis for unsolved fetalmalformations. Diagnostic rates vary signi ﬁcantly, but with
low diagnostic rates in isolated increased nuchal translu-
cency (NT) or cystic hygroma [Best et al 2018].
Materials and Methods: G5P2 with severe hydrops in 2
male fetuses (missed abortion week 19 and 20) and healthy
children. Both hydrope fetuses presented with normal ﬁrst
trimester scans. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) was the presumed
cause for the ﬁrst case of hydrops, as the mother ser-
oconverted just after the pregnancy. However, PCR forCMV was negative in tissue from the aborted fetuses.
Array-CGH was carried out on DNA obtained from
amniotic ﬂuid from both pregnancies, but leaving both cases
unresolved. WES was performed as trio on DNA extracted
from amniotic ﬂuid from the second pregnancy, and both
parents. Results were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: A novel variant in FOXP3 was identi ﬁed in
hemizygous state in the second pregnancy, inherited from
the mother, and subsequently con ﬁrmed in cell culture from
theﬁrst pregnancy. This variant is currently under further
validation.
Conclusions: Germline FOXP3 mutations cause immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and enteropathy, X-
linked (IPEX) syndrome. This syndrome is well character-
ized in patients postnatally. Prenatally, mutations have beenreported to cause the loss of male fetuses as a result of fetal
hydrops [Reichert et al. 2015]. This case adds to the body of
knowledge suggesting that WES can improve our under-standing of prenatal presentation of not only fetal mal-
formations but also isolated hydrops.
S. Ringsted: None. L. Andreassen: None. C. Kamper:
None. N. Becher: None. I. Vogel: None.
P01.28D
Absence of AGG interruptions is a risk factor for a full
mutation expansion among ethnically diverse FMR1
premutation carriers
N. Domniz
1, L. Ries-Levavi1, Y. Cohen1, L. Marom
Haham1, M. Berkenstadt1,E .P r a s1, A. Glicksman2,
N. Tortora2, G. J. Latham3, A. G. Hadd3, S. L. Nolin2,
S. Elizur1
1Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel,
2New York State Institute for Basic Research in1186Developmental Disabilities, New York, NY, United States,
3Asuragen, Austin, TX, United States
Introduction: Genetic counseling given to FMR1 premuta-
tion carriers is currently based upon the number of CGG
repeats. However, recent studies revealed that AGGinterruptions may decrease the risk of intergenerational
expansion.
Materials and Methods: All FMR1 premutation carriers
who underwent chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or
amniocentesis (AC) at Sheba Medical Center during the
period of 2011-2017 were included in this study. Toincrease the accuracy of our results, we combined results
from Israel with those from the New York State Institute for
Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities (IBR). FMR1PCR and Asuragen Kit were used to determine the number
of CGG repeats and AGG interruptions in all women and
fetuses.
Results: The combined data included 1471 transmissions
of maternal premutation alleles: 369 (25.1%) stable and
1,102 (74.9%) unstable transmissions. Full mutationexpansions were identi ﬁed in 20.6% (303/1471) of trans-
missions. A total of 97.4% (388/397) of transmissions from
alleles with no AGGs were unstable, compared to 79.6%(513/644) in alleles with 1 AGG and 46.7% (201/430) in
alleles with 2 or more AGGs. 40% (159/397) of alleles with
no AGGs expanded to a full mutation, compared to 20.2%(130/644) for alleles with 1 AGG and only 3.2% (14/430) in
alleles with 2 AGGs or more.
Conclusions: Based on this ethnically diverse data we
recommend that the risk estimates for a full mutation
expansion for FMR1 premutation carriers will include the
number of AGG interruptions as well as CGG repeat size.Study funding/competing interest(s) - Azrieli foundation,
Canada-Israel
N. Domniz: None. L. Ries-Levavi: None. Y. Cohen:
None. L. Marom Haham: None. M. Berkenstadt: None.
E. Pras: None. A. Glicksman: None. N. Tortora: None.
G.J. Latham: None. A.G. Hadd: None. S.L. Nolin: None.
S. Elizur: None.
P01.29A
Targeted next-generation sequencing and CNV analysis
identi ﬁes two novel mutations in the FRAS1 gene
M. Kuhn
1, M. Burkert1, S. Tschürtz2, K. Mehnert1,
D. Gläser1
1genetikum - Center for Human Genetics, Neu-Ulm,
Germany,2Medical Of ﬁce for Prenatal Medicine, Munich,
GermanyIntroduction: We report on a case of a nonconsanguineous
couple with one healthy child and two spontaneous
abortions (one at 22 and one at 36 weeks of gestation).
Test results of the couple ’s chromosome analysis were
normal, and there was no evidence of genetically relevant
diseases in their families. Frozen skin cells of the ﬁrst abort
had an insuf ﬁcient quality to perform gene panel analysis.
Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing
(CES) was performed on the parents ’DNA followed by
screening for carrier status in 34 relevant genes for intrau-
terine fetal death.
Results: In the maternal DNA sample, we identi ﬁed a
heterozygous novel mutation c.2423-1G>T in the FRAS1
gene affecting a highly conserved donor splice site and
leading most probably to aberrant splicing. Various splicesite mutations in the FRAS1 have been described before. In
the paternal DNA sample, copy number variation (CNV)
analysis based on next-generation sequencing data showeda novel heterozygous deletion of the last three exons of the
FRAS1 gene. Junction fragment PCR con ﬁrmed this dele-
tion and sequencing of the PCR products revealed thebreakpoints (c.11092 +658_*12039 +6368del). Although
the material of the ﬁrst abort had poor quality, Sanger
sequencing and junction fragment PCR on frozen skin cellswere able to identify these two novel variants as compound
heterozygous.
Conclusion: Therefore, clinical exome sequencing in
combination with CNV analysis on a couple ’s DNA is an
appropriate method to detect possible causes of multiple
stillbirths, especially when no fetal DNA is available.
M. Kuhn: None. M. Burkert: None. S. Tschürtz: None.
K. Mehnert: None. D. Gläser: None.
P01.30B
Identi ﬁcation of compound heterozygous FTO-
mutations in a severe malformation syndrome
U. Siebers-Renelt, Y. Stratis, J. Seggewiß, S. Ledig,
J. Horvath, P. Wieacker
Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany
We report on a non-consanguineous couple who presented
in the 19
thweek of their 6thpregnancy with ultrasound
abnormalities of the fetus (broad neck with increased nuchaltranslucency, multicystic dysplasia of the kidney, short
femur, fetal clubfoot). The couple has got just one healthy
child. Two spontaneous abortions occurred and onepregnancy with trisomy 21 was terminated. Another child
also exhibited a broad neck and additional omphalocele
early in pregnancy. Hydrocephaly was ﬁrst visible in the
32
ndweek. After delivery in the 35thweek, she required
artiﬁcial respiration. MRI showed a complex brainAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1187malformation. That child deceased at the age of one month.
Chromosome analysis and microarray were normal in both
malformed children. After termination of pregnancy we
performed a clinical trio-exome (Agilent SureSelect Inher-
ited Disease Panel). We identi ﬁed two loss-of-function
mutations in compound heterozygosity in the FTO gene not
yet described (ACMG class 4). The deceased sibling carried
both mutations and the healthy sister none. Homozygous
FTO loss-of-function mutations have been associated with
multiple malformations including short broad neck, differ-
ent brain malformations, severe developmental delay,
failure to thrive and high risk of death in early childhood(Boissel 2009, Daoud 2016). In summary, the FTO-
mutations are very likely to be causative for the disease
because of the type of mutation, the phenotype and thesegregation data. Nevertheless, prenatal molecular analysis
should be accompanied by a detailed ultrasound work-up.
Moreover, the couple has to be aware that the absence of theFTO-mutations does not completely exclude the disease.
U. Siebers-Renelt: None. Y. Stratis: None. J. Seggewiß:
None. S. Ledig: None. J. Horvath: None. P.
Wieacker: None.
P01.31C
Early prediction of preeclampsia (PE) severity in
pregnant women with preexisting type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM): new implements for genetic markers
T. Avramenko
1, A. Hrybanov1,2,3
1State Institution "Institute of pediatrics, obstetrics and
gynecology by the National Academy of Medical Sciences of
Ukraine", Kyiv, Ukraine,2Maternity Hospital #2, Mykolaiv,
Ukraine,3Public Health Board by Mykolaiv Region State
Administration, Mykolaiv, Ukraine
Background: Severe PE strongly correlates with persistent
disability, long-term cardiovascular complications in
mothers and prematurity, IUGR or BPD in neonates. Thestudy objective was to establish reliable clinical, genetic
markers associated with PE severity in T1DM women.
Materials and Methods: Group 1 included patients with
mild (n =15), moderate (n =11), severe (n =4) PE; Group 2 -
30 patients, in whom pregnancy was not complicated with
PE. Polymorphisms in eNOS (4b/4a, G894T), ACE (I/D),
AT2R1 (A1166C), MGP (Thr83Ala, T138C) and PON1
(C108T) genes were detected using PCR-RFLP. Data was
analyzed with SPSS17.0 using paired sample t-test, Pear-son’s chi-squared test with 95%CI calculation for OR.
Binary logistic regression was used to generate statistical
models and evaluate their prognostic value. ROC curveanalysis was performed in order to establish the in ﬂuence of
polymorphic variants of genes on PE severity.Results: Main contributors to moderate/severe PE
development: pre-existing vascular complications (nephro-
pathy [ χ2=10,05, p =0,004, OR =11,23 95%CI 2,13-59,26],
lower extremities angiopathy [ χ2=7,39, p =0,007,
OR=16,00 95%CI 1,86-137,61], retinopathy [ χ2=4,27,
p=0,039, OR =6,50 95%CI 1,25-33,91]) and their combi-
nations (nephropathy +retinopathy; nephropathy +lower
extremities angiopathy) and ACE DD-genotype. In
PON1_108CT carriers clinical parameters exerted modify-ing effect: when combined with nephropathy, or T1DM
duration < 8,5 years, or BMI < 23,8 kg/m
2, mild PE
develops; moderate/severe PE develops when diabetesduration is > 13,5 years or BMI is > 25,17 kg/m
2. Combi-
nation ACE_II/PON1_CC was protective against PE
development, while ACE_ID/PON1_CT is associated withmild PE. Conclusion: Genetic markers are helpful in
identi ﬁcation of women at high risk for severe PE.
T. Avramenko: None. A. Hrybanov: None.
P01.32D
Case of 8p and 18p genetic imbalance in a subfertilefemale patient without pronounced physical and mental
abnormalities
Y. V. Shilenkova, A. A. Pendina, O. A. E ﬁmova,
A. V. Tikhonov, O. G. Chiryaeva, V. S. Dudkina,
L. I. Petrova, I. D. Mekina, O. V. Malysheva,E. S. Shabanova, T. E. Ivashchenko, A. M. Gzgzyan,
I. Y. Kogan
D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductology, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation
Introduction: We report an unusual case of unbalanced
karyotype female carrier with no physical and mental
abnormalities and her reproductive history.
Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping
(GTG and QFH/AcD-banding techniques) was performed
on the chorionic villi from aborted material and on PHA-stimulated lymphocytes of the patient, her husband and
patient ’s parents. FISH and aCGH (CGXv1.1 8x60K,Per-
kinElmer) were performed on the patient ’s PHA-stimulated
lymphocytes and whole blood sample, respectively. Stan-
dard IVF was performed with an embryo biopsy on day 3
(6-8-cell stage) for PGT-SR by FISH.
Results: The patient - 28-years old women - sought
genetic counseling after loss of two naturally conceived
pregnancies. The ﬁrst miscarriage was not karyotyped. The
second had karyotype 45, ХХ,der(8)t(8;18)(p23;p11.3),-
18mat. The patient appeared to have the same karyotype:
45,ХХ,der(8)t(8;18)(p23;p11.3),-18dn. aCGH revealed
terminal deletions combined with microduplication: del(8)
(p23.1p23.3) (6.718Mb), dup(8)(p22p22) (4.937Mb), del1188(18)(p11.31p11.32) (3.693Mb), dup(18)(q23q23)
(0.060Mb). The patient ’s husband and parents had normal
karyotypes. The patient had only slight dysmorphic face
features and no pronounced physical and mental abnorm-
alities. Subsequently, the patient underwent four IVF cycles
with a total of 25 oocytes obtained. Only 13 of themreached MII (52% versus expected 75-90%). Only one out
of 10 embryos was cytogenetically balanced. The embryo
was transferred, but the pregnancy was not registered.
Conclusions: The present case demonstrates a genotype-
phenotype disparity in the carrier of unbalanced chromo-
somal rearrangement. Considering an unpredictable effectof the genetic imbalance on the offspring phenotype, a
personalized approach to the patient ’s genetic counseling is
required in order to achieve pregnancy with cytogeneticallybalanced embryo.
Y.V. Shilenkova: None. A.A. Pendina: None. O.A.
Eﬁmova: None. A.V. Tikhonov: None. O.G. Chiryaeva:
None. V.S. Dudkina: None. L.I. Petrova: None. I.D.
Mekina: None. O.V. Malysheva: None. E.S. Shabanova:
None. T.E. Ivashchenko: None. A.M. Gzgzyan: None. I.
Y. Kogan: None.
P01.33A
Trans-ethnic meta-analysis meta-analysis of gestational
diabetes reveals shared genetic background with type 2
diabetes
N. Pervjakova
1,2, J. P. Cook3, A. P. Morris3,4,
T. Ferreira5,6, R. Mägi1
1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, Estonia,
2Genomics of Common Disease, Division of Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, UK, London, United Kingdom,
3Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK, Liverpool, United Kingdom,4Estonian
Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu,Tartu, Estonia,
5Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Center for
Health for Health Information and Discovery, Oxford
University, Oxford, UK, Oxford, United Kingdom,66.
Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK, Oxford,
United Kingdom
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), de ﬁned as glucose
intolerance ﬁrst recognized in pregnancy, has important
implications for both mother and child. Offspring of
mothers with GDM have an increased risk of birth
complications associated with higher risk for developingmetabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovas-
cular disease in later life. To date, the only genome-wideassociation study (GWAS) for GDM, in 1,399 affected
Korean women, revealed associations at two loci: MNTR1B
andCDKAL1 . We conducted trans-ethnic meta-analysis of
21 GWAS in 5,374 cases and 346,506 controls of diverse
ancestry (62.0% European, 16.5% East Asian, 3.2%
Mexican-American and 18.3% Afro-Caribbean), eachimputed up to reference panels from the 1000 Genomes
Project or Haplotype Reference Consortium. The trans-
ethnic meta-analysis, performed with MR-MEGA to allowfor heterogeneity in allelic effects between ancestries,
included 13,980,490 variants, after excluding those with
minor allele count <5 and imputation quality <0.4 in eachGWAS. We replicated both known GDM associations at
genome-wide signi ﬁcance ( P<5x10
-8): MTNR1B
(rs10830963, P=2.3×10-49)a n d CDKAL1 (rs9348441,
P=9.7×10-15). We also identi ﬁed three additional novel
loci: TCF7L2 (rs7903146, P=1×10-14),CDKN2A/B
(rs10811660, P=1.9×10-9) and LOC105369513
(rs143421658, P=4.1×10-8). Allelic effects of GDM
association signals were mostly homogeneous across ethnic
groups. The exception was at the CDKAL1 locus
(Phet=3.68×10-9), where the signal was driven by East
Asian ancestry GWAS (OR East-asian=1.67(1.46-1.89);
OR Europeans =1.06(1.01-1.12)). Four of the loci ( MTNR1B ,
CDKAL1 ,TCF7L2 , and CDKN2A/B ) have also been
robustly associated with T2D, and lead variants are identical
to those we have identi ﬁed for GDM, supporting a shared
underlying genetic contribution to both diseases.
N. Pervjakova: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; AnteGenes OÜ. J.P. Cook: None. A.P. Morris:
None. T. Ferreira: None. R. Mägi: None.
P01.34B
Genome-wide analysis of losses and gains a better
understanding of idiopathic male infertility
A. Hod žić1,N .T r o št1, B. Zorn2, D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska3,
P. Noveski3, T. Kunej4, K. Urh4, L. Lovre čić1, B. Peterlin1
1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Andrology Unit,
Reproductive Unit, Department of Obstetrics andGynecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,
3Research Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology "Georgi D. Efremov"Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
4Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Diagnosting workup of infertile man, which
include screening for chromosomal aberrations and Y
chromosomal azoospermia factor deletions, have not beenAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1189changed for years and still the etiology of most of the
infertile cases remains unknown. Aiming to achieve
progress in elucidating genetic causes of male infertility
and to examine suitability of novel genetic testing methods
in clinical routine of infertile man, we investigated man
with unexplained infertility with Array ComparativeGenomic Hybridisation method.
Materials and Methods: We enrolled 90 patients with
severe male factor infertility, de ﬁned as idiopathic azoos-
permia or oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, and analyzed
DNA using SurePrint G3 Unrestricted CGH 4x180K
microarrays. We have selected candidate Copy NumberVariants (CNVs) according 2 criterias: 1st criteria was that
identi ﬁed CNVs are not present in currently available
databases of genomic variants, and 2nd criteria was thatidenti ﬁed CNVs are not present in our control data set of
men with proven fertility.
Results: We identi ﬁed 5 CNVs which included genes
previously related to male infertility (CLCA4, USF1,
FCER1G, FNTA, HOTAIR). We have also identi ﬁed 7
CNVs not presented in currently available databases ofgenomic variants or in our control data set. The identi ﬁed
CNVs spanning genes with noticed expression in testis,
however, their possible functional impact on infertility arecurrently not known.
Conclusion: We provide a several candidate CNVs,
possibly implicated in male infertility. Taken together withprevious research, these ﬁndings are one more step forward
to implementation of new testing methods into routine
clinical practice of infertile man.
A. Hod žić:None. N. Tro št:None. B. Zorn: None. D.
Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska: None. P. Noveski: None. T.
Kunej: None. K. Urh: None. L. Lovre čić:None. B.
Peterlin: None.
P01.35C
Detection of de novo copy-number variations from
exome sequencing of 108 infertile patient-parents trios
F. K. Mastrorosa
1, M. J. Xavier1, A. Mikulasova2,
M. S. Oud3, R. M. Smits4, G. Astuti3, B. Alobaidi1,
S. J. Cockell5, J. Coxhead6, C. Gilissen3, L. Ramos4,
J. A. Veltman1,3
1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,2Institute of
Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom,3Department of Human Genetics,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,Netherlands,
5Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,6Genomics Core Facility, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Introduction: Approximately 7% of all men are infertile
and genetics is known to play an important role in the most
severe forms of infertility such as azoospermia and extremeoligozoospermia. However, most patients remain undiag-
nosed. In this study, we explored the role of de novo copy-
number variations (CNVs) in whole-exome sequencing(WES) data from a unique cohort of 108 infertile men and
their parents.
Material and Methods: Three different software, CoN-
IFER, XHMM and an optimized GATK4 pipeline were
used to detect rare de novo CNVs. XHMM and GATK4
reduced the inherent noise in the exome coverage data best,resulting in the most accurate CNVs detection. Addition-
ally, the GATK4 pipeline allowed to integrate allele fre-
quency analysis, con ﬁrming the loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) in deletions.
Results: Application of these tools revealed two rare de
novo deletions in two different patients. One deletion
occurred on chromosome 11 and partially overlapped a
deletion previously reported in an infertile man. The second,
affected NXT2 on chromosome X, a gene evolutionary
conserved and highly expressed in testis. Both CNVs were
validated by microarrays and/or Q-PCR.
Conclusions: These ﬁrst data indicates that de novo
CNVs may play an important role in severe male infertility.
However, replication and functional studies are required to
further validate the impact of our ﬁndings. By further
improving CNV detection from WES data we may be also
able to identify additional de novo CNVs that are currently
missed, as well as maternally inherited CNVs that may playa role in male infertility.
F.K. Mastrorosa: None. M.J. Xavier: None. A. Miku-
lasova: None. M.S. Oud: None. R.M. Smits: None. G.
Astuti: None. B. Alobaidi: None. S.J. Cockell: None. J.
Coxhead: None. C. Gilissen: None. L. Ramos: None. J.A.
Veltman: None.
P01.36D
Identi ﬁcation of a Novel Genetic Cause of Familial
Nonobstructive Azospermia
S. G. TEMEL
1, B. Turkgenç2, K. Teral ı3, M. Ergören4,
M. Cetinkaya5,M .B a şar6, S. Kahraman5
1UNIVERSITY OF ULUDAG, FACULTY OF MEDICINE,
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICAL GENETICS, BURSA,
Turkey,2Acibadem Genetic Diagnostic Genetic Center,
labgen, ISTANBUL, Turkey,3Near East University, Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Nicosia, Cyprus,
4University of Near East, Faculty of Medicine, Department1190of Medical Biology, NICOSIA, Cyprus,5Assisted
Reproductive Technologies and Reproductive Genetics
Centre, Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,
6Department of Urology & Andrology, Memorial Sisli
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Infertility is a global reproductive health problem, and in
males it is usually because of the reduced number or the
complete absence of sperm cells in semen (oligozoospermiaand azoospermia, respectively). Nonobstructive azoosper-
mia (NOA) is the most severe form of male infertility
affecting ~0.6% of men from the general population and~10% of infertile men. Its etiology remains largely
unknown. To identify the genetic cause of NOA in four
affected members from a consanguineous family, weperformed whole-exome sequencing (WES). WES revealed
a homozygous c.1166C>T (p.Pro389Leu) variation in the
M1AP gene. The segregation of the M1AP variant with
NOA in this family was con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
The 3D structure of the mutant protein was predicted
computationally. Sequence- and structure-based in silico
studies and subsequent preliminary gene expression studies
imply that the M1AP variant has severe implications for
protein structure and function. Further functional studies tocorroborate our ﬁndings are ongoing. Overall, M1AP is a
novel candidate gene for male infertility and, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report identifying M1AP as a
cause for human familial NOA. And our pedigree analysis
suggests an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance for
NOA due to M1AP in the present family.
S.G. Temel: None. B. Turkgenç: None. K. Teral ı:
None. M. Ergören: None. M. Cetinkaya: None. M.
Başar:None. S. Kahraman: None.
P01.39C
Genetic analysis of 24 candidate genes validates TEX14,TEX11, NR5A1 and DMRT1 as clinically relevant for
non-obstructive azoospermia
A. Röpke
1, N. Köckerling1, M. J. Wyrwoll1, J. Emich1,
M. Wöste2, M. Dugas2, A. Pilatz3, H. Schuppe3,
T. Diemer3, D. Fietz4, C. Krallmann5, S. Kliesch5,
C. Friedrich1, F. Tüttelmann1
1Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany,2Institut für
Medizinische Informatik, Münster, Germany,3Klinik und
Poliklinik für Urologie, Kinderurologie und Andrologie,
Gießen, Germany,4Institute of Veterinary Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, Gießen, Germany,5Centre of
Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of
Clinical and Surgical Andrology, Münster, GermanyMale infertility is a clinically and genetically highly
heterogeneous disease, mostly characterised by spermato-
genetic failure, clinically noted as oligo- or azoospermia.
The most common form of the latter phenotype is non-
obstructive azoospermia (NOA), which can be caused by
various genetic defects such as chromosomal aberrations,Y-chromosomal AZF microdeletions or monogenic defects.
In this study, we systematically analysed 24 genes reported
to be associated with NOA in the OMIM database. Variantsin these genes were detected in whole exome sequencing
data from 484 well-phenotyped infertile patients (azoos-
permia, N =94; cryptozoospermia, N =52; mixed atrophy,
N=93; Sertoli-Cell-Only syndrome, N =179; meiotic arrest,
N=43; other arrest, N =23). Other clinical causes for their
infertility such as previous chemo-/radiotherapy, as well askaryotype aberrations and AZF deletions had been
excluded. Exclusively novel or rare coding variants were
assessed concerning their potential pathogenicity. Out of the24 genes listed in OMIM, TEX14, TEX11, NR5A1 and
DMRT1 were validated as clinically relevant genes causing
NOA with strong evidence. Speci ﬁcally, we identi ﬁed eight
patients carrying TEX11 variants. Ten patients demonstrated
compound heterozygous or homozygous TEX14 variants.
Five patients carried NR5A1 and ﬁve others DMRT1
variants. This is the ﬁrst report of concise exome
sequencing in a large group of infertile males. Our results
clearly demonstrate that the TEX14, TEX11, NR5A1 and
DMRT1 genes have reached a suf ﬁcient level of evidence to
be prioritised for clinical analyses. This work was carried
out within the frame of the DFG Clinical Research Unit“Male Germ Cells: from Genes to Function ”(CRU 326).
A. Röpke: None. N. Köckerling: None. M.J. Wyrwoll:
None. J. Emich: None. M. Wöste: None. M. Dugas:
None. A. Pilatz: None. H. Schuppe: None. T. Diemer:
None. D. Fietz: None. C. Krallmann: None. S. Kliesch:
None. C. Friedrich: None. F. Tüttelmann: None.
P01.40D
Maternal copy number variations in the DMD gene as
incidental ﬁ
ndings in non-invasive prenatal testing
N. Brison1, J. Storms1, K. Claeys2, L. Dehaspe1,
E. Dimitriadou1, C. Melotte1, T. de Ravel1, L. De Waele3,
N. Goemans4, E. Legius1, H. Peeters1, H. Van Esch1,
V. Race1, J. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, K. Van Den
Bogaert1
1Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium,
2Department of Neurology, Leuven, Belgium,3Department
of Pediatric Neurology, Leuven, Belgium,4Department of
Neurosciences, Leuven, BelgiumAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1191Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using shallow whole-
genome sequencing also reveals maternal copy number
variations (CNV ’s). Some of those variants are clinically
actionable or could be harmful for the fetus. CNV ’s in the
DMD gene, potentially causing dystrophinopathies, are
amongst the most commonly observed maternal CNV ’s. We
analyzed the data of maternal CNV ’s detected in the DMD
gene by NIPT. Out of 26.123 NIPT analyses, 16 maternal
CNV ’s in the DMD gene were detected (1/1.632 pregnant
women). Variant classi ﬁcation regarding pathogenicity and
phenotypic severity was based on public databases,
segregation analysis in the family and a prediction of theeffect on the reading frame. Ten CNV ’s were classi ﬁed as
pathogenic, 4 as benign whereas 2 remained unclassi ﬁed.
We present our experience with the detection of maternalCNV's in the DMD gene and propose a scheme for the
interpretation and the returning of these CNV ’s detected by
NIPT. We show that genome-wide NIPT leverages CNVscreening in the general population of pregnant women and
that interrogating the maternal CNV landscape can improve
overall pregnancy management.
N. Brison: None. J. Storms: None. K. Claeys: None. L.
Dehaspe: None. E. Dimitriadou: None. C. Melotte: None.
T. de Ravel: None. L. De Waele: None. N. Goemans:
None. E. Legius: None. H. Peeters: None. H. Van Esch:
None. V. Race: None. J. Vermeesch: None. K. Devriendt:
None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None.
P01.41A
Validation of SNP-based noninvasive prenatal screeningtest to detect maternal X chromosome abnormalities
V. Kantor
1, R. Dhamankar1, E. Valenti1, D. Lyons1,
M. T. Trefogli1, I. Balosbalos1, C. Kao2, H. Hakonarson2,
K. A. Martin1
1Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States,2Center for
Applied Genomics, Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States
Introduction: Maternal chromosome abnormalities (CA)
are known incidental ﬁndings with non-invasive prenatal
screening (NIPS), contributing to false positives with
quantitative methodologies. SNP-based NIPS can distin-
guish the maternal and fetal SNP allele distributions. Thisstudy validates the performance of SNP-based NIPS to
detect maternal CA on chromosome X.
Methods: Plasma samples from singleton pregnancies
were obtained (April-December 2018) and analyzed by
SNP-based NIPS. Samples were included in the analysis if
the algorithm could not return a result (below threshold forreporting) for suspected CA. These samples were strati ﬁed
into suspected maternal (group A, n =107) and fetal origin(group B, n =110). Associated maternal buffy coats were
blinded and sent to CHOP for cytogenetic analysis using the
Global Screening Array (GSA, Illumina).
Results: Of 107 group A samples, 101 were con ﬁrmed by
GSA to have maternal X CA (PPV: 94.4%; 97.5% con-
ﬁdence interval (CI), 88.2-100%); in the remaining 6 sam-
ples, 3 were discordant (GSA unable to detect suspected
maternal CA), and in the other 3 samples, maternal CA was
suspected, but too ambiguous to call as present. In 67.3%(68/101) cases, NIPS vs. GSA interpretations matched; and
32.7% (33/101) showed similar but varied interpretations
due to ambiguities arising from mosaicism and/or speci ﬁcX
abnormality. No maternal X CA were found in group B by
GSA (NPV: 100%; 97.5% CI, 96.7-100%).
Conclusions: The study supports the reporting of
maternal X CA suspected by SNP-based NIPS, which was
conﬁrmed in 94.4% of suspected cases. No maternal
abnormalities were identi ﬁed when a fetal abnormality was
suspected.
V. Kantor: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. R. Dhamankar:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Full-time
Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Stock, Natera, Inc. E. Valenti: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc.. D.
Lyons: None. M.T. Trefogli: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. I.
Balosbalos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Full-time, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Stock, Natera, Inc.. C. Kao: None. H. Hakonarson: None.
K.A. Martin: None.
P01.42B
Genetic signals for use of hormone replacement therapyin post-menopausal women suggest potential drug
targets and re ﬂect changes in health practice
K. S. Ruth, R. N. Beaumont, J. Tyrrell, A. R. Wood,
S. E. Jones, M. N. Weedon, T. M. Frayling, A. Murray
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is an
effective treatment for vasomotor symptoms around1192menopause, but in the UK HRT usage dropped following
the publication of health risks in 2002.
Materials and Methods: To understand the biology of
HRT use, we carried out genome-wide analyses of self-
reported HRT phenotypes (ever taken, age started, age
stopped and time taken) in up to 153,152 white Europeanwomen aged 40-70 years from the UK Biobank.
Results: We identi ﬁed 15 independent signals. A signal
(AF=95%) in TACR3 , the receptor for neurokinin B, was
associated with raised odds of using HRT (1.18 per allele;
P=1×10
-26) and with vasomotor symptoms in a previous
genome-wide analysis (Crandall et al 2017). Additionally, aputative signal (AF =0.1%) near ALDH8A1 (gene involved
in tryptophan catabolism) was associated with taking HRT
for longer (0.5 SD per allele; P=4×10
-8). Tryptophan is a
precursor of serotonin, which has been implicated in hot
ﬂushes, as has neurokinin B.
Of the signals, 13/15 were associated with starting HRT
younger at P<5×10-8and 11 with earlier menopause. A
genetically-predicted one year earlier menopause raised the
odds of HRT use in women starting treatment before 2002(OR=1.12, 95% CI =1.10,1.13) but not after 2002
(OR=1.02, 95% CI =0.95,1.00). In contrast, the signals
near TACR3 and ALDH8A1 were not associated with
menopause timing.
Conclusions: Genetic associations for HRT are largely
driven by menopause timing and are affected by changes inhealth practice. We identi ﬁed two genetic signals, which are
not affected by health practice, near plausible candidate
genes for vasomotor symptoms.
K.S. Ruth: None. R.N. Beaumont: None. J. Tyrrell:
None. A.R. Wood: None. S.E. Jones: None. M.N. Wee-
don: None. T.M. Frayling: None. A. Murray: None.
P01.43C
Prenatal diagnostics: the utility of molecularkaryotyping
F. Sachinidi, E. Panou, D. Mpouzarelou, C. Billi,
L. Florentin
Alfalab, Genetics and Genomics Center, Athens, GreeceIntroduction: the aim of this study is to highlight the use of
molecular karyotyping in the context of prenatal diagnostictesting.
Materials and Methods: Molecular karyotype was
applied on 4012 prenatal samples (CVS, amniotic ﬂuids) as
theﬁrst line diagnostic tool. Specimens have been analyzed
using Agilent SurePrint G3 8x60K ISCA design and
Cytogenomics software.
Results: women who underwent prenatal molecular kar-
yotype were referred for ultrasound ﬁndings, increased NT,advanced maternal age, previous pregnancy with aneu-
ploidy, positive biochemical or NIPT, anxiety etc.
Molecular karyotype shows an increased diagnostic yield
compared to conventional karyotype varying from 1,4% to
3,4% depending on the referral reason with the highest
added value in fetuses with abnormal U/S ﬁndings. Among
all abnormal CGH samples with normal karyotype, 72,5%
of clinically signi ﬁcant imbalances would have escaped
detection from NIPT since they concern rare syndromes(25%), susceptibility to-loci (60%) and backbone abnorm-
alities (15%) related to the referral reason.
Conclusion: Since more than 70% of the abnormal CGH
cases would not be detected neither by conventional kar-
yotype nor by NIPT, we suggest that every pregnant woman
of any age should be offered the informed choice to undergomolecular karyotype prenatal testing.
F. Sachinidi: None. E. Panou: None. D. Mpouzarelou:
None. C. Billi: None. L. Florentin: None.
P01.44D
Prenatally diagnosed megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-hydrocephalus syndrome
K. Tael
1, K. Ridnõi2,3, E. Kurvinen1, P. Ilves2,4,
L. Makarenkova3, S. Pajusalu1,2,5, M. H. Wojcik6,7,
K. Õunap1,2,7, T. Reimand1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
3East-Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia,4Clinic of
Radiology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,5Yale
University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics,New Haven, CT, United States,
6Division of Genetics and
Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children ’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, UnitedStates,
7Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA, United States
Introduction: Megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-
hydrocephalus (MPPH) syndrome is characterized by
megalencephaly, polymicrogyria and a variant in one ofthree genes: CCND2, AKT3 orPIK3R2 . To the best of our
knowledge, there is only one prenatally reported MPPH
case. We present a new case of MPPH with a variant inCCND2 that was diagnosed prenatally.
Case report: Chorionic biopsy was performed during the
1st trimester of the pregnancy due to increased NT value(3.39 cm) to a 29-years-old patient. The karyotype of the
fetus was 46,XY. Ultrasonography and magnetic resonance
imaging of the fetus showed extensive bilateral corticaldysplasia of the supratentorial cerebral parenchyma with a
suspected focal acute lesion in the right parietotemporalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1193region. Dysgenesis of the corpus callosum as well as
asymmetry of the hemispheres of cerebellum were also
visualized. The radiological changes were nonspeci ﬁc but
indicated either intrauterine infection or genetic brain mal-
formation. The pregnancy was ultimately terminated, and an
autopsy revealed multiple congenital cerebral anomalies:abnormal cranial occlusion, abnormal additional clefts on
right in the occipital and parasagital regions, dysgenesis of
the corpus callosum, and a collapsed and hypoplastic sep-tum pellucidum. There were no polydactyly and signs of
inﬂammation in the placental and fetal tissues. To investi-
gate the underlying etiology of this phenotype, trio exomesequencing (ES) analysis was done.
Result: ES revealed a pathogenic de novo missense var-
iant: NM_001759.3( CCND2 ):c.839C>A p.(Thr280Asn)
rs587777620, con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Conclusions: MPPH syndrome should be considered
when prenatally cerebral dysgenesis is visualized on USand/or MRI.
Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PRG471 and
PUTJD827.
K. Tael: None. K. Ridnõi: None. E. Kurvinen: None. P.
Ilves: None. L. Makarenkova: None. S. Pajusalu: None.
M.H. Wojcik: None. K. Õunap: None. T. Reimand:
None.
P01.46B
Robust strategy for preimplantation genetic testing of
myotonic dystrophy type 1 by bidirectional triplet-
primed PCR combined with multi-microsatellitehaplotyping following whole genome ampli ﬁcation
M. Lian
1,2, C. G. Lee3,4,5, S. S. Chong3,1,2
1National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore,
2National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore,
3National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore,
4Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore,5National Cancer Center, Singapore, Singapore
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by moderate to
very large expansions of the DMPK CTG trinucleotide
repeat. Disease transmission to offspring can be avoided
through prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation genetic
testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M). We describe arobust PGT-M strategy that can be applied to virtually any
couple at risk for DM1, including carriers of large expanded
alleles with non-CTG interruptions at either the 5 ’or 3’end
of the repeat. This strategy utilizes whole-genome ampli-
ﬁcation by multiple displacement ampli ﬁcation, followed
by bidirectional triplet-primed PCR (TP-PCR) sizing of theDMPK CTG repeat, in parallel with single-tube genotyping
and haplotype phasing of 12 closely linked and highlypolymorphic microsatellite markers. Bidirectional TP-PCR
and dodecaplex marker PCR assays were optimized and
validated on whole-genome ampli ﬁed single lymphoblasts
isolated from DM1 reference cell lines, and tested on a
simulated PGT-M case comprising a parent-offspring trio
and three simulated embryos. DMPK TP-PCR reliably
detects repeat expansions regardless of allele size, and
employing TP-PCR in both directions ensures successful
expansion detection even when non-CTG interruptionsoccur at either the 5 ’or 3 ’end of the expanded allele.
Misdiagnoses and diagnostic ambiguity due to allele
dropout or exogenous DNA contamination can be easilydetected through the use of tightly linked microsatellite
markers, minimizing the exclusion of potentially unaffected
embryos for uterine transfer. The highly polymorphic multi-marker panel also maximizes the likelihood of marker
informativeness in at-risk couples, thus minimizing the need
for couple-speci ﬁc assay customization.
M. Lian: None. C.G. Lee: None. S.S. Chong: None.
P01.47C
Nicotine and resveratrol alter sox2 and sox4 genes
expression levels in human amniotic cell culture
G. Cömertpay, Ü. H. Lüleyap, B. M. Y ılmaz, P. Pazarc ı
Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, ADANA, TurkeyIntroduction: The aim of this research is to investigate the
effects of nicotine on expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4master genes in human amniotic cell cultures to indicate the
risks of smoking in pregnancy. The effects of resveratrol on
expression levels of these genes in human amniotic cellcultures, which are treated by nicotine were also examined
in this study.
Materials and Methods: Twenty patients were included
in our study and for each patient; control, nicotine treated
and nicotine +resveratrol treated cell culture groups are
formed. The expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genesare examined in each group by using real time RT-PCR.
Results: According to the results of our study, change in
expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes in nicotinetreated group were found to be statistically signi ﬁcant. Also,
when groups treated with nicotine and nicotine +resvera-
trol were compared the difference was found to be statisti-cally signi ﬁcant.
Conclusion: In conclusion, nicotine increased the
expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes by 60% inhuman amniotic cell cultures and resveratrol was found to
be an important antioxidant that reduces the increased
expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes caused bynicotine treatment.1194This study was supported by the Scienti ﬁc Research
Project Unit of the Çukurova University
G. Cömertpay: None. Ü.H. Lüleyap: None. B.M.
Yılmaz: None. P. Pazarc ı:None.
P01.48D
A placental trisomy 2 detected by NIPT evolved in a
fetal small Supernumerary Marker Chromosome
(sSMC)
J. Domaradzka1, M. Deperas1, E. Obersztyn1,
A. Kuci ńska-Chahwan2, N. Brison3, K. Van Den
Bogaert3, T. Roszkowski2,M .K ędzior1, M. Bartnik-
Głaska1,A . Łuszczek1, K. Jakubów-Durska1,
J. Vermeesch3, B. Nowakowska1
1Medical Genetics Department, The Institute of Mother and
Child, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Witold Orlowski Public
Teaching Hospital, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland,
3Centre for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
Leuven, Belgium
Objective: Here we report a prenatally detected mosaicism
of a small supernumerary marker chromosome (sSMC)
derived from chromosome 2. The 38-year-old woman
underwent amniocentesis because of a high risk of trisomy2 revealed by the Non-Invasive Prenatal Test (NIPT).
Methods and results: A genome-wide NIPT detected a
trisomy of chromosome 2. The amniocentesis was per-formed to verify the NIPT result. Array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) from uncultured amniocytes
revealed a duplication of 14,83 Mb on chromosome2q11.1q13. Interphase ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) revealed three signals of centromere 2 in 30% of the
cells. GTG-banded metaphases con ﬁrmed the abnormal
karyotype (47,XX, +mar[21]/46,XX[19]), indicating 52%
mosaicism of the cell line with the sSMC. The ultrasound
examination did not reveal abnormalities. The pregnancyhas been terminated. Cytogenetic analyses (FISH, aCGH
and conventional karyotype) on fetal skin biopsies were
performed and con ﬁrmed the genomic gain of the cen-
tromeric region of chromosome 2. In the placenta, three cell
lines were detected: a normal cell line, a cell line with
trisomy 2 and a third one with only the sSCM derived fromchromosome 2. Conclusion: Whole-genome NIPT allows
not only the identi ﬁcation of common fetal trisomies (13,
18, 21) but also diagnosis of rare chromosomal abnormal-ities. Especially in such cases, it is extremely important to
perform not only NIPT veri ﬁcation on a sample of material
other than trophoblast, but also to apply appropriateresearch methods. Such conduct allows detailed analysis of
the detected aberration, thus appropriate clinical validity.J. Domaradzka: None. M. Deperas: None. E. Obersz-
tyn: None. A. Kucińska-Chahwan: None. N. Brison:
None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None. T. Roszkowski: None.
M. Kędzior: None. M. Bartnik-G łaska: None. A.
Łuszczek: None. K. Jakubów-Durska: None. J. Ver-
meesch: None. B. Nowakowska: None.
P01.49A
Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing pitfalls: exceptionalreport of multiple discrepancies between noninvasive
screening for fetal trisomy 21, karyotype, array CGH
and fetal ultrasound
F. Kundul
1, K. Cassinari1, G. Joly-Hélas1, N. Le Meur1,
J. Coursimault1, M. Castelain1, A. Diguet2, E. Verspyck2,
S. Torre3, B. Macé1, T. Frebourg1, P. Chambon1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F76000,
Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Rouen University Hospital-Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France,
3Department of Neonatal Pediatrics, Intensive Care and
Neuropediatrics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France
Introduction: Pitfalls of noninvasive prenatal test (NIPT)
for fetal trisomy 21 on circulating cell-free DNA arecurrently well known and are linked to con ﬁned placental
mosaicism, maternal or fetal mosaicism, maternal neoplasia,
evanescent twin, or low fetal DNA fraction. Unbalancedchromosomal rearrangements may also interfere with NIPT.
We report here a rare anomaly identi ﬁed through NIPT.
Case: A NIPT was performed on a 39-year-old woman
with abnormal ﬁrst trimester serum markers. This NIPT
(Clarigo, Multiplicom Agilent ) did not show any trisomy 21
but was evocative of trisomy 18. An amniocentesis wasperformed at the 22th week of gestation (WG) and FISH
analyses ( Aneucyte, Cytocell) on native amniotic ﬂuid were
compatible with a trisomy 18 in a female fetus. Unexpect-edly, concomitant ultrasound control didn ’t detect any
morphological abnormality on a male fetus. Then, fetal
karyotype and array-CGH con ﬁrmed the female chromo-
somal sex and revealed a very partial trisomy 18, linked to a
small supernumerary marker chromosome, in mosaic,
which was derivative from a chromosome 18. In addition,SRY locus was found on the short arm of one X chromo-
some. Genetic counseling being less alarming in this con-
text than with a complete trisomy 18, this patient pursuedher pregnancy and delivered a boy at 36 WG with normal
neonatal examination. A regular monitoring of his psy-
chomotor development is under way.
Discussion: This observation underlines the necessary
precautions while interpreting NIPT and the necessity of aAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1195strong cytogenetic con ﬁrmation. This case also illustrates
that incidental ﬁndings are to be expected with NIPT.
F. Kundul: None. K. Cassinari: None. G. Joly-Hélas:
None. N. Le Meur: None. J. Coursimault: None. M.
Castelain: None. A. Diguet: None. E. Verspyck: None. S.
Torre: None. B. Macé: None. T. Frebourg: None. P.
Chambon: None.
P01.50B
Pilot study of locally performed noninvasive prenatal
testing NIPT in Bulgaria
R. RAYNOVA, S. Bichev, S. Andonova, N. Yaneva,
C. Kercheva, I. Bradinova, A. Savov
National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Introduction: With the introduction of noninvasive
prenatal testing (NIPT), the prenatal screening for chromo-somal aneuploidies has been expanded beyond ultrasound
examination and combined ﬁrst-trimester screening (cFTS).
NIPT using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in maternalblood presents as an early, accurate, and safe prenatal
testing. Since August 2018 NIPT for chromosomes 21, 18,
13 and sex determination was introduced in-situ in theUniversity Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology ”Maichin
dom”,S oﬁa. The analysis was discussed with pregnant
women after performing cFTS.
Materials and Methods: A total of 134 pregnant women
were screened for chromosomal aneuploidies by NIPT
using ion semiconductor sequencing platform (Ion Pro-ton™, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) and IONA ®test (Pre-
maitha Health plc, Manchester, UK). The patients were at a
mean age of 34.5 years. Plasma samples were collectedbetween 10 +5 and 24 +5 g.w.
Results: Due to an intermediate risk (1/100 to 1/1000)
NIPT was performed on 68 (47.76%) pregnant women.Others were tested because of maternal anxiety or advanced
age. An average of 10.6% (from 3 to 24%) fetal fraction
(FF) was achieved. One report was unsuccessful due to alow fetal fraction in patient with BMI =43.03. We obtained
132“low risk ”reports and one “high risk ”- for trisomy 21,
conﬁrmed by amniocentesis followed by QF-PCR.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst introduction of locally
performed NIPT in Bulgaria. With the accumulation of
more samples and data a possible correlation between cFTS
results and NIPT; FF or/and gestational week and NIPT
results could be established.
R. Raynova: None. S. Bichev: None. S. Andonova:
None. N. Yaneva: None. C. Kercheva: None. I. Bradi-
nova: None. A. Savov: None.P01.51C
Unexpected ﬁnding of uniparental disomy mosaicism in
term placentas: Is it a common feature in trisomic
placentas?
D. Van Opstal1, K. E. M. Diderich1, M. Joosten1,L .C .P .
Govaerts1, J. Polak1, M. Boter1, J. J. Saris1, W. Cheung1,
S. van Veen1, R. M. van der Helm1,A .T .J .I .G o1,
M. F. C. M. Knapen1, D. N. M. Papatsonis2, A. Dijkman3,
F. A. T. de Vries1, R. H. Galjaard1, L. H. Hoefsloot1,
M. I. Srebniak1
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Amphia Hospital,
Breda, Netherlands,3Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft,
Netherlands
Objective: Non‐invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) detects
placental chromosome aberrations. When amniocentesisreveals a normal karyotype, con ﬁned placental mosaicism
(CPM) may be assumed. In order to con ﬁrm this, placental
cytogenetic studies were performed.
Method: NIPT was conducted in the course of the
DutchTRIDENT study. Placentas of 10 cases with NIPT
results indicating an autosomal trisomy and showing anormal (N =9) or low mosaic karyotype (N =1) in
amniotic ﬂuid (AF) were investigated. The cytotrophoblast
as well as the mesenchymal core of two to four placentalchorionicvilli biopsies were studied with single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array. Clinical outcome data were
collected.
Results: In 10/10 cases, CPM was proven. In 3/10 cases
trisomy/uniparental disomy (UPD)/biparental disomy
(BPD) mosaicism was discovered. In 2/3 cases, all three celllines were present in the placenta, whereas BPD was found
in AF. In 1/3 cases trisomy 22/UPD22 was present in AF
while trisomy 22/BPD22 mosaicism was found in the pla-centa. Five of 10 pregnancies were affected with pre ‐
eclampsia, low birth weight, preterm delivery, and/or con-
genital malformations.
Conclusion: The presence of trisomy/UPD/BPD mosai-
cism in 3/10 cases that we investigated proves that trisomic
zygote rescue may involve multiple rescue events duringearly embryogenesis. UPD mosaicism, when present in
crucial fetal tissues, may explain the abnormal phenotype in
undiagnosed cases.
D. Van Opstal: None. K.E.M. Diderich: None. M.
Joosten: None. L.C.P. Govaerts: None. J. Polak: None.
M. Boter: None. J.J. Saris: None. W. Cheung: None. S.
van Veen: None. R.M. van der Helm: None. A.T.J.I. Go:
None. M.F.C.M. Knapen: None. D.N.M. Papatsonis:
None. A. Dijkman: None. F.A.T. de Vries: None. R.H.
Galjaard: None. L.H. Hoefsloot: None. M.I.
Srebniak: None.1196P01.53A
Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing: Laboratory Clinical
Experience: 20000 Clinical Samples
G. Savarese, L. De Falco, P. Savarese, R. Ruggiero,
L. D’Amore, T. Suero, L. Circelli, R. D ’Angelo,
C. Ramiro, I. Pisano, A. Di Carlo, E. Evangelista,
G. Furino, M. Bruno, C. Vicedomini, A. Fico
AMES Genetic Lab, Polidiagnostic Instrumental Centre,
Casalnuovo di Napoli, Italy
Introduction: Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of mater-
nal plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) can potentially evaluate
all 24 chromosomes to identify abnormalities of theplacenta, fetus, or pregnant woman. The objective of this
study is to give a complete and robust clinical picture of the
current performance of NIPT for trisomy 13, 18, and 21 andsex chromosomes aneuploidies as well as for the other
chromosomes.
Materials and Methods: All data were generated in our
AMES accredited laboratory from January 2017 to January
2019 in 20000 samples. The pipeline included automated
library preparation (VeriSeq NIPT Microlab STAR, Illu-mina) and WGS sequencing on a Next550 (Illumina).
VeriSeq NIPT Assay Software ( www.illumina.com/
NIPTsoftware ) was used for data analysis of aneuploidy
status of 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes and fetal
fraction of cffDNA. An in house algorithm was optimized
to analyze other aneuploidies and subchromosomalaberrations.
Results: The main results were showed in Table 1. We
also reported 19 rare autosomal trisomies (RATs) and6 structural abnormalities identi ﬁed in 10500 samples,
mainly trisomy 15 (n =5), followed by trisomy 8 (n =4)
and trisomies 16 and 22 (n =2).
Conclusions: The performance characteristics were
established in samples in which we analysed all 24 chro-
mosomes with a minimum fetal fraction of 4%, and hasbeen con ﬁrmed by our extensive clinical experience in the
same clinical population.
Table 1: Clinical performance based on clinical
Experience
Overall
performance
n=20000TP FP FN Sensitivity (%
(95% Cl))Speci ﬁcity (%
(95% Cl))
T21 151 1 0 100 100
(97.52,100.0) (99.97, 100.0)
T18 44 6 0 100 99.97
(91.97, 100.0) (99.93, 100.0)
T13 24 4 0 100 99.98(86.2,100.0) (99.95, 100.0)
Sex chromosome
aneuploidies80 14 0 100 99.93
(95.42,100.0) (99.88, 99.96)
All 299 25 0 100 99.87
(98.73,100.0) (99.81,99.91)
Multiple gestation
n=441TP FP FN Sensitivity (%
(95% Cl))Speci ﬁcity (%
(95% Cl))
T21 5 0 0 100 100
(56.55,100.0) (99.13, 100.0)
T13 0 1 0 99.77
(99.13, 100.0)
ART pregnancies
n=984TP FP FN Sensitivity (%
(95% Cl))Speci ﬁcity (%
(95% Cl))
T21 2 0 0 100 100
(34.24,100.0) (99.61, 100.0)
T18 2 0 0 100 100
(34.24,100.0) (99.61, 100.0)
T13 0 1 0 99.77
(99.13, 100.0)
Sex chromosome
aneuploidies7 3 0 100 99.69
(64.57,100.0) (99.10, 99.69)
G. Savarese: None. L. De Falco: None. P. Savarese:
None. R. Ruggiero: None. L. D ’Amore: None. T. Suero:
None. L. Circelli: None. R. D ’Angelo: None. C. Ramiro:
None. I. Pisano: None. A. Di Carlo: None. E. Evange-
lista: None. G. Furino: None. M. Bruno: None. C.
Vicedomini: None. A. Fico: None.
P01.54B
High total DNA contributes to low fetal fraction in NIPT
and tends to resolve on redraw
A. Ryan, S. Krinshpun
Natera, San Carlos, CA, United StatesIntroduction: Low fetal fraction (FF) is a common cause of
test failures in NIPT and is correlated with maternal weight,gestational age, and aneuploidy[1,2]. We show that low FF
can also be associated with high DNA concentration (DC)
which frequently reverts toward average after redraw.
Materials and Methods: Sample DC was estimated by
comparing to a reference sequence added before ampli ﬁ-
cation. 99,936 eligible samples were collected between2012 and 2014. Additionally, 1,374 received a redraw after
test failure and changes in DC and FF between the two
draws were observed.
Results: Samples with low DC (below 10th percentile)
have average FF 12.4% and samples with high DC (aboveAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 119790th percentile) have average FF 8.6%. The average FF is
10.1%. Samples with test failure were twice as likely to
have high DC. After redraw, cases with high initial DC had
38 times larger median reduction in DC compared to
overall. The 10% of cases with greatest reduction in DC had
median FF increase 1.2%, compared to FF increase 0.4%for cases without signi ﬁcant change in DC. Change in DC
was a signi ﬁcant parameter (p<10-5) in a logistic regression
model for redraw success.
Conclusions: Samples with high DC are overrepresented
in test failures and have lower average FF. High DC tends
to reduce after redraw, producing larger FF increase. Thissupports the option for repeat NIPT after a failure due to
low FF.
[1] Pergament et al. Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Aug;124(2 Pt
1):210-8.
[2] McKanna et al. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2019
Jan;53(1):73-79.
A. Ryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Natera. S. Krinshpun: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Natera.
P01.55C
Microarray ﬁndings in pregnancies with
oligohydramnios - a retrospective cohort study and
literature review
S. Sagi
1, L. Sagi-Dain2, I. Maya3, S. Ben-Shachar4,
A. Singer5
1Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,2Carmel Medical
Center, Haifa, Israel,3Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva,
Israel,4Souraski Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel,5Ministry
of Health, Jerusalem, Israel
Introduction: This study was performed following a
statement in national position paper de ﬁning the advised
management of pregnancies with abnormal amniotic ﬂuid
volume. The proposed statement recommended to refer allpregnancies with oligohydramnios to genetic counseling,
except for proven rupture of membranes, evidence of
placental insuf ﬁciency or oligohydramnios diagnosed after
37 weeks of gestational age. Thus, the objective of this
study was to explore the risk for abnormal chromosomal
microarray analysis (CMA) ﬁndings in pregnancies with
oligohydramnios.
Methods: Data from all CMA analyses performed due to
oligohydramnios between January 2013 and September2017 were retrospectively obtained from the Ministry of
Health database. In addition, a search was conducted
through the Pubmed database from inception to February2018 for English articles exploring the issue.Results: Fifty CMA analyses were performed due to
oligohydramnios. Of these, in 21 tests it constituted an
isolated anomaly, 13 cases were associated with anatomic
defects, and the remaining 16 pregnancies were diagnosed
with intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR) as well. All
CMA tests were normal, except for one pathogenic ﬁnding
in the IUGR group - a 16p11.2 duplication sized 722Kb.
Literature search yielded 394 titles, of which two relevant
articles were found. One of these, published at 1998, yiel-ded 31 (20.1%) abnormal karyotypes in 154 pregnancies
with oligohydramnios (11 of these as an isolated ﬁndings),
while another (1995) did not ﬁnd any aberrations in 28
pregnancies with isolated oligohydramnios.
Discussion: Current evidence does not support invasive
prenatal testing in pregnancies with isolatedoligohydramnios.
S. Sagi: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Maya: None. S.
Ben-Shachar: None. A. Singer: None.
P01.57A
Early experiences with screening for aneuploidy inpreimplantation genetic testing for inherited disorders
T. Diemer
1, C. L. F. Toft2, C. Hnida3, B. Degn2,
H. Okkels2, A. Ernst2, H. J. Ingerslev3, I. S. Pedersen2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,2Department of Molecular
Diagnostics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark,3Fertility Unit, Aalborg University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark
Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) is divided into three
categories based on the indication: PGT-M (Monogenic),
PGT-SR (Structural rearrangements) and PGT-A (Aneu-
ploidy). A large study of more than 15000 trophectodermbiopsies found the lowest rate of aneuploidy to be 25% in
young women increasing with maternal age to more than
90%. Thus at least 1 in 4 embryos are expected to beaneuploid, possibly leading to implantation failure, mis-
carriage or an abnormal fetus. Hence, selection of euploid
embryos should in theory increase pregnancy rates anddecrease miscarriage rates, but this is still a subject of
intense international discussion. In our center we don ’t offer
PGT-A, but as our PGT-SR setup is based on ShallowWhole Genome Sequencing, the ploidy status is revealed,
and thus used for prioritizing embryos. Our PGT-M setup
includes fragment analysis of short tandem repeats, andSNaPshot analysis of the speci ﬁc mutation when relevant.
Since PGT-M setup does not detect aneuploidy, we would
expect a higher rate of implantation when performing PGT-SR. Mean maternal age is similar in the two groups (30.96
in the PGT-M and 32.56 in the PGT-SR group). We1198examined the rate of positive hCG and ongoing pregnancies
(OPR) per transfer (SET) on embryos (159 PGT-M and 27
PGT-SR) transferred between 01-01-2017 and 01-12-2018.
Surprisingly, we found no signi ﬁcant difference in outcome
in the two groups in terms of positive hCG (49.7 vs. 48.1, P
=0.881) or OPR (34.6 vs. 37.0, P =0.805), but the number
of cases is still rather low.
T. Diemer: None. C.L.F. Toft: None. C. Hnida: None.
B. Degn: None. H. Okkels: None. A. Ernst: None. H.J.
Ingerslev: None. I.S. Pedersen: None.
P01.58B
Counseling conundrum: sex discordance identi ﬁcation
following preimplantation genetic testing or noninvasive
prenatal testing using SNP-based methodologies
K. L. Howard, M. K. Maisenbacher, K. Merrion,
S. Leaonard, W. DiNonno
Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States
Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) and
noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) can determine fetal sex
with high accuracy prior to/during pregnancy. However,additional prenatal screening or clinical presentation may
indicate sex discrepancy requiring medical follow-up for an
infant ’s health.
Methods: Cases of possible sex discrepancy after PGT or
NIPT at a single lab were retrospectively reviewed. For
PGT, genotyping was performed using Illumina Cyto12SNP-based microarray with informatics. For NIPT, cell-free
DNA was isolated and ampli ﬁed by massively-multiplexed
PCR targeting 13,392 SNPs covering chromosomes 13, 18,21, X and Y. Only cases with testing to identify a cause for
discrepancy were included.
Results: Four of 23,297 (0.02%) PGT and 49 of
1,081,541 (0.005%) NIPT cases had discrepant sex by
prenatal screening or postnatal exam. For PGT, child con-
cordance with parental samples and remaining embryosrevealed 2 (50%) resulted from incorrect embryo transfers
and 2 (50%) resulted from natural conception around the
time of embryo transfer. For NIPT, phlebotomy labelingerrors comprised 6 (12.2%); con ﬁned placental mosaicism,
10 (20.4%); ultrasound errors, 13 (26.6%); and disorders of
sexual development (DSD), 20 (40.8%). No discrepancieswere due to lab error for PGT/NIPT cases.
Conclusions: Causes of discordant sex after PGT or
NIPT can include sample swap, ultrasound errors, PGT/NIPT result errors, natural conception around the time of
embryo transfer, vanished twin on non-SNP-based NIPT,
embryo mosaicism, con ﬁned placental mosaicism and var-
ious DSDs. A thorough investigation can providereassurance and guide appropriate medical management and
counseling about cause and recurrence risk.
K.L. Howard: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. M.K. Mai-
senbacher: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
I am full time employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. K. Merrion: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Full Time Employee,
Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁ
cant; Stock,
Natera, Inc. S. Leaonard: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc. W.
DiNonno: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Signi ﬁcant; Stock Options, Natera, Inc..
P01.59C
Preimplantation genetic testing of monogenic disease:experience in Russia
S. O. Zhikrivetskaya, Y. L. Volkova, E. V. Musatova,
Y. V. Sofronova, N. A. Shirokova, E. A. Pomerantseva
Center of Genetics and Reproductive Medicine GENETICO
LLC, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing of mono-
genic disease (PGT-M) is an alternative to prenatal testing
for couples with high risk of having offspring with single-
gene disorder. PGT-M is technically challenging, becauseof extremely small amount of biomaterial. We report here
our experience of PGT-M in “Genetico ”center in Russia.
Material and Methods: A retrospective analysis of all
requests and cycles of PGT-M referred to our center was
performed. Personalized PGT-M assays combine direct
diagnosis of the pathogenic variants and linkage analysis ofhighly heterozygous STRs. PGT-A by NGS or aCGH was
performed for unaffected embryos upon patient ’s request.
Results: Of 109 couples referred to our center for PGT-M,
92 completed preliminary test for PGT-M for 42 genetic
condition: 24 autosomal-dominant, 54 autosomal-recessive,
13 X-linked requests. The most frequent indication was spinalmuscular atrophy (17). We performed 85 PGT-M cycles with
413 embryos. The whole genome ampli ﬁc a t i o nf a i l e di n1 6
cases (3,9%). Median number of markers in test-systems was12 and for embryo analysis it was 10. These highly infor-
mative test systems contributed to low number of incon-
clusive results - only for 7 samples (1,8%). For 156 (58,6%)unaffected embryos PGT-A was performed and 91 (34,1%)
were suitable for transfer. At the moment we haveAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1199information about 43 transfers, 19 pregnancies and 7 healthy
births and no affected pregnancy or birth.
Conclusions: Highly informative test system and accu-
rate analysis of results can lead to both - high accuracy of
obtained results and decreased number of embryos, that
were rejected because of inconclusive results.
S.O. Zhikrivetskaya: None. Y.L. Volkova: None. E.V.
Musatova: None. Y.V. Sofronova: None. N.A. Shir-
okova: None. E.A. Pomerantseva: None.
P01.60D
Identifying eQTL in ﬂuence on gene expression through
microRNAs
R. Inno, S. Sõber, M. LaanInstitue of Biomedicine and Translational Meidicine, Tartu,
Estonia
Introduction: microRNAs drive coordinated expressional
changes of their target genes and trigger functional shift incells. Placental microRNAs are speci ﬁcally involved in
trophoblast differentiation and function. Single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) associated with the expression level of genesare de ﬁned as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). The
aim of my PhD project is to identify placental eQTLs
modulating the expression of microRNAs and to understandtheir downstream effect on the placental transcriptome.
Materials and Methods: Placental miRSeq (unpubl.
data) and genotyping (Kasak et al 2015) datasets weresubjected to genetic association testing for eQTL discovery
(n=40), implicated in PLINK v1.07 (Purcell et al 2007).
microRNAs and their eQTLs were cross-referenced withnewbors growth parameters. Additionally association test-
ing between identi ﬁed miRNA eQTLs and placental
expression levels of predicted target genes were analyzed.Correlations between the expression pro ﬁle of placental
miRNAs (miRSeq dataset) and transcripts (RNA-Seq
dataset; Sõber et al 2015) were analyzed using DESeq2platform (Love et al 2014). eQTL and newborn growth
parameter association was validated in combined REPRO-
META and Happy Pregnancy cohort (n =2100)
Results: In total, 11 placental microRNAs were detected
that were expressionally modulated by eQTLs. Four of
these microRNAs and their eQTLs show assosiation withnewborns growth parametes. Several novel target genes and
biological pathways were identi ﬁed for these microRNAs.
Conclusions: miRNA eQTLs may represent additional
modulators of the placental transcriptome, placental func-
tion and pregnancy course.
Funding: European Union through the European Regional
Development Fund (project Happy Pregnancy, 3.2.0701.12-
0047) and Estonian Research Council (IUT34-12).R. Inno: None. S. Sõber: None. M. Laan: None.
P01.62B
Whole exome-based preconception carrier test (PCT)
for consanguineous couples: ﬁrst results from clinical
practice
S. C. E. H. Sallevelt
1, B. de Koning1, C. E. M. de Die-
Smulders1, C. Gilissen2, A. P. A. Stegmann1,
H. G. Brunner1,2, A. D. C. Paulussen1
1Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht,
Netherlands,2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Introduction: consanguineous partners are at increased risk
of both being carrier of the same autosomal recessive (AR)
disorder, with 25% risk of affected offspring as aconsequence. Until recently, no comprehensive preconcep-
tion carrier test was available to identify the very rare
disease-causing mutations these couples may carry. Wedeveloped such a test for consanguineous couples and
implemented this in our clinical practice.
Materials and Methods: both individuals of a couple
undergo whole exome sequencing (WES). First the couple ’s
sequence data are merged: only variants present in the same
gene in both of them and with a population frequency <5%,remain in the dataset. Subsequently, this dataset is ﬁltered
against a gene panel, consisting of >1900 genes associated
with known AR diseases (OMIM-based). Only combina-tions of likely pathogenic or pathogenic mutations (class IV
or V variants) in both partners are reported. Carriership in
only one individual is not detected.
Results: thus far 22 consanguineous couples were included.
For 7 (32%), ‘unexpected ’pathogenic variants were reported
conferring risk of severely affected offspring, allowing thesecouples to opt for prenatal or preconception diagnostic choi-
ces. Disease examples are: sul ﬁte oxidase de ﬁciency, AR
epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, restrictive dermatopathy,infantile epileptic encephalopathy. None of the disease asso-
ciations were linked to any known disease in the family,
demonstrating the innovative value of this approach.
Conclusions: our WES-based preconception carrier test
(PCT) provides a powerful diagnostic tool for identi ﬁcation
of serious disease carrier status in consanguineous couples.Outcomes provide signi ﬁcant reproductive choices that no
other test currently offers.
S.C.E.H. Sallevelt: None. B. de Koning: None. C.E.M.
de Die-Smulders: None. C. Gilissen: None. A.P.A. Steg-
mann: None. H.G. Brunner: None. A.D.C.
Paulussen: None.1200P01.63C
CarrierTest - the expanded preconception carrier
screening
F. Lhota, F. Zembol, L. Dohnalova, Z. Vilimova,
M. Bittoova, I. Soldatova, B. Honysova, M. Famfulikova,M. Koudova, D. Stejskal
Gennet, Clinic of genetics and reproductive medicine,
Prague, Czech Republic
We have developed a NGS panel which screens (i) 889
mutations causing 68 severe genetic disorders that can
affect progeny of healthy individuals (genetic compatibility
test), (ii) mutations associated with blood hypercoagul-ability in ﬂuencing infertility treatment and pregnancy, (iii)
inherited ovarian response to gonadotrophin stimulation.
The test is designated for patients undergoing an IVFprogram and for gamete donors.
CarrierTest is a custom NGS panel with locally assem-
bled bioinformatic pipeline and variant database. To replaceMLPA and fragmentation analysis we implemented speci ﬁc
design adjustments and sequencing data analysis allowing
detection of large deletions of SMN1, CFTR genes and also
microdeletions on chromosome Y (AZF region) within one
laboratory test. The report contains comparative analysis of
detected variants for evaluation of residual risk and pre-conception compatibility of couple for consideration of
preimplantation (PGT-M) or prenatal diagnostics.
So far 8258 samples were analyzed. These include: 3196
couples before conception, 1388 gamete donors and 478
patients with reproduction impairment without compat-
ibility testing. Frequent occurrence of carriers was observedin the commonly screened genes ( SMN1 2,4%, CFTR 3,7%,
GJB2 6,2% ) but also in other genes previously not tested
(e.g. ABCA4 4,2%, DHCR7 2,7%, SERPINA1 2,7%, PAH
2,5%, ACADM 1,5%, ATP7B 1,2%, AR1,1%). We identi-
ﬁed 79 pairs (2,4%) with a reproduction risk, which is
twofold increase detection rate in comparison with onlyCFTR/SMN1/GJB2 testing.
CarrierTest facilitates informed decision about reproduc-
tion. Screening of couples and gamete donors allows to elu-cidate higher number of carriers of severe disorders in order to
offer appropriate preconception and prenatal care.
F. Lhota: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Gennet. F. Zembol: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. L. Dohnalova: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. Z. Vilimova: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. M. Bittoova:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. I.
Soldatova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Gennet. B. Honysova: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. M. Famfulikova: A. Employment (fullor part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Gennet. M. Koudova: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Gennet.
D.
Stejskal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Gennet.
P01.64D
The prevalence of genetic and anatomic fetal defects:
data from Happy Pregnancy Study
K. Rull1,2,3, E. Hanson1,2, M. Laan3
1Women ’s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia,2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Institute of
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University ofTartu, Tartu, Estonia
Introduction: The study aimed to assess the prevalence of
genetic and anatomic abnormalities among the participants
of the prospective Happy Pregnancy study ( “Development
of novel non-invasive biomarkers for fertility and healthypregnancy").
Methods: The pregnancy course and outcome including
theﬁrst trimester serum test and ultrasound scans at 11-14
and 19-21 weeks were documented in the cohort of 2320
women visiting the Women ’s Clinic of Tartu University
Hospital, Estonia in 2013-2015. Targeted FISH, karyotyp-ing and SNP-based array was applied in cases of abnormal
ﬁndings after 12 gestational weeks.
Results: In 63 cases (2.7%), the pregnancy resulted with
early (<12 weeks) /late (>12 weeks) loss (n =42 /8) or ter-
mination of pregnancy (TOP) before 22 weeks (n =13). The
genetic disorders were detected in 16 cases (0.7%), theanatomic defects occurred in 53 cases (2.3%). Serious
anatomic defects, resulted with TOP, fetal death or postnatal
surgical intervention during the ﬁrst year after birth occur-
red in 14 cases (0.6%); anomalies two were not antenatally
diagnosed: univentricular heart and cleft lip.
Defect Antenatal diagnosis Diagnosis after birth
Genetic 9 (7)* 7 (1 trisomy 18)
Hand/foot 1 7
Cleft lip/palate 1 (1)* 1
Cardiac mild/severe 1/4 (1)* 7/1
Urogenital 12 5
Gastrointestinal 4 (1)* 1Cerebral 4 (1)* 0
Minor 1 3
Total 37 (11)* 32
*termination of pregnancyAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1201Summary: The overall prevalence of the serious genetic
and/or anatomic among unselected pregnant women in
Happy Pregnancy cohort was 0.97%.
Funding: The European Regional Development Fund
(3.2.0701.12-0047), Estonian Research Council (grants
IUT34-12).
K. Rull: None. E. Hanson: None. M. Laan: None.
P01.65A
Selecting fetuses in ambiguous setting: Preimplantation
Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for variants of unknown
signiﬁcant (VUS)
S. Zuckerman1, K. Rotshenker Olshinka2, O. Weiss1,
N. Srebnik2, S. Shaviv1, O. Freireich1, R. Segel1, T. Eldar
Geva2, G. Altarescu1
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,,
Jerusalem, Israel,2IVF Unit, Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel
The introduction of new technologies of chromosomal
microarrays (CMA) and whole exome sequencing is leadingto wider awareness of people to their genetic background
and in ﬂuence on offspring. The decision to perform PGD to
select an embryo with no inherited VUS, considering theinherent ambiguity of VUS which is not unequivocally
linked to a disorder, may give false hope and lead to
frustration if an affected child is born. In order to evaluateIsraeli VUS carriers ’intentions regarding PGD for VUS
ﬁndings, we have analyzed database from a large PGD
center. Twenty three couples required PGD for VUSdetected, in at least one spouse, by CMA analysis. Five
couples had two VUS detected. Eight couples (35%) had
previous pregnancy termination (TOP) solely due to thedetection of VUS in an embryo. Thirteen couples (57%) had
no other indication for PGD. The interpretation of VUS in
the time of counseling was ‘likely-pathogenic ’in 10 cases
(36%), ‘VUS ’in 9 cases (32%) and ‘likely-benign ’in 9
cases (32%). PGD was performed in 14 couples (61%): 9/
10 likely-pathogenic, 5/9 VUS and 1/9 likely-benign VUS.Although most couples performed PGD for a likely-
pathogenic VUS, some couples regard likely-benign VUS
as an indication for TOP and PGD. Future demand for suchcontroversial PGD applications will be growing and
challenge the medical milieu also considering continuous
re-interpretation of VUS. Setting guidelines for VUS ’
interpretations, proper counselling regarding VUS ’mean-
ings and de ﬁning the justi ﬁed applications of PGD uses are
crucial steps in practicing PGD for VUS ﬁndings.
S. Zuckerman: None. K. Rotshenker Olshinka: None.
O. Weiss: None. N. Srebnik: None. S. Shaviv: None. O.Freireich: None. R. Segel: None. T. Eldar Geva: None.
G. Altarescu: None.
P01.67C
Preimplantation genetic test in couples with history of
infertility and pregnancy loss
S. Y. Yaneva Staykova
1, G. Stamenov2, R. Staneva1,2,
M. Pancheva2, M. Sera ﬁmova2, K. Nikolova2,
O. Antonova1, D. Toncheva1, S. Hadjidekova1,2
1Medical University of So ﬁa, Medical Faculty, Department
of Medical Genetics, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Nadezhda Hospital,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Preimplantation genetic test (PGT) is a
cutting-edge technology of early genetic disease detection
in embryos prior to their implantation in the uterus. Thepurpose of our study is to show the value of PGT in couples
with infertility; its ability to reduce the risk of birth of
chromosomally unbalanced offspring and pregnancy loss;to increase the chance of successful pregnancy and birth of
an unaffected child.
Materials and Methods: We describe 185 couples with a
history of infertility and pregnancy loss, who after extensive
genetic counseling opted for in vitro fertilization procedure
with PGT. Trophectoderm biopsy was carried out on 497blastocyst stage embryos originating from 231 oocyte
retrieval cycles. DNA was extracted and subjected to whole
genome ampli ﬁcation. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization with microarray platforms 24sure v3/24sure +
and next-generation sequencing with VeriSeqPGS Librar-
yPrep protocol were performed. Results were analyzed byBlueFuse Multi version 4.3 software.
Results: 196 embryos had a balanced pro ﬁle (39.44%),
292 embryos showed an unbalanced pro ﬁle (58.75%) and 9
embryos could not be interpreted (1.81%). Embryo transfer
was conducted in 109 cases (58.92%) and chemical preg-
nancy was detected in 33.03% of the women. Pregnancyloss occurred in 3.67% of cases. Live birth rate was 29.36%.
Conclusions: PGT reduces the number of failed transfers
and eliminates the trauma of terminating desired pregnancyand possible medical complications. In couples with
reproductive failures, PGT can be recommended in order to
considerably increase the chance of conceiving with achromosomally balanced embryo and live birth of a healthy
offspring.
S.Y. Yaneva Staykova: None. G. Stamenov: None. R.
Staneva: None. M. Pancheva: None. M. Sera ﬁmova:
None. K. Nikolova: None. O. Antonova: None. D.
Toncheva: None. S. Hadjidekova: None.1202P01.68D
Rapid whole exome sequencing to identify the
underlying genetic cause in fetuses with sonographic
anomalies
I. Feenstra1, A. C. Deden2, M. I. Nelen1, K. Neveling1,
S. Castelein3, C. F. Gilissen3, R. P. Pfundt4, M. W. Elting5,
T. K. Rinne4, K. E. Diderich6, S. C. Sallevelt7, N. Corsten-
Janssen8, K. D. Lichtenbelt9, T. Gardeitchik4, L. Vissers4,
H. G. Yntema4, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands,
3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Molecular
Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition,
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Department of Genetics,
Amsterdam Medical University, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
6Department of Genetics, Erasmus University Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands,7Department of Clinical
Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, Netherlands,8Department of Genetics,
University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen,Netherlands,
9Department of Genetics, University Medical
Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
Rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) in critically ill
newborns with a presumed genetic disorder has shown to
increase diagnostic yield earlier in life, which leads toimproved patient care. Due to this impact, rWES has
become a routine genetic test in this group of patients. We
hypothesize that rWES could have the same effect evenbefore birth. Therefore we studied the use of rWES in
fetuses with a wide range of sonographic anomalies
representing the clinical practice.
We performed a retrospective analysis of the ﬁrst 54 cases
referred to our laboratory for prenatal rWES following the
detection of fetal sonographic anomalies. Parental and fetalDNAs were sequenced simultaneously in 53 of the cases
and as singleton analysis in one case due to a deceased
parent. The most common identi ﬁed sonographic anomalies
were (multiple) congenital anomalies, skeletal dysplasia and
intracerebral structural anomalies.
We were able to identify a causative pathogenic mole-
cular variant in 12 of the 54 cases (22%) and a likely
causative pathogenic molecular variant in another ﬁve
cases (9%), bringing the molecular diagnostic yield in thiscohort to 31%. Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variantswere detected in fetuses w ith skeletal dysplasias ( n=11,
65%), multiple congenital anomalies ( n=4, 23%) or
intracerebral structural anomalies ( n=2, 12%).
These results suggest that rWES is likely to improve
prenatal diagnosis of fetuses with ultrasonic abnormalities.
I. Feenstra: None. A.C. Deden: None. M.I. Nelen:
None. K. Neveling: None. S. Castelein: None. C.F.
Gilissen: None. R.P. Pfundt: None. M.W. Elting: None.
T.K. Rinne: None. K.E. Diderich: None. S.C. Sallevelt:
None. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. K.D. Lichtenbelt:
None. T. Gardeitchik: None. L. Vissers: None. H.G.
Yntema: None. W.A. van Zelst-Stams: None.
P01.69A
Half decade experience: karyotyping, aCGH or NIPT -changes in prenatal testing strategy
E. Kuznetsova, V. Gnetetskaya, M. Ermakova, M. Kurtser,
Y. Tarasova
Mother and Child, Moscow, Russian FederationOver 5 years the strategy of genetic counseling signi ﬁ-
cantly has changed after introduction of new prenataldiagnostic methods of detecti on chromosomal abnormal-
ities. In 2013 our laboratory had possibility to use cell-
based FISH and karyotyping for pregnancies at risk(maternal serum screening, advanced age, ultrasound
examination (US), family history, patient ’s anxiety).
Since 2014 patients in ﬁrst trimester with NT> =2,5 mm
or/and US abnormalities were recommended chorionic
villus sampling followed by karyotyping and DNA
extraction which allowed to perform aCGH (array-basedcomparative genomic hybridization) in case of normal
fetus karyotype. In second trimester after the amniocent-
esis mostly aCGH/FISH analy sis were recommended due
to time limit with compare to cell cultivation of amniotic
ﬂuid for standard karyotyping . Chromosome imbalances
by aCGH let us reveal about 20 families where one of theparents had a balanced rearrangement invisible by
standard karyotyping. For these aims subtelomeric FISH
analysis have been performed. When a noninvasiveprenatal testing (NIPT) appeared in 2016 the whole
amount of invasive procedures decreased up to 50%.
NIPT should be recommended to women without USabnormalities and family history (Table). Otherwise only
invasive prenatal testing is acceptable due to limits of
NIPT. Since 2013 more than 12000 prenatal analyseswere done. aCGH increased the detection of pathogenic
chromosomal aberrations on 12%. Prenatal counseling is
the most important tool for c larifying the appropriate
strategy in each case.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1203Table. Comparison of NIPT results.
NIPT test Result Con ﬁrmed False
positiveFalse
negativeRefused
invasiveprocedure Low risks High risk
Panorama
(Natera,since 2016)3381 191 91(61%) 58 (38%) 1 (0,6%) 41
Harmony
(AriosaDiagnostics,since 2016)1939 79 57(80%) 14 (20%) 0 8
VERASITY
(NIPDgenetics,since 2017)1583 33 31 (100%) 0 0 2
Total 6903 303 179 72 1 51
E. Kuznetsova: None. V. Gnetetskaya: None. M.
Ermakova: None. M. Kurtser: None. Y. Tarasova: None.
P01.70B
Correlation between reason to apply a prenatal
diagnosis for aneuploidy and the results of test - A
retrospective study on 2,881 foetus investigated in last 15years by FISH method in “Cuza Voda ”Maternity, Iasi,
Romania
V. Martiniuc
1, M. Gramescu2, S. Popa2, R. Popescu2,
A. Paduret1, I. Resmerita2, L. Caba2, L. Butnariu2,
M. Panzaru2, C. Rusu2, E. GORDUZA1,2
1"Cuza Voda" Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Iasi,
Romania,2"Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania
We analysed retrospectively 2,881 cases investigated by
prenatal diagnosis, using FISH method in the last 15 years
in Iasi, Romania. We used probes for chromosomes 13, 18,
21, X and Y and we found 215 foetus with aneuploidy(7.46%). In 642 cases with abnormal double test we
identi ﬁed 17 chromosomal anomalies [2.64%] (12 cases
with trisomy 21 and 1 case with trisomy 18, trisomy 13,trisomy XXY and trisomy XYY). In 577 cases with
abnormal triple test we identi ﬁed 8 chromosomal anomalies
[1.38%] (4 cases with trisomy 21 and 4 cases with trisomy18). In 42 cases with abnormal double and triple test we did
not identi ﬁed chromosomal anomalies. In 759 cases with
congenital anomalies identi ﬁed by ultrasonography we
found 162 chromosomal anomalies [21.34%] (78 cases
with trisomy 21, 52 cases with trisomy 18, 13 cases with
trisomy 13, 10 cases with monosomy X and 9 cases withtriploidy). In 732 cases with advanced maternal age (> 35
years) we identi ﬁed 16 chromosomal anomalies [2.18%]
(14 cases with trisomy 21 and 1 case with trisomy 13, andtriploidy). We applied FISH test in 11 cases with positive
NIPD and we con ﬁrmed 9 cases with trisomy 21 and onecase with monosomy X. In 118 cases we made prenatal
diagnosis for other reason (usually for chromosomal
pathology in antecedents) and we found only two cases
with trisomy 21 [1.69%]. In conclusion, prenatal diagnosis
of chromosomal disorders is very useful in cases with
congenital anomalies and positive NIPD.
V. Martiniuc: None. M. Gramescu: None. S. Popa:
None. R. Popescu: None. A. Paduret: None. I. Resmerita:
None. L. Caba: None. L. Butnariu: None. M. Panzaru:
None. C. Rusu: None. E. Gorduza: None.
P01.71C
Applicational of the array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) in the prenatal diagnostics of
fetuses with increased risk of aneuploidy
M. Chojnacka
1, K. Sobecka1, M. Bartnik-G łaska1,
M. Smyk1, I. Plaskota1,B .W i śniowiecka-Kowalnik1,
M. K ędzior1, J. Bernaciak1, K. Jakubów-Durska1,
E. Obersztyn1, T. Roszkowski2, A. Kuci ńska-Chahwan2,
P. Kretowicz3, B. Nowakowska1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,2Clinic of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Professor Witold Or łowski
Independent Public Clinical Hospital - Postgraduate
Medical Education Centre, Warsaw, Poland,3II
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Centerof Postgraduate Education (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland
The occurrence of aneuploidy is estimated at 5 - 11 % of all
fetuses. The most common are trisomies of chromosomes
13, 18, 21 and monosomy of the chromosome X.
Noninvasive prenatal screening tests allow the risk calcula-tion of the aneuploidies based on the patients age (above
35), biochemical markers (free β-hCG) and ultrasono-
graphic markers (nuchal translucency parameter). Theresults suggesting a high risk of aneuploidy give strong
indications for further invasive diagnostics.
The aim of this project was to evaluate the frequency of
chromosome aberrations other than aneuploidies in the
group of 204 patients with high risk of trisomy based on the
screening tests, where the ultrasound test did not show anyabnormalities. To perform the array diagnostic evaluation
DNA from uncultured amniotic ﬂuid, trophoblast or cul-
tured amniocytes was used.
Aneuploidy was identi ﬁed in 34/204 fetuses (17%).
Trisomy 21 was the most frequent abnormality (66%). The
trisomy 13 and 18 were detected in 3% and 11%, respec-tively, followed by X monosomy (11%), X mosaic
monosomy (3%) and sex chromosomes disomy (11%). In
10/204 cases (5%) structural aberrations of 115 kb to 41 Mbwere identi ﬁed. Two of them were classi ﬁed as potentially
pathogenic and 8 as pathogenic, where 4 were localized in1204the regions of known microdeletion and microduplication
syndromes.
Therefore, we postulate that CGH is the most reliable and
the fastest method for identi ﬁcation of genomic imbalances,
even in the cohort of patients with normal results of ultra-
sound examination.
M. Chojnacka: None. K. Sobecka: None. M. Bartnik-
Głaska: None. M. Smyk: None. I. Plaskota: None. B.
Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. M. Kędzior: None. J.
Bernaciak: None. K. Jakubów-Durska: None. E.
Obersztyn: None. T. Roszkowski: None. A. Kucińska-
Chahwan: None. P. Kretowicz: None. B.
Nowakowska: None.
P01.72D
Prenatal whole exome sequencing detects a novel
Fukutin ( FKTN ) mutation in a fetus with a suspected
recurrence of Dandy-Walker malformation
A. Traversa1, E. Marchionni2, A. Giovannetti2,
M. Genovesi2, S. Bernardo2, D. Guadagnolo2,
N. Panzironi2, G. Napoli2, B. Torres3, A. Paiardini4,
L. Bernardini3, T. Mazza5, M. Carella1, V. Caputo2,
A. Pizzuti2,1
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG),Italy,
2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy,3Laboratory of
Cytogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo dellaSofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy,
4Department
of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy,5Laboratory of
Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy
Introduction: Posterior fossa malformations are among the
most frequent Central Nervous System anomalies prenatally
detected. We report on a 17 weeks male fetus with anultrasonographic suspicion of Dandy-Walker Malformation
(DWM) recurrence. The previous pregnancy of the couple
had been interrupted at 22 gestational weeks following adiagnosis of DWM. We identi ﬁed the molecular cause using
Next Generation Sequencing in prenatal diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing
(WES) has been performed on fetal genomic DNA. After
reads pre-processing, mapping, variant calling and annota-
tion, a ﬁltering strategy based on allelic frequency, recessive
inheritance and phenotypic ontologies has been applied. A
fetal MRI at 18 gestational weeks has been performed. In
silico analysis of a potential causative variant in the Fukutinprotein has been carried out through a structural modeling
approach.Results: We identi ﬁed a novel homozygous missense
mutation (NM_006731.2, c.898G>A, p.Gly300Arg) in
Fukutin gene ( FKTN ), which is associated to Muscular
Dystrophy-Dystroglycanopathies. Fetal MRI supported
molecular ﬁndings. Structural modeling analyses indicated
a potential pathogenetic mechanism of the variant, througha reduced activation of the sugar moieties, which in turn
impairs transfer to α-dystroglycan and thus its glycosyla-
tion. These ﬁndings pointed to a rede ﬁnition of the ultra-
sonographic suspicion of DWM recurrence to a Muscular
Dystrophy-Dystroglycanopathy type A.
Conclusions: The present case con ﬁrmed WES as a
reliable tool for prenatal identi ﬁcation of molecular bases of
Central Nervous System phenotypes. Moreover, it high-
lights the importance of considering Muscular Dystrophy-Dystroglycanopathies when a posterior fossa anomaly is
early prenatally described.
Grant: Italian Ministry of Health, RC1801GC11
A. Traversa: None. E. Marchionni: None. A. Gio-
vannetti: None. M. Genovesi: None. S. Bernardo: None.
D. Guadagnolo: None. N. Panzironi: None. G. Napoli:
None. B. Torres: None. A. Paiardini: None. L. Bernar-
dini: None. T. Mazza: None. M. Carella: None. V.
Caputo: None. A. Pizzuti: None.
P01.73A
The advantage of comparative genomic hybridization(aCGH) over quantitative ﬂuorescence PCR (QF-PCR)
in genetic testing of chorions after miscarriage
K. Matuszewska
1,2, M. Piechota1, B. Wieckowska3,
K. Milanowska1, N. Kochalska1, A. Stachowiak1,
K. Lacna1, P. Puacz4, T. Olejniczak5, A. Latos-
Bielenska1,2
1Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland,3Department of
Medical Statistics and Information Technologies, PoznanUniversity of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland,
4Department of Mother and Child Health, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland,
5Division of Perinatology and Women ’s Diseases, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland
At least 60% of spontaneous abortions occur due to genetic
disease (most often chromosomal aberration) in the embryo
and fetus. Genetic testing of miscarriage material is veryimportant in order to determine the etiology of miscarriage
and to identify couples at risk.
In our laboratory two methods QF-PCR (for chromo-
somes: 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X, Y) - 827 chorions andAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1205aCGH (with resolution 12x135k or 8x60k) - 417 chorions
were used.
Chromosomal aberrations (numerical or structural) were
found in 56,5% of chorions analyzed by aCGH and in
52,5% tested by QF-PCR. Among chromosome aberrations
most frequent were trisomies (65,7%; most frequent trisomy16; trisomy 14 with the same frequency as trisomy 18), 45,
X (14%) and triploidy (13,1%). The higher number of
miscarriages identi ﬁed in an individual case, the smaller
percentage of abnormal results were observed.
Structural chromosomal aberrations including CNVs were
identi ﬁed in 13,6% of noneuploid miscarriages examined by
aCGH. Some CNVs were repeated and contained genes that
could be candidate genes critical for maintaining healthy
pregnancy. The most common micro-aberration (6 none-uploid chorions analyzed by aCGH) concerned the locus
3p21.31, and involved the DAG1 gene. The DAG1 is
expressed in the placenta during pregnancy. Literature datacorrelate de ﬁciency of alpha dystroglycan encoded by
DAG1 gene with embryonic lethality.
Introduction of aCGH to the diagnostics of miscarriages,
enabled the dynamic development of research on genetic
causes of recurrent pregnancy losses including other than
chromosomal aberrations.
K. Matuszewska: None. M. Piechota: None. B.
Wieckowska: None. K. Milanowska: None. N.
Kochalska: None. A. Stachowiak: None. K. Lacna: None.
P. Puacz: None. T. Olejniczak: None. A. Latos-
Bielenska: None.
P01.74B
Two years ’experience with molecular diagnostics of
RASopathies in prenatal cases
E. Svobodová
1, M. Matyá šová1, J. Kadlecová1,
D. N. Grochová1, P. Vla šín2
1Cytogenetická laborato řBrno, s.r.o., Brno, Czech
Republic,2Centrum prenatální diagnostiky, s.r.o., Brno,
Czech Republic
Introduction: RASopathies are a group of diseases with
similar symptoms caused by disruption of RAS/MAPK
pathway function. The most abundant diseases are Noonan
syndrome and neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1.
Materials and Methods: Resequencing of 20 selected
genes was performed by massive parallel sequencing
approach on samples with normal karyotype originatedfrom amniotic ﬂuid or chorionic villi tissue.
Results: Samples were indicated on the basis of ultra-
sound ﬁndings. From a total of 104 prenatal samples cau-
sative variant was found in 10 of them (detection rate 9,6
%). All those positive samples had severe ultrasoundﬁnding –increased nuchal translucency, hygroma coli,
cardiac abnormalities, excess amniotic ﬂuid, etc. Most fre-
quently causative variants were found in PTPN11 gene (4/
10). Surprisingly, in two cases (2/10) we have detected
variant in RIT1 , one of the recently reported gene for
Noonan syndrome. Especially in prenatal diagnostic var-iants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VOUS) pose a signi ﬁcant
problem. There is not enough information to sort them out
into classi ﬁcatory categories, so they complicate con-
secutive genetic consultation. In our group VOUS was
identi ﬁed in 14 samples (14/104; 13,5 %). However, seg-
regation analysis of the variants in family members helpedto clarify their signi ﬁcance in eight of them.
Conclusions: The aim of this study was to evaluate
clinical bene ﬁts of massive parallel sequencing in prenatal
diagnostics of cases suspected for RASopathy (i.e. detection
rate) and compare them to the fraction of detected VOUS.
In general, our results establish this approach as effectivebut with non-negligible number of uncertain ﬁndings.
E. Svobodová: None. M. Matyá šová: None. J. Kadle-
cová: None. D.N. Grochová: None. P. Vla šín:None.
P01.75C
1 out of 4 healthy individuals are carriers of a severerecessive or X-linked disease after using a panel of 15
genes
M. Sánchez-Soler
1,2, A. Urbano1,2,3,4, E. Montoya1,2,3,4,
I. Ochando1,2,3,4, R. Vázquez1,2, J. Rueda1,2,3,4
1Unidad de Genética, Hospital HLA Vistahermosa,
Alicante, Spain,2Cátedra de Biomedicina Reproductiva
Vistahermosa, UMH, Alicante, Spain,3Departamento
Histología, Facultad de Medicina, UMH, Alicante, Spain,
4E-GENETICARE, UMH, Parque Cientí ﬁco, Elche, Spain
Preconceptional tests use Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) to identify carriers of recessive and X-linked
diseases, with the aim of reducing the risk of offspringborn with these alterations. The goal of the present study is
to show the results of the implementation of a reduced
carrier screening test analyzed by NGS in a population of1097 healthy individuals who attend a reproduction center.
This test includes 15 genes associated with the 16 most
prevalent autosomal recessive and X ‐linked diseases in
Caucasian population, following the current recommenda-
tions of scienti ﬁc societies (high prevalence, severe, early
onset and with clear genotype-phenotype relation diseases).Among the total of individuals, 809 (73.7%) are women and
288 (26.3%) are men. 25.4% are carriers of at least 1
pathogenic or probably pathogenic alteration (22.5% have asingle mutation and 2.9% have two). Diseases with highest
probability of being a carrier are: cystic ﬁbrosis and1206congenital bilateral aplasia of vas deferens (1/13), GJB2-
related DFNB 1 non-syndromic hearing loss and deafness
(1/16), familial Mediterranean fever (1/42), spinal muscular
atrophy (1/50) and phenylketonuria (1/52). Out of the 809
women, 2.1% are carriers of a premutation (45-200 CGG
repeats) in the FMR1 gene, causative of X-fragile
syndrome. In conclusion, 1 out 4 patients without other
diseases who attend a reproduction center is a carrier of a
pathogenic alteration in one of the screened genes. This testidenti ﬁes the most frequent alterations that are at risk of
being transmitted to the offspring to promote the autonomy
of patients to make reproductive decisions.
M. Sánchez-Soler: None. A. Urbano: None. E. Mon-
toya: None. I. Ochando: None. R. Vázquez: None. J.
Rueda: None.
P01.77A
Genomic analyses in cases with reduced fertility andrecurrent fetal anomalies
K. Belemezova
1,2,3, M. Rizov1, R. Kaneva4, V. Peicheva4,
A. Kanev5, M. Hristova-Savova1, T. Milachich1,
A. Shterev1, I. Dimova1,4
1Medical complex „Dr Shterev “,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
2University Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski ”, Department of
Clinical Laboratory and Clinical Immunology, MedicalUniversity of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Tissue Bank BulGen,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,4Center of Molecular medicine, Medical
University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,5Military Medical
Academy, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Objective: Genomic aberrations are usually associated with
reduced fertility, recurrent abortions or fetal anomalies.
Establishment of the exact genetic diagnosis in such cases
has a great impact on the determination of the reproductiverisk and making a decision for reproductive options.
Design: In our study we have collected patient samples in
the following clinical cases of disturbed reproduction:infertility or repeated abortions, structural fetal anomalies
and intrauterine death.
Materials and Methods: We performed cytogenetic
analysis on lymphocytes from couples in all the listed above
cases (1425 samples) and array CGH analysis of abortion
samples in cases of disturbed fetal development(40 samples).
Results: Chromosomal alterations were established by
cytogenetic analysis in 93 patients (6.5%), distributed asfollows - 19 chromosomal translocations (1.3%), 7 numer-
ical X/Y aberrations (0.5%), 10 cases of X/Y mosaicism
(0.7%), 2 cases of mosaic marker (0.1%), 25 cases of chr9inversion (1.75%), 20 cases of acrocentric satellite poly-
morphisms (1.4%), 5 cases of pericentric heteromorphism1qh+and 9qh +(0.4%), 5 structural Y-chromosome aber-
rations (0.4%), 2 deletions of Xqter and 1 ring21 chromo-
some. In cases of fetal anomalies array CGH revealed
17р13.3 microdeletion (Miller-Dieker syndrome), 1p36
microdeletion, 22q11.21 microdeletion (Di George syn-
drome), 22q11.1 microduplication (Cat-eye syndrome),10q26.3 microdeletion (2 cases), 22q11.21 microduplica-
tion (2 cases), 15q11.2 microdeletion (3 cases), 17p11.2
microdeletion (Smith-Magenis syndrome).
Conclusions: In 6.5% of couples with reproductive fail-
ure chromosomal alterations were detected. There is a high
probability (about 30%) to reveal microstructural genomicaberrations by array CGH in cases of recurrent fetal
anomalies.
K. Belemezova: None. M. Rizov: None. R. Kaneva:
None. V. Peicheva: None. A. Kanev: None. M. Hristova-
Savova: None. T. Milachich: None. A. Shterev: None. I.
Dimova: None.
P01.79C
Using Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) forretinoblastoma survivors: cost-effectiveness and quality
of life improvements
M. Zeppel
1, D. Scho ﬁeld1, S. Staf ﬁeri2, R. Shrestha1,
D. Jelovic3, R. Jamieson4
1GenIMPACT, North Ryde, Australia,2Dept of
Ophthalmology, Royal Children ’s Hospital, Parkville,
Australia,3Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children ’s
Hospital at Westmead, Children ’s Medical Research
Institute, Save Sight Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW, Australia,4Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children ’s
Hospital at Westmead, Children ’s Medical Research
Institute, Save Sight Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia
Background: Retinoblastoma (Rb) is a paediatric cancer,
leading to loss of vision, eye(s) or life. Approximately 40%of patients have a heritable form of the disease, caused by a
mutation in RB1. Offspring of these individuals are at a 50%
risk of inheriting the disease. Aggressive and invasivetreatments in the ﬁrstﬁve years of life under general
anaesthetic, followed by regular monitoring until age 18,
impact the patient, family, hospital resources. Preimplanta-tion genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers alternative reproductive
choices for individuals with a heritable mutation. Costs of
genomic sequencing are rapidly declining, with increasingavailability of reproductive technologies.
Methods and Materials: We undertook a cost-
effectiveness study of access to PGD for survivors withheritable retinoblastoma. We modelled the cost of repro-
ductive technology, number of affected/unaffected births,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1207and quality of life gains, for parental uptake rates of PGD
from 0-100%. We included the costs of hospital visits from
0-18 years, and costs of IVF and PGD using three cycles (1
fresh, 2 frozen).
Results: In a cohort of retinoblastoma survivors, using in-
vitro fertilization (IVF) and PGD always led to cost-savings,and quality of life improvements, even at low uptake rates.
Cost-savings were $156,538 and 20.58 Quality Adjusted
Life years were gained for ten couples with 50% using PGDcompared to the natural pregnancy pathway.
Conclusions: IVF and PGD were always less expensive,
with higher quality-of-life compared with taking the naturalpregnancy approach. Affordable and accessible PGD will
lead to savings for families and health systems for families
with heritable retinoblastoma.
M. Zeppel: None. D. Scho ﬁeld: None. S. Staf ﬁeri:
None. R. Shrestha: None. D. Jelovic: None. R.
Jamieson: None.
P01.80D
Celiac disease predisposition and Recurrent pregnancyloss: HLA- genotyping
K. Sosnina
1, O. Terpyliak1, D. Zastavna1,2
1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv,
Ukraine,2Department of Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University
of Technology, Rzeszow, Poland
In recent years, has been discussed a relationship between
RPL and celiac disease (CD), one of the most common
intestinal disorders in the small intestine affecting up to 1%of individuals in Western populations. It is known that
susceptibility to CD is linked to certain human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) class II alleles, especially in the HLA-DQregion. In this context, the aim of this study was to
investigate the prevalence of the CD-predisposing alleles in
women with RPL.
Results: The presence of appropriate HLA alleles in 32
women with RPL and 33 women of control group was
determined. High CD predisposition was considered inindividuals with HLA alleles DQA1*0501, DQB1*0201-
0203 (encoding HLA-DQ2) and DQB1*0302 (encoding
HLA-DQ8), the presence of only the alleles DQA1*0501,DQB1*0201-0203 was considered as medium-high predis-
position CD and a low risk CD are related allele
DQB1*0302. A signi ﬁcantly higher frequency HLA-DQ2/
DQ8 haplotype in women with RPL compared to control
was established (21.88% vs. 3.03%, p<0.025). The geno-
type HLA-DQ2 is established with a signi ﬁcantly higher
frequency in women with RPL compared to control (34.8%
vs. 6.06%, p <0.005). The frequency of the HLA-DQ8genotype was almost the same in the study groups (18.75%
and 12.12%, p>0.05), and the absence of such CD-
predisposing alleles was signi ﬁcantly lower in women
with RPL compared to control (25% and 78.79%, p
<0.0001).
Conclusions: The study of a possible correlation between
HLA-DQ2/DQ8 haplotype and RPL might suggest new
diagnostic and therapeutical approaches for RPL women.
K. Sosnina: None. O. Terpyliak: None. D.
Zastavna: None.
P01.81A
Expanding our non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD)
service using droplet digital PCR
J. Shaw, S. Sheppard, N. Chandler, H. Ahlfors, L. Chitty
North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London,
United Kingdom
Introduction: NIPD where the mother carries a mutation is
hindered by the maternal mutant background in cell-free
DNA (cfDNA). Relative haplotype dosage analysis is used
in clinical laboratories for NIPD of recessive and X-linkeddisorders, however this technique requires DNA from both
parents and a proband. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) offers
high sensitivity for quanti ﬁcation of cfDNA and has
potential for use in carrier mothers via relative mutation
dosage using only a maternal sample. We have applied this
technology to sickle cell disease and 8 X-linked disorders todetermine clinical utility.
Methods: ddPCR assays were designed and validated
using gDNA for the pathogenic variant. Testing was per-formed on cfDNA from maternal plasma samples for
22 sickle cell risk pregnancies and 10 X-linked mutations.
Fetal fraction was determined using three different methods.Fetal genotype predictions were generated using sequential
probability ratio test, with results con ﬁrmed by invasive
sampling.
Results: For sickle cell disease, correct predictions of
fetal HBB genotype were generated for 11 samples, with 2
incorrect predictions and 9 inconclusive results. Incorrectand inconclusive predictions resulted from low fetal fraction
and threshold positioning during analysis. For X-linked
conditions, assay design has been successful and develop-ment of the analysis pipeline initiated.
Conclusions: ddPCR has the potential to be used for
NIPD for maternal mutation carriers using only a maternalsample. We will report testing of over 50 additional ongo-
ing cases to re ﬁne and validate the analysis pipeline to
further extend the scope of our NIPD clinical service.
J. Shaw: None. S. Sheppard: None. N. Chandler:
None. H. Ahlfors: None. L. Chitty: None.1208P01.82B
Comprehensive chromosome screening of human ﬁrst
polar bodies and oocytes using four different whole
genome ampli ﬁcation methods and single-cell next-
generation sequencing
A. Sarosiak1,2, I. Minota1, K. Koziol3, M. Oldak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate
School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Novum Fertility Clinic,
Warsaw, Poland
Background: Aneuploidy is the most frequent type of
chromosome aberration and the most signi ﬁcant clinically.
It occurs as a result of meiotic chromosomal malsegregation
during formation of a haploid oocyte by subsequentextrusion of two polar bodies: polar body ﬁrst (PB1) and
second (PB2). Based on meiosis mechanism, genome of a
single oocyte can be deduced by analyzing its sibling polarbodies.
Material and Methods: Next-generation sequencing
technology for comprehensive chromosome screening wasused to assess ploidy status of the oocytes and their sibling
PB1. A total of 120 single cells (60 PB1 and 60 oocytes)
were subjected for whole genome ampli ﬁcation (WGA)
using four different commercially available WGA kits and
analyzed using VeriSeq PGS kit on the MiSeq sequencer
(Illumina). Random samples were validated using genomicarrays (aCGH). Aneuploidy detection with the tested kits
was evaluated.
Results: Aneuploidy status was determined for 112 of
120 (93,3%) samples. In the group of well-ampli ﬁed PB1-
oocyte pairs (33/60) a 97% concordance between the
chromosomal status of PB1 and the corresponding oocytewas observed. Differences in WGA kits performance
including ampli ﬁcation uniformity and aneuploidy calling
potential were evaluated and the most optimal kit for PB1genome WGA was selected. Results from aCGH validation
of the randomly selected samples showed full consistency
with the NGS results.
Conclusions: NGS-based method used for PB1 genome
analysis showed a high predictive potential of PB1 in
deducing ploidy status of the corresponding oocyte and is apromising method for genetic preconception testing of
oocytes.
Supported by: POIR.02.03.02-14- 0092/17
A. Sarosiak: None. I. Minota: None. K. Koziol: None.
M. Oldak: None.P01.83C
What is the actual risk of couples carriers for the
mutation DHCR7 :c.964-1G>C?
H. Daum
1, V. Meiner1, R. Michaelson-Cohen2,
R. Sukenik-Halevy3,4, M. Levy-Zalzberg5, A. Bar-Ziv6,
A. Weiden7, S. Scher8, M. Shohat4,9,10, J. Zlotogora1
1Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel,2Medical Genetics Institute, Dept. of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, HebrewUniversity of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,
3Recanati
Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva,
Israel,4Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel
aviv, Israel,5Genetic Institute, Soroka, Beer sheva, Israel,
6The Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel hashomer, Israel,7Dor Yeshorim,
Committee for Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases,
Jerusalem, Israel,8Dor Yeshorim, Committee for
Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, Brooklyn, NY,United States,
9Bio-informatics department, Cancer center,
Sheba Medical center, Tel hashomer, Israel,10Institute of
Medical Genetics, Maccabi HMO, Rehovot, Israel
Introduction: Smith-Lemli-Opitz is an autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by variable expression includingmultiple congenital malformations, dysmorphic features,
metabolic derangement and intellectual disability. The
founder mutation DHCR7 :c.964-1G>C was introduced into
the Israeli preconception screening tests for Ashkenazi Jews
in 2017 since the carrier frequency of the mutation is high in
this population (1.2%). Despite the high carrier rate, thedisease itself is not known to be frequent in this population.
Discrepancy between the carrier and disease frequency
raises the question of the actual risks for affected offspringfor couples detected by the screening program.
Methods: We performed a literature review of all pub-
lications available with detailed information regardinghomozygous DHCR7 :c.964-1G>C fetuses/patients were
included. We also collected clinical data about the couples
identi ﬁed in the national screening program, such as
reproductive history.
Results: Out of 31 homozygous fetuses, six died in-utero
(IUFD), ten pregnancies were terminated during the secondtrimester and 15 children were born. All 15 died between
day one till three months of age. Reproductive history of
Smith-Lemli-Opitz at-risk couples showed that out of 61pregnancies, 32 spontaneous miscarriages were
reported (52%).
Discussion: Our observations support the previous
knowledge that homozygosity for c.964-1G>C in DHCR7
leads to a severe phenotype or early spontaneous abortion.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1209An unexpected observation was the excess of early spon-
taneous abortions. The reason for this is not clear and awaits
further studies.
H. Daum: None. V. Meiner: None. R. Michaelson-
Cohen: None. R. Sukenik-Halevy: None. M. Levy-Zalz-
berg: None. A. Bar-Ziv: None. A. Weiden: None. S.
Scher: None. M. Shohat: None. J. Zlotogora: None.
P01.85A
Developing quantitative real-time PCR for
preconception spinal muscular atrophy carrier
screening in Thai population
P. Chit ayanan1, B. Panthan2, S. Klumsathian2,
A. Charoenyingwattana2, W. Chantratita2, O. Trachoo3,2
1Panthupark Genetics Clinic, Bangkok, Thailand,2Center
for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine RamathibodiHospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand,
3Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe
neuromuscular disease and one of the most commonautosomal recessive diseases in children, caused by
homozygous absence of the survival motor neuron gene
(SMN1 ). Heterozygous exon 7 deletion of SMN1 is de ﬁned
as a carrier with the reported frequency of 1/40 to 1/50
worldwide. Clinical practice in many countries recommends
SMA carrier screening for most couples at thepreconception stage.
Materials and Methods: We developed a quantitative
real-time PCR protocol to detect SMN1 exon 7 deletion
(SMADX7 ™) as a cost-effective method, aiming to per-
form carrier screening in 430 Thai individuals visiting
preconception clinic. Validation of the method was done in100 positive and negative controls compared to standard
DHPLC method.
Results: The result of control testing was 100% con-
sistent between real-time PCR and DHPLC. Further popu-
lation screening revealed the SMA carrier frequency of 1/
72.
Conclusion: Developing of SMADX7 ™is an out-
standing strategy for SMA carrier screening in Thai popu-
lation due to good cost-bene ﬁt and rapid turnaround time
within 24 hours. Carrier frequency in our cohort seemed to
be lower than global frequency; however, additional sub-
jects are required to be enrolled, aiming to obtain thenational data that can represent overall carrier frequency.
Grants: Leader Medical Genetics and Genomics,
Co., Ltd.
P. Chitayanan: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Leader Medical Genetics and Genomics, Co., Ltd.B. Panthan: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Leader Medical Genetics
and Genomics, Co., Ltd.. S. Klumsathian: None. A.
Charoenyingwattana: None. W. Chantratita: None. O.
Trachoo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Leader Medical Genetics and
Genomics, Co., Ltd..
P01.86B
Detection and validation of subchromosomalaberrations detected as part of routine noninvasive
prenatal testing
M. Sekelská
1, A. Izsáková1, K. Kubo šová1, P. Tilandyová1,
E. Csekes1,Ž. Kúchová1, R. Luká čková2, D. Landlová2,
M. Hýblová2, M. Har šányová3, J. Budi š3, T. Szemes3,
P. Kri žan2, G. Minárik2
1Trisomy test Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Medirex Inc.,
Bratislava, Slovakia,3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal testing is based on
analysis of circulating DNA from blood of pregnant
women. Low coverage whole genome sequencing is able
to detect not only most commonly screened chromosomalaneuploidies but also different subchromosomal aberrations.
Aim: Aim of the work was prospective study of detection
and validation of subchromosomal aberrations of fetal ori-gin identi ﬁed as part of routine noninvasive prenatal testing.
Materials and Methods: From April 2016 till December
2018, more than 8000 samples of pregnant women usingIllumina NextSeq 500 platform were analysed. Low cov-
erage whole genome sequencing was used in combination
with optimized CNV detection algorithm.
Results: In tested cohort of patients different suchromo-
somal aberrations were detected in 32 samples. Half of
patients (16) refused con ﬁrmatory testing or we were not
able to get sample or feedback from the further management
of the patient. In second half of samples (16) DNA from
amniocenteses were available for con ﬁrmatory testing. Of
these cases 5 ﬁndings were con ﬁrmed and 11 were negative
after veri ﬁcation analyses. In samples with detected aber-
rations fetal fraction varied between 10,3 and 18,26 %. Thesmallest reported aberration was 1 Mb and the largest one
approx. 80 Mb long.
Conclusions: In this prospective study the possibility of
utilization of low coverage genomic sequencing for detec-
tion of subchromosomal aberrations over the whole genome
was con ﬁrmed. For proper estimations of sensitivity, spe-
ciﬁcity, NPV and PPV larger studies are necessary as1210samples signi ﬁcantly differ in crucial factors that are fetal
fraction, position and size of detected aberration.
M. Sekelská: None. A. Izsáková: None. K. Kubo šová:
None. P. Tilandyová: None. E. Csekes: None. Ž.
Kúchová: None. R. Luká čková: None. D. Landlová:
None. M. Hýblová: None. M. Har šányová: None. J.
Budi š:None. T. Szemes: None. P. Kri žan: None. G.
Minárik: None.
P01.87C
The risk of spontaneous abortion in subfertile couples
G. C. COZARU1,2, M. Aschie1,2, A. Mitroi1,2, C. Brinzan1,2
1CEDMOG - “Ovidius ”University of Constanta,
Constanta, Romania,2“Sf Apostol Andrei ”Emergency
Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Constanta,
Romania
Our research has gone from the observation that women
with a history of subfertility have been shown to haveincreased rates of subclinical early pregnancy loss, as
detected via human chorionic gonadotropin, relative to
women without a history of impaired fertility.
Objectives: The purpose of this study was to assess the
association between subfertility and spontaneous abortion.
Methods: A total of 122 women in Constanta reported
384 pregnancies between 2014 and 2018 and were able to
provide an estimate of the waiting time to conception for
276 (71.87% of the 384 eligible pregnancies). We notedretrospective data, including sociodemographic character-
istics, obstetric and medical history, genetic risk factors,
cigarette smoking, caffeine and alcohol consumption, andoccupational information. Rates of spontaneous abortion
were determined among women with and without sub-
fertility, and adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% con ﬁdence
intervals (CIs) were estimated via multiple logistic
regression.
Results: Multivariate logistic regression analyses with
generalized estimating equations indicated that spontaneous
abortion rates were 28.0% in pregnancies preceded by
subfertility and 17.0% in pregnancies without impairedfertility (adjusted OR =1.68, 95% CI =1.36, 2.84).
The attributable risk of spontaneous abortion associated
with subfertility was 6.9%.
Conclusions: Subfertile women evidence an increased
number of spontaneous abortions.
Research supported by CEDMOG, Ovidius University of
Constanta, POS CCE 2.21. Project, (ID 1844, SMIS
48750).
G.C. Cozaru: None. M. Aschie: None. A. Mitroi: None.
C. Brinzan: None.P01.88D
A molecular strategy increases the PGD accuracy for
Taiwan b-thalassemia population
Y. C. Li
1,2,3, Y. C. Chen1, H. H. Shih1, E. H. Cheng1,
Y. P. Lin1,Y .P .P a i1,M .S .L e e1,3,4
1Lee Women ’s Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan,2China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan,3Chung-Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan,4Chung-Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan
β-thalassemia carries over 1.1% prevalent rate in Taiwan
and has polymorphism variants coordinated with geogra-
phy. Both β-thalassemia carrier couple would transmit 1/4
risk of thalassemia major to their offspring in every
pregnancy. Thalassemia major patients require lifelong
transfusions, iron-chelation therapy and, an expensivesupport system. These bring a great socioeconomic burden
to the suffered family. PGD (preimplantation genetic
diagnosis) for β-thalassemia is conducted in IVF (in vitro
fertilization) to transfer an embryo without thalassemia
major to the uterus. The problem of allele dropout (ADO)
and preferential ampli ﬁcation highly exist in PGD involving
WGA (whole genome ampli ﬁcation) of blastocyst biopsies.
It had been reported that a combination of Sanger
sequencing and QF-PCR of STR markers increased thedetection rate of the mutated β-globin gene in PGD.
However, the uninformative STRs and ADO of the mutated
gene usually limited the validation of PGD. Moreover, theheterozygosity rate of STRs is highly population different.
In this study, we veri ﬁed several STRs for providing
enough informative STRs for Taiwan β-thalassemia popula-
tion. Our results showed that six linked STRs (D11S4146,
D11S1760, D11S1243, D11S4891, D11S2352, and
D11S1871) with highly heterozygous polymorphism andlow recombination rate in Taiwan population and would
achieve up to 99% diagnostic validation in PGD for
β-thalassemia. Furthermore, the multi ﬂuorescent PCR of
STRs conducted in a single tube for the linkage analysis of
the mutated β-globin gene provided a simple method for
performing the PGD of β-thalassemia major. This study was
supported from MOST of Taiwan (107-2314-B-040-019),
CSMU (104-OM-A-102), and CSMU-CCH (CSMUCCH-
102-06).
Y.C. Li: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Lee Women ’s Hospital. B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Chung-Shan
Medical University. Y.C. Chen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Lee Women ’s Hospital. H.H. Shih:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Lee
Women ’s Hospital. E.H. Cheng: A. Employment (full orAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1211part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Lee Women ’s Hospital. Y.P. Lin:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Lee Women ’s
Hospital. Y.P. Pai: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Lee Women ’s Hospital. M.S. Lee: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-niﬁcant; Chung-Shan Medical University.
P01.89A
Maternal and paternal genotypes analysis of
thrombophilic gene variants in the risk of reproductive
disorders in married couples
Z. I. Rossokha
1,2, O. F. Popova1, N. L. Medvedieva1,
L. P. Sheiko2, N. G. Gorovenko2
1State Institution “Reference-centre for molecular
diagnostic of Public Health Ministry of Ukraine ”, Kyiv,
Ukraine,2State Institution «Genetic and Regenerative
Medicine of the National Academy of Medical Sciences of
Ukraine», Kyiv, Ukraine
Introduction: Inherited thrombophilia is well de ﬁned.
Factor V Leiden mutation and prothrombin G20210Agenetic variants are classic thrombophilic determinants for
clinical manifestation of reproductive disorders. But new
genetic variants are discussed now. The aim of the study toevaluate the in ﬂuence of classic and new genetic variants on
reproductive disorders in married couples.
Materials and Methods: The genetic variants of Factor
V(G1691A, rs 6025), prothrombin (G20210A, rs 1799963),
PAI-I (675 5G/4G, rs 1799889), FGB (C148T, G-455A, rs
1800787 and rs 1800790) were analyzed in 206 coupleswith reproductive disorders (69 with unspeci ﬁed infertility/
137 with recurrent pregnancy loss) and 35 couples of
comparison group (who gave birth to one or two healthychildren). Frequency genotypes analysis was carried out
without taking into account the origin (maternal or paternal)
of genotypes. SNP Stats program were used for statisticalanalysis.
Results: There were found no signi ﬁcant differences for
prothrombin, Factor V and FGB genes variants amonginvestigated groups. 5G/5G genotypes were signi ﬁcantly
decreased among couples with reproductive disorders
(Table). We identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant dominant inheritance
models for PAI-I (5G/4G) gene ( χ²=5,16; p =0,023;
OR=0,51, 95%CI: 0,29-0,88) for reproductive failure in
couples.
Conclusions: We suppose that PAI gene has a bene ﬁcial
effect on reproductive function due to improved antic-
oagulant properties of blood when genotype 5G/5G inmarried couples present or for embryos this genotype are
predicted.Table. Distribution of genes variants
Gene
(polymorphicvariants)Genotypes Basic group,
n/%(n=412)Comparison
group, n/%(n=70)
Protrombin
(G20210A)GG 393/95,39 69/98,57
GA 19/4,61 1/1,43
AA 0/0,00 0/0,00
Factor V
(G1691A)GG 394/95,63 69/98,57
GA 17/4,13 1/1,43
AA 1/0,24 0/0,00
FGB
(C148T)CC 209/50,73 39/55,71
CT 180/43,69 28/40,00
TT 23/5,58 3/4,29
FGB
(-455 G/A)GG 226/54,85 40/57,14
GA 165/40,05 28/40,00
AA 21/5,10 2/2,86
PAI-I
(-675 5G/4G)5G/5G 82/19,90 23/32,86
5G/4G 203/49,27 29/41,43
4G /4G 127/30,83 18/25,71
Z.I. Rossokha: None. O.F. Popova: None. N.L. Med-
vedieva: None. L.P. Sheiko: None. N.G.
Gorovenko: None.
P01.90B
Droplet digital PCR multiplexing for fetal aneuploidy
detection
I. Zednikova1, M. Korabecna1, E. Pazourkova1,
S. Santorova1, P. Calda2, M. Brestak2,3, A. Horinek1
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic,
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic,3Screening
Center Pro ﬁG2, Prague, Czech Republic
Background: Nowadays, cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in
maternal plasma is routinely applied for non-invasive
prenatal testing (NIPT). Detection of the most common
fetal aneuploidies is ordinarily performed using NGStechnology. Low concentration of cffDNA in maternal
circulation prevents the utilization of cheaper and simpler
technology - droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). The aim of ourstudy was to overcome this problem by target multiplexing.
Methods: Three genes on chromosome 21 and chromo-
some 18 were absolutely quanti ﬁed in one ddPCR reaction
(hexaplex). Targets on different chromosomes were dis-
tinguished using different labelling (FAM/HEX). Expected1212FAM/HEX ratio for DNA with normal karyotype is 1. In
case of fetal trisomy of 21 or 18, the ratio will be de ﬂected
accordingly. Arti ﬁcial mixtures of euploid and trisomic
DNA were used for pilot study.
Results: DNA with normal karyotype was systematically
mixed with DNA with trisomy of 21 (0%; 5%; 10%; 20%;40%); chromosome 18 was used as a reference chromosome
in this case. Eight replicates for each mixture were per-
formed. Detected FAM/HEX ratios always corresponded tothe expected ratios for respective mixtures. Even the lowest
representation of aneuploid DNA (5%) was correctly
detected.
Conclusion: After promising results of the initial phase
with the arti ﬁcial mixtures, the optimized work ﬂow will
now be applied for the analysis of plasma of pregnantwomen. This method could be applicable for detection of
trisomy 21 or 18 in the same reaction, as both trisomies
together have never been observed. Supported by theMinistry of Health of the Czech Republic RVO VFN64165
I. Zednikova: None. M. Korabecna: None. E.
Pazourkova: None. S. Santorova: None. P. Calda: None.
M. Brestak: None. A. Horinek: None.
P01.91C
Clinical implementation of diagnostic whole exome
sequencing for fetal multiple congenital anomalies on
ultrasound
N. Corsten-Janssen, J. C. D. Diphoorn, K. Bouman, J. El
Mecky, J. B. G. M. Verheij, W. S. Kerstjens, A. Scheper,R. Kinds, I. M. van Langen, R. J. Sinke, R. H. Sijmons,
B. Sikkema-Raddatz, H. Westers, C. C. van Diemen
Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen,
Netherlands
Introduction: Identifying the cause of fetal anomalies seen
on ultrasound provides important information for perinatalmanagement, but we can diagnose only ~40% of fetuses
using conventional genetic tests (QF-PCR and microarray).
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) may improve diagnosticyield, but is challenging due to uncertainties around fetal
phenotyping, variant interpretation, ethical/counseling
issues of incidental ﬁndings and variants of unknown
clinical signi ﬁcance, and the requirement of short turn-
around times. In this study, we implemented WES in
prenatal care to increase our diagnostic yield.
Materials and Methods: We conducted a prospective
study of rapid trio WES analysis next to conventional
genetic tests for twenty- ﬁve fetuses with ultrasound
abnormalities. Inclusion criteria were at least two congenital
malformations on ultrasound or one congenitalmalformation in a fetus with a sib with similar phenotype,
without known genetic cause. We performed trio WES
analysis using a custom virtual gene-panel (~3,800 OMIM
genes, excluding late-onset disease genes).
Results: We established an additional genetic WES-based
diagnosis in nine fetuses, being: syndromes of MIRAGE(SAMD9 ), Zellweger ( PEX1 ), Walker Warburg
(POMGNT1 ), Noonan ( PTNP11 ), Kabuki (KMT2D ),
CHARGE ( CHD7 ); two cases of Osteogenesis Imperfecta
type 2 ( COL1A1 ), and one potential diagnosis in a fetus
with hydrops ( MYH7 ). In six out of 25 cases the WES
diagnosis aided in perinatal management. The mean turn-around time was 10 (range 6-15) working days.
Conclusion:
Our prospective study shows that imple-
menting WES as a routine test in the prenatal setting ischallenging, but technically feasible and has a promising
diagnostic yield and signi ﬁcant clinical relevance.
N. Corsten-Janssen: None. J.C.D. Diphoorn: None. K.
Bouman: None. J. El Mecky: None. J.B.G.M. Verheij:
None. W.S. Kerstjens: None. A. Scheper: None. R.
Kinds: None. I.M. van Langen: None. R.J. Sinke: None.
R.H. Sijmons: None. B. Sikkema-Raddatz: None. H.
Westers: None. C.C. van Diemen: None.
P01.92D
CNVs with unknown signi ﬁcance on chromosome 15 in
prenatal samples
K. Markova, R. Mansfeldova, V. Becvarova, H. Pekova,
T. Marie, M. Spacirova, B. Laposova, J. Starkova,V. Sucha, P. Sidova, J. Horacek, M. Koudova, D. Stejskal
Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech RepublicIntroduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is
increasingly used in prenatal diagnostics. It provides betterresolution than conventional karyotyping, nevertheless,
CNVs with variable expressivity and low penetrance require
a proper interpretation attitude.
Materials and Methods: More than 2200 prenatal sam-
ples (AMC, CVS) were examined at our clinic within the
last two years. In 9.8% samples an aneuploidy was detectedby QFPCR. The remaining samples were analyzed by CMA
as aﬁrst-tier test: samples were assessed by array CGH (or
SNP-array) and analyzed with AgilentCytoGenomics soft-ware. Parental samples were analyzed using CMA to spe-
cify the origin of the identi ﬁed aberrations.
Results: 72 CMA analyzed samples were considered to
be pathogenic (out of them 56 below karyotype resolution)
while additional 112 cases as variants of unknown sig-
niﬁcance: class 2, 3 and 4 (likely benign, uncertain clinical
relevance, likely pathogenic) or without subclassi ﬁcation.
Most frequent VOUS were identi ﬁed on chromosomes 15Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1213(19), 16 (8) and X (13). Prominent CNVs were del/dup
15q11.2 (BP1BP2) and del/dup 15q13.2q13.3 encompass-
ing signi ﬁcant genes NIPA1 and CHRNA7, respectively.
These CNVs are associated with neurodevelopmental dis-
orders, autism and behavioral problems. Penetrance is
incomplete and expressivity varies greatly. Databases, lit-erature search and familial genealogy did not prove de ﬁnite
pathogenicity. The most of these CNVs was inherited and
all traceable pregnancies with normal ultrasound continued.
Conclusion: All fetuses with VOUS on chromosome 15
except one had normal ultrasound. CNVs identi ﬁed on
chromosome 15 except deletion of CHRNA7, weredescribed as likely benign with respect to prevailing par-
ental origin and normal ultrasound.
K. Markova: None. R. Mansfeldova: None. V. Bec-
varova: None. H. Pekova: None. T. Marie: None. M.
Spacirova: None. B. Laposova: None. J. Starkova: None.
V. Sucha: None. P. Sidova: None. J. Horacek: None. M.
Koudova: None. D. Stejskal: None.
P01.93A
Preconception carrier screening: effect of reporting
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance in partners of carriers
with clinically signi ﬁcant variants
H. Fridman
1,2,3, D. Behar4, S. Carmi2, E. Levy-Lahad1,3
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Braun School of Public Health and
Community Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,Jerusalem, Israel,
3Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,4Igentify, Tirat
Hacarmel, Israel
Background: Expanded preconception carrier screening
(ECS) panels can identify at-risk couples for multiplediseases. ECS reports are currently limited to pathogenic/
likely-pathogenic variants (PV/LPV). Variants of unknown
signiﬁcance (VOUS) are not reported, even though
reporting VOUS is routine in genomic and chromosomal
array testing in both postnatal and prenatal settings. This
policy misses pairings of PV/LPV carriers with VOUScarriers (PV/LPV*VOUS), who may be at-risk. To evaluate
the importance of this omission, we examined the rates and
characteristics of PV/LPV*VOUS virtual matings in anAshkenazi-Jewish (AJ) cohort, a population with well-
established preconception screening. Methods: We ana-
lyzed 672 AJ genomes (225,456 virtual couples) forvariants in different gene-panels (exons ±10bp): AJ (55
genes), pan-ethnic (168 genes) and combined (180 genes),
using an ACMG classi ﬁer.
Results: Across 180 genes, we identi ﬁed 4671 variants,
among them 144 (3.1%) were PV/LPV and 1963 (42%)were VOUS. The proportion of matings who were PV/
LPV*PV/LPV was 2.7-3.8% (depending on the panel),
similar to previous reports. The proportion of PV/
LPV*VOUS matings was 17-20%. Considering only exo-
nic, non-UTR VOUS resulted in a decreased proportion of
PV/LPV*VOUS matings to ≈7%. Most (65-70%) PV/
LPV*VOUS matings were at risk for severe/profoundly-
severe diseases, while only 6-7% were at risk for mild
diseases.
Conclusions: Non-reporting of VOUS in ECS may miss
at-risk couples for severe diseases. Reporting PV/
LPV*VOUS couples would triple the proportion of at-riskcouples, even if considering only exonic, non-UTR VOUS.
Even if only 10% of VOUS are ultimately reclassi ﬁed as
PV/LPV, reporting PV/LPV*VOUS would increase theyield of ECS by ≈25%.
H. Fridman: None. D. Behar: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Igentify. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Igentify. S. Carmi: None. E. Levy-
Lahad: None.
P01.94B
Incidence of Y chromosome microdeletion in differentworld populations: systematic review
A. Kurtovic-Kozaric
1,2, H. Komic2,3, L. Mehinovic2,
M. Kozaric4, I. Eminovic2, Z. Halilovic5
1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Department of Clinical
Pathology, Cytology and Human Genetics, Clinical Center
of the University of Sarajevo,, Sarajevo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,2Department of Genetics, Biology Section,
Faculty of Science, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo,
Bosnia and Herzegovina,3TIMM Laboratory at
Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg,Gothenburg, Sweden,
4Clinic of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo,
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina,5Laboratory of Human
Genetics, Department of Clinical Pathology, Cytology and
Human Genetics, Clinical Center of the University of
Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletions in azoosper-
mia factor (AZF) sub-regions of its long arm are the secondmost frequent genetic cause of male infertility. The aim of
this study was to analyze data on Y chromosome
microdeletion world-wide.
Materials and Methods: A recall search yielded 924
papers, 73 papers met the inclusion criteria. Risk of bias
was the size of tested population (>100 men) and itsapplication excluded 31 studies, yielding 42 papers for ﬁnal
analysis.1214Results: The mean Y microdeletion frequency for all
included studies was 8.35% (n =32996), and 6.4%
(n=31552) for the studies that passed risk of bias criteria.
The mean Y microdeletion frequencies per continent
(Asian, American, European and African) were 9%, 6.83%,4.45% and 3.97%, respectively. The highest frequencies
were detected in South Korean (38%) and Syrian (28%)
populations. The lowest frequencies were in Danish (0.7%)
and Croatian (0.9%) populations. The frequencies among
AZF sub-regions showed the same pattern in almost all
The frequencies of different AZF sub-region microdeletions in different world populations
Continent Country AZFa AZFb AZFc AZFa +b AZFa +c AZFb +c AZFa +b+c Ref.
EUROPE Denmark 0% 1.54% 92.30% 0% 0% 3.08% 3.08% Olesen et al. 2017
0% 0% 66.67% 0% 0% 33.33% 0% Bor et al. 2002
Slovakia 25% 0% 50% 0% 0% 12.5% 12.5% Behulova et al. 2011
Netherlands 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Dohle et al. 2002;
0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Paracchini et al. 2000
Slovenia 10% 0% 50% 0% 0% 20% 20% Peterlin et al. 2002
Italy 11.11% 8.08% 65.66% 0% 0% 13.13% 2.02% Ferlin et al. 2007
Germany 5.26% 10.53% 78.95% 0% 0% 5.26% 0 Maurer et al. 2001
Croatia 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Medica et al. 2005
Turkey 3.81% 3.81% 49.52% 0% 0% 26.67% 16.19% Kumtepe et al. 2009
21% 25% 42% 0% 4% 8% 0% Cavkaytar et al. 2012
Latvia 0% 0% 60% 0% 0% 0% 40% Puzuka et al. 2011
UK 0% 38.46% 38.46% 0% 0% 15.38% 7.70% Mascarenhas et al. 2016
Czech 0% 0% 62.50% 0% 0% 37.50% 0% Machatkova et al,.2002
Sweden 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% Österlund et al. 2000
Macedonia 0% 0% 88.89% 0% 0% 11.11% 0% Plaseski et al. 2006
ASIA Japan 0% 30% 60% 0% 0% 10% 0% Nakashima et al.2002
China 4.7% 4% 73.30% 0% 0% 11.30% 6.7% Zhu et al. 2016
2.22% 13% 75% 0% 0% 9.62% 0% Elfateh et al. 2014
2.01% 4.7% 75.18% 0% 1.34% 14.09% 2.68% Zhang et al. 2013
India 16.67% 33.33% 33.33% 0% 0% 16.67% 0% Abid et al. 2008
22.22% 11.11% 33.33% 0% 0% 33.33% 0% Mitra et el. 2008
0% 12.5% 37.5% 37.5% 0% 12.5% 0% Dada et al. 2006
Thailand 0% 33.33% 50% 0% 0% 16.67% 0% Vutyavanich et al. 2007
South Korea 0% 0% 73.64% 0% 0% 26.36% 0% Choi et al. 2013
4.95% 7.92% 54.46% 0% 0% 23.76% 8.91% Kim et al. 2012
Sri Lanka 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Wettasinghe et al. 2012
Jordan 0% 0% 66.7% 0% 0% 33.3% 0% Khabour et al. 2014
Kuwait 0% 0% 28.57% 0% 0% 71.43% 0% Mohammed et al. 2007
11.1% 0% 55.6% 0% 0% 33.30% 0% Alkhalaf & Al-Shoumer, 2010
Iran 0% 0% 50% 0% 0% 50% 0% Saliminejad et al. 2012
Pakistan 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Siddiqui et al. 2013
Palestine 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Shaqalaih et al. 2009
Saudi Arabia 0% 12.5% 75% 0% 12.5% 0% 0% Hellani et al. 2006
Israel 0% 12.5% 87.5% 0% 0% 0% 0% Kleiman et al. 1999
Middle East 9.09% 42.43% 30.30% 0% 0% 18.18% 0% Alhalabi et al. 2013
AFRICA Tunisia 0% 10% 30% 0% 0% 30% 30% Rajeb et al. 2008
0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Hammami et al. 2014
Morocco 0% 0% 50% 0% 0% 50% 0% Imken et al. 2007
AMERICA Brazil 8.33% 0% 58.33% 0% 0% 25% 8.33% Pina-Neto et al. 2006
US 2.68% 11.41% 52.35% 0% 0% 21.48% 12.08% Stahl et al. 2010
5% 5% 64% 0% 0% 17% 9% Hofherr et al. 2011Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1215studies, with AZFc being most frequent (90.5%), followed
by AZFb +c.
Conclusion: Isolated AZFc microdeletion was the most
frequent, except for Croatian, Swedish, Kuwaiti and Middle
East populations. These results can serve as a basis for
creating future guidelines for genetic diagnostics of maleinfertility.
A. Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. H. Komic: None. L.
Mehinovic: None. M. Kozaric: None. I. Eminovic: None.
Z. Halilovic: None.
P02
Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain)
P02.01C
PAX6 gene analysis for aniridia patients: single
Lithuanian centre experience in 2017-2018 years period
R. Traberg, V. Asmoniene, D. Cereskevicius, M. Sukys
Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kauno
klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania
Introduction: Aniridia is a very rare congenital panocular
disorder characterized by complete or partial iris hypopla-
sia.PAX6 gene mutations occur in around 90% of aniridia
cases. Two-thirds of aniridia cases are inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern and 1/3 are sporadic cases.
Materials and Methods: PAX6 gene analysis was per-
formed for patients who were diagnosed with isolated and
syndromic aniridia. Their ﬁrst line and/or affected family
members also was analysed. The PAX6 gene was analysed
by Sanger sequencing (2-13 exones). If no point mutations
were found, analysis was extended to deletion/ duplication
search with multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁca-
tion (MLPA) kit ( MRC-Holland SALSA MLPA P219 PAX6
kit).
Results: 5 families and 3 single cases were tested for
PAX6 gene mutations in 2 years period (2017 - 2018) (20
analyses altogether). Six different mutations were found in
15 (75%) cases: 1 missense mutation, 1 intragenic deletion,4 nonsense mutations. The 2 truncating mutations
(c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) and c.392_393delTA (p.
Ile131Thrfs*15)) were newly described. De novo PAX6
gene variant c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) was found for
patient, who diagnosed with aniridia and doubled kidney.
PAX6 gene variant c.392_393delTA (p.Ile131Thrfs*15)
was found for family members with isolated aniridia.
Members of one family with various clinical presentation
(unilateral aniridia and Peters anomaly, cataracts, opticnerve hypoplasia) shared missense variant of unknown
signiﬁcance c.422T>C (p.Leu141Pro).Conclusions: We would like to suggest that PAX6 gene
variants c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) and c.392_393delTA (p.
Ile131Thrfs*15) are cause of aniridia for our patients.
R. Traberg: None. V. Asmoniene: None. D. Cereske-
vicius: None. M. Sukys: None.
P02.02D
The role of next-generation sequencing in the
differential diagnosis of congenital iris anomalies
F. Blanco-Kelly, M. Tarilonte, C. Villaverde, S. T. Swa ﬁri,
A. Arteche, A. Avila-Fernandez, J. Moya, I. Lorda,M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Ayuso, M. Corton
Genetics Department, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-
CIBERER, UAM, Madrid, Spain
Abnormal development of the iris is a feature of severalcongenital ocular malformations. Classical aniridia, the
most common form, is a panocular disease characterized by
iris and foveal hypoplasia, keratopathy, cataracts andglaucoma, caused by PAX6 haploinsuf ﬁciency. The pre-
sence of variable expressivity and phenotypic overlapping
with other types of anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD)hinders the genetic characterization of atypical presentations
of aniridia. Here, we evaluate the usefulness of NGS to
improve the clinical diagnosis of these pathologies. Acohort of 106 families was studied, including cases with
classical aniridia or atypical forms (iris hypoplasia, atrophy
or coloboma). The entire PAX6 gene and other 260 genes
associated with ocular malformations were analyzed using
custom targeted NGS and aCGH approaches, as well as
clinical or whole exome and/or Sanger sequencing. About82% of the cases presented likely pathogenic variants or
CNVs in 5 different genes. Defects in PAX6 explain 75% of
cases, including not only all characterized cases withclassical aniridia, but also 30% of patients with more
atypical presentations, in whom LOF or atypical missense
and non-coding variants were identi ﬁed, respectively. Other
aniridia-like patients presented pathogenic variants in ASD-
related genes or variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in
candidate genes. Molecular analysis of iris malformationspresents high diagnostic yield not only in cases with
classical aniridia (95%) but also in patients with aniridia-
like phenotypes (>50%). Our work evidences the clinicalutility of differential genetic studies based on NGS in
patients with congenital iris anomalies.
Grants: ISCIII (PI17_01164, CPII17_00006), FEDER
and Conchita Rabago Foundation.
F. Blanco-Kelly: None. M. Tarilonte: None. C. Villa-
verde: None. S.T. Swa ﬁri:None. A. Arteche: None. A.
Avila-Fernandez: None. J. Moya: None. I. Lorda: None.1216M. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. C. Ayuso: None. M.
Corton: None.
P02.03A
Genotype-phenotype correlations in congenital PAX6-
associated aniridia
T. A. Vasilyeva1, V. V. Kadyshev1, A. A. Voskresenskaya2,
N. V. Petrova1, A. V. Marakhonov1,3, R. A. Zinchenko1,4
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Cheboksary branch of S. Fyodorov Eye
Microsurgery Federal State Institution, Cheboksary,
Russian Federation,3Far Eastern Federal University,
Vladivostok, Russian Federation,4Pirogov Russian
National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Objectives: Aniridia is an autosomal dominant severe
panocular disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the
PAX6 gene or large chromosomal aberrations affecting
11p13 region. Aniridia phenotype varies greatly. Based on
the occurrence of several aniridia characteristics in groups
of patients with the same type of PAX6 mutation, genotype
—phenotype correlations were analyzed.
Methods: 155 patients from 129 unrelated families were
examined in the course of the earlier study, 118 patientswere found to have intragenic pathogenic variants while 37
others have large chromosomal deletions. Patients were
allocated into 6 groups according to the type of PAX6
mutation: missense, nonsense, frame shifting, splicing, 3 ′-
cis-regulatory region deletions, and all other 11p13 chro-
mosome deletions. Data on six frequently observed aniridiceye anomalies were collected: complete or partial aniridia,
cataract, glaucoma, kerathopathy, fovea hypoplasia, and
nystagmus. Fisher ’s exact test with Benjamini —Hochberg
correction for multiple testing was applied for 2×2 con-
tingency tables created to compare occurrence of each
ocular sign in the group of patients with one type ofmutations versus the corresponding occurrence in the group
with all other mutations.
Results: Only patients with 3 ′-cis-regulatory region
deletions signi ﬁcantly more often develop a distinct and
milder aniridia phenotype without kerathopathy, fovea
hypoplasia and nystagmus. Identi ﬁed missense and splicing
mutations were associated with severe aniridia phenotype
and in their consequences could not be distinguished from
the loss-of-function mutations.
Conclusions: Revealed genotype-phenotype correlations
inPAX6 -associated aniridia suggests common disease
mechanism for all mutations except for 3 ′-cis-regulatory
region deletions.
Supported by grant RSF №17-15-01051.T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.A.
Voskresenskaya: None. N.V. Petrova: None. A.V. Mar-
akhonov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.
P02.04B
Congenital aniridia caused by new PAX6 variantsinvolving exonic cryptic-splicing sites
M. Tarilonte, P. Ramos, J. Moya, C. Villaverde, G. Sanz,
S. T. Swa ﬁri, B. Gener, F. Blanco-Kelly, C. Ayuso,
M. Corton
IIS - University Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid,
Spain
Congenital aniridia is a panocular disease, with a worldwide
incidence of 1:50.000-100.000 births, characterized by iris
and foveal hypoplasia and additional anomalies in thecornea, anterior segment and lens, leading to low visual
acuity. Up to 90% of the aniridia cases carried monoallelic
loss-of-function variants causing haploinsuf ﬁciency of
PAX6 , a highly-conserved transcriptional regulator that is
critical for normal ocular development. Here, we aimed to
assess functionally the implication on splicing of different
exonic and intronic variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS), mainly located in the PAX6 homeodomain. First,
novel VUS including synonymous, missense and non-canonical splicing variants were identi ﬁed in our cohort of
87 Spanish families with aniridia after classical genotyping
and/or targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) of theentire PAX6 locus. No additional pathogenic variants were
found in other 250 eye developmental genes. Functional
splicing assays were performed using in silico predictors,
in vitro minigenes and, when available, patients-derived
lymphocytes cell lines. We described new spliceogenic
mechanisms for PAX6 variants through activating different
exonic cryptic donors as the most plausible cause for
congenital aniridia in several families. These included an
additional case of parental PAX6 mosaicism, as con ﬁrmed
by digital-droplet PCR, for a synonymous variant in an
asymptomatic mother with two affected siblings. In
conclusion, clinical interpretation of silent and non-canonical splicing variants represents a real challenge for
the genetic counseling. Our study revealed the importance
of functional studies to elucidate the role of non-codingPAX6 variants underlying ocular development.
Grants: ISCIII (PI17_01164, CPII17_00006), FEDER
and Conchita Rabago Foundation
M. Tarilonte: None. P. Ramos: None. J. Moya: None.
C. Villaverde: None. G. Sanz: None. S.T. Swa ﬁri:None.
B. Gener: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. C. Ayuso: None.
M. Corton: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1217P02.05C
Preliminary results from a new GWAS meta-analysis
point at new loci for age-related hearing loss (ARHL)
M. Brumat1, A. Morgan1, M. Cocca2, M. Mezzavilla2,
G. Van Camp3, E. Fransen4, G. Biino5, U. Ambrosetti6,
D. Toniolo7, S. Ghiselli2, P. Gasparini1,2, G. Girotto1,2
1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences,
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,2Institute for Maternal
and Child Health - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,
3Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and
Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium,
4Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,5Institute of Molecular
Genetics, National Research Council of Italy, Pavia, Italy,
6Audiologia, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy,
7Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics,
S. Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy
Introduction: With the progressive ageing of world
population, there is a need to further investigate the genetic
base of late-onset disorders such as ARHL. With this study,we aim to increase our knowledge of this complex disease.
Materials and Methods: We performed a case-control
GWAS analysis on 2663 subjects (aged > =50) coming
from Italy, Northern Europe and Caucasus clinically char-
acterized including the audiometric phenotype. Cases and
controls were classi ﬁed as previously described
(DOI:10.3109/21695717.2014.911472). Genotype data
were imputed using 1000Gph3 reference panel. Results
were pooled together with METAL. Replication of resultswas performed with UK-Biobank data (ie. speech-in-noise
phenotype). Analyses on natural selection in European
populations were performed and integrated haplotype scores(iHS) on signi ﬁcant GWAS results were collected.
Results: Meta-analysis identi ﬁed some strongly sig-
niﬁcant loci. To prioritize these genes, signals of selection
were checked to evaluate the presence of genetic variants
that could have some evolutionary role and a stronger
effect. A signi ﬁcant hit on chr5 was detected in a gene/
protein (|iHS|score>2) catalysing the conversion of homo-
cysteine to other amino-acids. Signal of selection was pre-
sent in North European populations, but absent in SouthEuropean ones. Interestingly, literature showed a relation-
ship between hyperhomocysteinemia induced by folate
deﬁciency and premature hearing loss, prompting further
investigation and discussion on these results.
Conclusions: As the association signal is mainly driven
by Northern Italian and European populations, a population-speciﬁc haplotype involved in folate metabolism should
also implicated directly or indirectly in ARHL.M. Brumat: None. A. Morgan: None. M. Cocca: None.
M. Mezzavilla: None. G. Van Camp: None. E. Fransen:
None. G. Biino: None. U. Ambrosetti: None. D. Toniolo:
None. S. Ghiselli: None. P. Gasparini: None. G.
Girotto: None.
P02.06D
Multi-level evidence of an allelic hierarchy of USH2A
variants; hearing loss, auditory processing and speech/language outcomes
P. A. Perrino
1, L. Nedevska2, R. Reader3,4, A. Hill5,
WGS500 Consortium, A. R. Rendall1, H. S. Mountford2,
A. N. Buscarello1, N. Lahiri6, A. Saggar6, R. H. Fitch1,
D. F. Newbury2
1Department of Psychological Science/Behavioral
Neuroscience, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, UnitedStates,
2Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford
Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom,3Wellcome
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, UnitedKingdom,
4School of Veterinary Medicine and Science,
University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, United
Kingdom,5Centre for Child & Adolescent Health,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom,6Institute of
Molecular and Clinical Sciences, University of London & St
George ’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Hearing and auditory processing are funda-
mental to language development. Genetic mechanisms that
alter these processes may therefore have secondary effects
on emergent language. In this work, we consider variationsacross the USH2A gene and characterise an allelic hierarchy
associated with alternate and distinct clinical manifestations
including Auditory Processing Disorder (APD), Develop-mental Language Disorder (DLD) and Usher syndrome.
Materials and Methods: This investigation combines
whole genome sequencing data from a family affected by asevere form of APD and speech dysarthria with genetic
characterisation of two large population cohorts; the Avon
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) andUK10K. To compliment human ﬁndings, a mouse model
with a genetic knockout of the rodent homolog Ush2a was
assessed for auditory processing and vocalizations.
Results: Combined human and mouse results show: (1)
heterozygous USH2A disruptions lead to impaired low-
frequency sound perception; (2) low-level hearing impair-ments caused by heterozygous disruption of Ush2a
associate with persistent higher-order acoustic processing
deﬁcits and altered vocalizations in mice; and (3) risk var-
iants of USH2A combined with altered low-frequency1218hearing thresholds lead to signi ﬁcantly worse language
outcomes in humans.
Conclusions: We identify a complex, interactive genetic
mechanism under which variants in USH2A contribute to
low-frequency hearing loss and alter higher-order auditory
processing increasing the risk of language disorder. Sincethese variants are found in 0.85% of the population, we
recommend comprehensive genetic screening to enable the
early identi ﬁcation of carrier individuals alongside speci ﬁc
assessment of low-frequency hearing in individuals at risk.
P.A. Perrino: None. L. Nedevska: None. R. Reader:
None. A. Hill: None. A.R. Rendall: None. H.S. Mount-
ford: None. A.N. Buscarello: None. N. Lahiri: None. A.
Saggar: None. R.H. Fitch: None. D.F. Newbury: None.
P02.07A
Expanding the mechanisms underlying CEP290
pleiotropy: about 4 cases
I. Barny
1, I. Perrault1, S. Thomas1, T. Attié-Bitach1,
M. Rio2, C. Hamel3, H. Dollfus4, S. Defoort-Dhellemmes5,
J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1, X. Gerard1
1Institut Imagine, Paris, France,2IHU Necker Enfants
Malades, Paris, France,3Institut des Neurosciences de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,4Centre de référence
pour les affections génétiques ophtalmologiques CARGO,Strasbourg, France,
5CHRU de Lille, Lille, France
Introduction: CEP290 is pivotal for the assembly/main-
tenance of primary and motile cilia in a wide range of cells.
Consistently, CEP290 mutations cause a spectrum of
ciliopathies ranging from Leber congenital amaurosis(LCA10) to embryo-lethal Meckel syndrome (MKS).
LCA10 manifests invariably as a congenital and dramati-
cally severe cone-dominant disease with visual functionreduced to light perception. Here, we report 4 individuals
with some preserved vision despite biallelism for presum-
ably severe CEP290 mutations and functional analysis in
ﬁbroblasts we performed to better understand the molecular
bases of CEP290 pleiotropy.
Materials and Methods: in silico , mRNA, protein and
ciliation analyses were performed in P1 (p.Ile556Phefs*17,
homozygous), P2 (p.Lys170*/p.Glu1364*), P3.1 and P3.2
(c.1824 +3A>G/ p.Asn2290Lysfs*6) and controls.
Results: mRNA analysis of P1 and P2 mRNA revealed
spontaneous skipping of exons encompassing the premature
stop codons by mechanisms involving basal exon-skipping(BES) and nonsense-associated altered splicing (NAS)
individually or in combination. Protein analysis detected
small amounts of a CEP290 protein and unaltered ciliationability compared to controls. In contrast, we detected no
BES or NAS which could have enabled the production ofPTC-free CEP290 isoforms from the mutant allele carrying
the c.6869dup in the ﬁbroblasts from P3.1 and P3.2.
However, we detected some correctly spliced CEP290
mRNAs transcribed from the second allele carrying the
c.1824+3A>G mutation and small amounts of the protein
by Western blot analysis.
Conclusion: Here, we report that CEP290 pleiotropy
involves splicing regulation through different mechanisms
that can act individually or in combination and includeNAS, BES and hypomorphic consensus splice site
mutations.
I. Barny: None. I. Perrault: None. S. Thomas: None. T.
Attié-Bitach: None. M. Rio: None. C. Hamel: None. H.
Dollfus: None. S. Defoort-Dhellemmes: None. J. Kaplan:
None. J. Rozet: None. X. Gerard: None.
P02.08B
The role of HCN1 variation in circadian chronotypes
S. Smieszek
1, C. P. S. Polymeropoulos2,
M. Polymeropoulos2
1Vanda Pharmaceuticals, WASHINGTON, DC, United
States,2Vanda Pharmaceuticals, DC, OH, United States
To ascertain the genetic risk factors for morningness/
eveningness phenotypes we conducted a genome-wideassociation analysis using 316 whole genome sequencing
samples. We have directly tested the association between
SNPs and MEQ (morning-evening questionnaire). Wecomputed association test results by linear regression
assuming additive allelic effects (covariates: age, gender,
and the 3 PCs). We detect a large region on chromosome 5(more than ~400 adjacent SNPs in LD, spanning ~2mb)
centered within HCN1, Brain Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated
Channel 1. Regional enrichment yields a p-value of < 10-99. It is highly expressed in the brain and potentially
modulates excitability in the brain and responding to
regulation by cyclic nucleotides, playing a critical role inshaping the autonomous activity of single neurons and the
periodicity of network oscillations. It has been shown in a
double-mutant mouse model that lack of HNC1 mediatedfeedback in rod photoreceptor cells prolongs rod responses
and saturates the downstream retinal network during bright
light stimulation. The risk allele is effectively correlatedwith lower MEQ score hence evening phenotype. The locus
has been shown to be a signi ﬁcant (1.6e-09) eQTL for
HCN1 in GTEX. HCN1 channel is responsible for thefeedback on the rods regulating the dynamic range of light
reactivity under dim or intermediate light conditions. We
hypothesize that if this feedback is not functioning properlyan individual may get saturated with even dim light
resulting in misperception of the light conditions resultingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1219in a circadian delay. This would suggest that HCN1
variations may directly impact the ME phenotype.
S. Smieszek: None. C.P.S. Polymeropoulos: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharma-
ceuticals. M. Polymeropoulos: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals.
P02.09C
Clinical utility of panel-based genetic testing in infantsand young children with inherited eye disease
E. Lenassi
1, S. Ramsden2, J. Clayton-Smith2,
S. Douzgou2, G. Hall2, V. Sharma3, I. Lloyd4,
J. L. Ashworth3, S. Biswas3, G. C. Black1, P. Sergouniotis1
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary ’s
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Manchester Royal
Eye Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom,4Great
Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Advances in ocular genetics have trans-
formed our understanding of inherited eye diseases (IEDs)and have led to the development of powerful diagnostic
tests. However, integration of these tests into routine
healthcare is frequently ineffective. Providing robustevidence of bene ﬁt can accelerate implementation; for
example, the adoption of a genetic test is much more likely
when its clinical utility (i.e. its ability to in ﬂuence
management and health outcomes) has been clearly
demonstrated. Here we assess the current clinical utility of
genetic testing in paediatric IED.
Materials and Methods: Unrelated children (0-5 years
old) with IED were retrospectively ascertained through the
database of the UK North West Genomic Laboratory Hub.The cohort was consecutively collected and included indi-
viduals presenting between 09/2011 and 08/2018. All study
participants were examined in tertiary paediatric ophthalmicgenetic clinics and underwent panel-based genetic testing.
Results: 229 children were evaluated including 33 with
albinism, 83 with bilateral paediatric cataracts, 19 withcongenital glaucoma, 7 with ectopia lentis and 57 with
inherited retinal disorders. The diagnostic yield was highest
for albinism and ectopia lentis and lowest for congenitalglaucoma. Genetic testing altered management (e.g. pre-
vented additional investigations or led to the introduction of
personalised surveillance measures or determined eligibilityfor treatment trials) in signi ﬁcant subsets of children with
ectopia lentis, albinism, bilateral cataracts and inherited
retinal disorders.
Conclusions: Genetic testing helped identify an aetiolo-
gical diagnosis in the majority of children with IED. Thisprevented additional unnecessary testing and provided the
opportunity for anticipatory guidance in a subset of patients
that could be precisely de ﬁned.
E. Lenassi: None. S. Ramsden: None. J. Clayton-
Smith: None. S. Douzgou: None. G. Hall: None. V.
Sharma: None. I. Lloyd: None. J.L. Ashworth: None. S.
Biswas: None. G.C. Black: None. P. Sergouniotis: None.
P02.11A
Founder haplotype bearing mutation c.1621C>T (p.
Gln541*) in the FYCO1 gene causing of autosomal
recessive cataract (CTRCT18) in the Sakha Republic ofRussia
N. A. Barashkov
1,2, L. S. Vychuzhina1, A. V. Solovyev1,2,
F. M. Teryutin1, V. G. Pshennikova1,2, T. E. Burtseva1,2,
M. I. Tomsky1, F. A. Platonov2, G. P. Romanov2,
N. N. Gotovtsev1, E. K. Khusnutdinova3,4, O. L. Posukh5,6,
S. A. Fedororva1,2
1Yakut Scienti ﬁc Centre of Complex Medical Problems,
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical
Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2M.K. Ammosov
North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, RussianFederation,
3Ufa Federal Research Center of Russian
Academy Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,
Ufa, Russian Federation,4Bashkir State University, Ufa,
Russian Federation,5Federal Research Center Institute of
Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,
6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation
Novel nonsense mutation c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) in the
FYCO1 gene was previously revealed by whole exome
sequencing as the main genetic cause of congenital
autosomal recessive cataract (CTRCT18) in patients fromthe Sakha Republic (Eastern Siberia). In this report we
present the results of the c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) carrier
frequency analysis in 424 adult individuals without ofvisual impairments from 7 populations of Eastern Siberia
(Russians, Yakuts, Evenks, Evens, Dolgans, Yukaghirs and
Chukchi). The highest carrier frequency of this mutationwas found in Yakut population (7.9%), the lowest in
Evenks (1.7%) and Evens (2.0%), and c.1621C>T (p.
Gln541*) was absent in Russians, Yukaghirs, Dolgans andChukchi. Common haplotypes for c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*)
were reconstructed as a result of genotyping of 6 STR
markers ﬂanking the FYCO1 gene in 25 patients homo-
zygous for c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) and in 114 patients
without this mutation. Common haplotypes bearing
c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) indicate the role of founder effectin the spread of this mutation in the Sakha Republic. The
highest diversity of the c.1621C>T-haplotypes was revealed1220in the Central Yakuts ethno-territorial group. The mutant
haplotypes of the Vilyui and Northern Yakuts groups are
probably derived from the c.1621C>T-haplotypes found in
the Central Yakuts group. Our results suggest that mutation
c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) in the FYCO1 gene causing
CTRCT18 arose about 260±65 years ago (in the middleof the XVIII century) and spread among Yakut population
as a result of founder effect. This study was supported by
the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russia(#6.1766.2017) and the RFBR (18-05-600035_Arctica).
N.A. Barashkov: None. L.S. Vychuzhina: None. A.V.
Solovyev: None. F.M. Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshenni-
kova: None. T.E. Burtseva: None. M.I. Tomsky: None. F.
A. Platonov: None. G.P. Romanov: None. N.N. Gotovt-
sev: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. O.L. Posukh:
None. S.A. Fedororva: None.
P02.12B
Clinical Exome Sequencing reveals the genetic cause in a
family with congenital cataract
E. Louizou, S. Rapti, A. Vasiageorgi, G. Kapetsis,
E. Tsitsopoulos, C. Yfanti
Molecular Genetics Department, Bioiatriki S.A., Athens,
Greece
Introduction: Cataracts are the principal cause of treatable
blindness worldwide. Inherited congenital cataract shows all
types of inheritance patterns in a syndromic and non-syndromic form. Congenital Cataract is an opaci ﬁcation of
the lens, usually diagnosed at birth and without proper
treatment, the vision never develops normally. In this studywe present a family from Central Greece with six affected
members born with Congenital Cataract, ﬁve males and one
female, all of which had bilateral nuclear cataracts asnewborns. Despite efforts to medically improve their
condition, many members had a gradual deterioration of
their vision which led to blindness, before the age of thirtyyears old.
Materials and Methods: Clinical Exome Sequencing
(CES) was performed with the Sophia Genetics Protocol ona MiSeq Illumina platform, in one of the affected probands.
In order to con ﬁrm our ﬁnding and to investigate the carrier
status of most family members, Sanger sequencing wasperformed for the region of interest.
Results: The analysis revealed a possibly pathologic
mutation -c.3808C>T(p.Gln1270*) -on the NHS gene,
which is located on the X chromosome. The mutation has
not been previously recorded in any database but the NHS
gene is known to be the cause of X-linked CongenitalCataract - Nans Hooran Syndrome.Conclusion: CES of related subjects from an isolated
family with Congenital Cataract identi ﬁed a causal NHS
mutation and con ﬁrmed the mode of inheritance in the
family as X-linked recessive. This ﬁnding will aid drama-
tically the clinical management of this whole family.
E. Louizou: None. S. Rapti: None. A. Vasiageorgi:
None. G. Kapetsis: None. E. Tsitsopoulos: None.
C.
Yfanti: None.
P02.13C
A heterozygous likely pathogenic variant in MAF
transactivation domain as a cause of bilateral congenitalcataract without intellectual disability or seizures
L. Lovrecic, A. Maver, I. Vre čar, B. Peterlin
University Medical Center Ljubljana, Clinical Institute of
Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Congenital cataract is a developmental
disorder of the lens resulting in lens cloudiness or opacities.The hereditary congenital cataracts are genetically hetero-
geneous and can be transmitted under an autosomal
dominant, recessive or X-linked inheritance model. TheMAF gene (OMIM*177075) pathogenic sequence variants
in the c-terminal DNA binding domain have been shown to
cause autosomal dominant isolated congenital cataractphenotype. On the other hand, MAF N-terminal transacti-
vation domain genetic variants are associated with Ayme-
Gripp syndrome (OMIM#601088), in which the eyeanomalies are accompanied by intellectual disability,
sensorineural hearing loss, seizures, distinctive facial
appearance, reduced growth and skeletal anomalies.
Materials and Methods: A female patient, law graduate
by profession, was referred to genetic consultation in her
ﬁrst pregnancy for her history of bilateral congenital cat-
aract. Other medical history was unremarkable, except for
mild delay in achieving developmental milestones and mild
unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. She never neededhearing aid. General examination at 30 years showed nor-
mal height and distinctive ﬂat facial appearance. Clinical
exome sequencing was used to test for causative variants in110 known genes associated with isolated and syndromic
cataract.
Results: A heterozygous likely pathogenic de novo
missense variant c.188C>G (Pro63Arg) in the N-terminal
transactivation domain of the MAF gene was identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of pathogenic variant
in the N-terminal transactivation domain of the MAF gene
in an individual without intellectual disability/learning dif-
ﬁculties, seizures or signi ﬁcant hearing loss.
L. Lovrecic: None. A. Maver: None. I. Vrečar:None.
B. Peterlin: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1221P02.15A
Important contribution of STRC copy number
variations to the development of mild-to-moderate
hearing loss
B. Harasimowicz1, D. Ozieblo1,2, H. Skarzynski3,
M. Oldak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate
School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology
Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of
Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland
Background: Copy number variations (CNVs) are com-
mon cause of genetically determined hearing loss (HL).
CNVs are frequently found in the STRC gene which is
related to autosomal recessive HL. Due to presence of STRC
pseudogene and technological limitation of CNVs detec-
tion, large deletions and duplications encompassing STRC
are still an underestimated contributor to HL development.
Material and Methods: A group of 50 patients with
mild-to-moderate HL diagnosed before the age of 10 andwith no DFNB1 pathogenic was recruited for the study. All
patients were tested for CNVs in STRC gene using quanti-
tative comparative ﬂuorescent PCR (QF-PCR) with primers
speciﬁc to the STRC gene and its pseudogene followed by
multiplex-ligation probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA).
Results: Genetic prescreen with QF-PCR revealed a
complete deletion of the STRC tested regions in 24% (24/
100) and partial deletion in 5% of the studied alleles (5/
100). This method allowed us also to identify two completeand two partial deletion of tested regions in the STRC
pseudogene. Complete deletions of the STRC gene regions
were fully con ﬁrmed by MLPA. One additional STRC
partial deletion and one duplication were also detected.
Considering the genotypes, in 26% (13/50) of HL patients
homozygous or compound heterozygous CNVs weredetected. In 10% (5/50) of patients only simple hetero-
zygous CNVs was found.
Conclusions: This study shows that CNVs in STRC are a
frequent cause of mild-to-moderate hearing loss in Polish
patients. There is a strong need to include CNVs analysis of
STRC gene in the standard HL diagnostic work ﬂow.
B. Harasimowicz: None. D. Ozieblo: None. H. Skar-
zynski: None. M. Oldak: None.
P02.16B
Genetic analysis of 320 Iranian patients affected by
deafness using Sanger sequencing and Next GenerationSequencing (NGS) methodsS. Morovvati
1, M. Ajallooeian2, N. Ayoubzadeh3
1Human Genetic Research Center, Baqiyatallah University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,3Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic
of
Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is one of the most
common congenital impairments which occurs one in every
thousand children. More than half of these cases are causedby genetic factors. At the present time, more than 150 genes
have been identi ﬁed to be associated with hearing loss.
Materials and Methods: In this study, for more than 600
patients affected by deafness, genetic counseling was done.
320 patients selected for genetic analysis. In ﬁrst step, for all
selected patients, analysis of GJB2 gene was done. Then,for patients who had normal result for GJB2 gene, hearing
loss genetic panel (including 127 genes involved in deaf-
ness) was performed using NGS method. Finally, forpatients for whom no pathogenic mutation was detected in
their genetic panel, Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was
done by NGS method.
Results: 19 different pathogenic mutations were found
GJB2 gene in 92 out of 320 patients (28.75%). Deafness
genetic panel and WES were performed for 65 and 57patients with normal GJB2 test respectively. Pathogenic and
likely pathogenic mutations were detected in 75 subjects
including 25 novel mutations.
Discussion: Due to the prevalence of consanguine mar-
riages in Iran, autosomal recessive hearing loss is common
in our country. Genetic analysis, especially WES can bevery helpful in preventing the birth of deaf children.
S. Morovvati: None. M. Ajallooeian: None. N.
Ayoubzadeh: None.
P02.17C
Gene-wise burden analysis on painful diabeticneuropathy
E. Salvi
1, M. Marchi1, M. Gerrits2, R. Almomani2,
I. D’Amato1, R. A. Malik3,4, D. Ziegler5,6, G. J. Bönhof6,
I. S. J. Merkies2,7, C. G. Faber2, G. Lauria Pinter1,8,
PROPANE study group
1Neuroalgology Unit - Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico “Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy,2Clinical
Genetics and Department of Neurology, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,
3Institute of Human Development, Centre for
Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Manchester and
Central Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester1222Academic Health Science Center, Manchester, United
Kingdom,4Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medicine, Doha, Qatar,5Institute for Clinical Diabetology,
German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes
Research, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf,
Germany,6Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology,
Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf,
Germany,7Department of Neurology, St. Elisabeth
Hospital, Willemstad, Curaçao,8Department of Biomedical
and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco", University of Milan,
Milano, Italy
Introduction: Neuropathic pain is one of the most common
complication of diabetic patients. It is a complex trait
inﬂuenced by multiple genes and environmental factors. A
debated hypothesis is that many rare variants might
contribute to the missing heritability unexplained by
common variants. Since frequencies of rare variants arevery low, even with high penetrance, it is challenging to
detect association. Burden tests collapse the rare variants
within the gene as a single genetic variable. This studyproposes a gene-wise burden test to look for genes with an
overrepresentation of variations in painful (PDN) versus
painless (PLDN) diabetic neuropathy patients.
Material and Methods: 107 candidate genes were
sequenced by single molecule Molecular Probes-Next
Generation Sequencing (MIP-NGS) in 61 PDN and 125PLDN patients. To test differences in the mutational burden
between PDN and PLDN, we applied SKAT-O test as
implemented in EPACTS on all non-synonymous variantswith a maximum minor allele frequency of 5%.
Results: Comparing the excess of rare variants in PDN
respect to PLDN, P2RX7 andSCN11A showed the lowest p-
values (p =0.01 and p =0.03, respectively) even if they did
not reach the signi ﬁcant Bonferroni threshold.
Conclusions: The burden approach provided biologically
plausible signals that would have remained indistinguish-
able from random noise with the traditional single-variant
analysis, because of high allelic heterogeneity. Our resultscould leave the possibility that a combination of protein-
altering variants in P2RX7 andSCN11A contribute to the
risk of PDN. The work has been supported by FP7 PRO-PANE (602273) and the H2020-MSCA PAIN-Net
(721841) Grants.
E. Salvi: None. M. Marchi: None. M. Gerrits: None. R.
Almomani: None. I. D’Amato: None. R.A. Malik: None.
D. Ziegler: None. G.J. Bönhof: None. I.S.J. Merkies:
None. C.G. Faber: None. G. Lauria Pinter: None.
P02.18D
Genetic causes of non-syndromic bilateral deafness inNorth-Eastern SloveniaA. erjavec skerget, B. zagradisnik, D. krgovi ć, A. golub,
J. rebol, A. kravos, N. kokalj voka č
university Medical Centre Maribor, maribor, SloveniaIntroduction: Mutations in the gene encoding protein
connexin 26 (GJB2) have been shown as a major
contributor to prelingual, sensorineural, nonsyndromic,
recessive deafness. One speci ﬁc mutation, 35delG, has
accounted for the majority of the mutations detected in the
GJB2 gene in Caucasian populations. The purpose of our
study was to evaluate the characterisation and theprevalence of all, GJB2, GJB6 and other known mutations
among affected individuals from North Eastern Slovenia.
Materials and Methods: There were 33 individuals
diagnosed with hereditary deafness (DF) enrolled in the
study. The allele speci ﬁc PCR, MLPA technique and the
Sanger sequencing was used to screen the GJB2 codingregion. NGS sequencing with Oto-GeneSGKit ®was used in
10 probands with bilateral, pre-lingual non syndromic DF
with a negative medical history related to potential causes ofacquired DF.
Results: The overall diagnostic yield of the DF cohort
was 8/33 (24.2%). The homozygous mutation c.35delG wasidenti ﬁed in four out of 33 patients (12.1%). By ﬁve patients
mono-allelic mutation c.35delG was detected (15.15%; 5/
33). Three among them were compound heterozygotes:c.35delG variant compounded with variants: c.109G>A;
WTIVS 1 +1: G>A; and c.235delC. NGS detected one
homozygous disease-causing variant c.2464C>T in OTOFgene in one patient (10%), which is also heterozygote for
the c.35delG.
Conclusion: The relative low ratio of individuals homo-
zygous (12.1%) and heterozygous (15.15%) for the
c.35delG mutation suggest that there are other genes
responsible for nonsyndromic deafness in the North-EasternSlovenian population. In one out of 10 tested probands with
NGS this was con ﬁrmed.
A. erjavec skerget: None. B. zagradisnik: None. D.
krgović:None. A. golub: None. J. rebol: None. A. kra-
vos: None. N. kokalj voka č:None.
P02.19A
Investigating the genetic architecture of fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in a geneticallyreﬁned cohort of patients
A. N. Sadan
1, N. J. Hafford-Tear1, K. Muthusamy1,2,
L. Dudakova3, P. Skalicka3,4, P. Liskova3,4,
A. J. Hardcastle1,S .J .T u f t1,2, N. Pontikos1,
A. E. Davidson1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12231UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom,2Moor ﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United
Kingdom,3Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic,4Research
Unit for Rare Diseases; First Faculty of Medicine, CharlesUniversity and General University Hospital in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD)
is a degenerative condition affecting up to 4.5% of the
population over the age of 50 years. Symptoms conse-quently result in a reduction in vision. An intronic CTG
triplet-repeat expansion (termed CTG18.1) situated in TCF4
has been signi ﬁcantly associated with disease.
Material and methods: DNA samples were obtained
from British and Czech FECD patients (n =679). Samples
were genotyped for CTG18.1 using a short tandem repeat(STR) assay and triplet-primed-PCR. Individuals harbour-
ing bi-allelic non-expanded CTG18.1 alleles (<50 repeats)
were analysed by whole exome sequencing (WES) andwhen possible followed up for familial history and deep
phenotyping. WES data was interrogated for rare deleter-
ious variants (minor allele frequency [MAF] <0.5% andCADD>20) in genes previously associated with corneal
disease and genes with a de ﬁned functional role within the
cornea. Samples without an identi ﬁable rare causal variant,
are currently being analysed by a gene burden analysis
using an internal WES dataset as the control group.
Results: 20% (138/679) of the FECD patients had non-
expanded copies of CTG18.1. Interrogation of WES data
identi ﬁed several candidate disease-associated variants,
including COL8A2 and ZEB1 variants in atypical early-onset cases. Results of the gene burden analysis presented a
number of potentially novel genes within the re ﬁned patient
cohort.
Conclusion: This study reveals the incidence of non
CTG18.1-mediated FECD in our cohort and aims to provide
insight into the genetic causes of disease within thisgenetically re ﬁned patient group. This project is funded by
the National Eye Research Centre and Rosetrees Trust.
A.N. Sadan: None. N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. K.
Muthusamy: None. L. Dudakova: None. P. Skalicka:
None. P. Liskova: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. S.J.
Tuft: None. N. Pontikos: None. A.E. Davidson: None.
P02.20B
Clinical manifestations and novel SOX10 pathogenic
variants in Danish probands with profound hearing
impairment and malformations of the semicircular
canalsM. Fjellberg Moldenæs
1, N. Dahl Rendtorff2,
L. Sandbjerg Hindbæk2, Ø. Nilssen1,3, L. Tranebjærg2,4
1Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø,
Tromsø, Norway,2The Kennedy Centre, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University hospital,Copenhagen, Denmark,
3Department of Medical Genetics,
University Hospital of North-Norway, Tromsø, Norway,
4Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Waardenburg- and CHARGE syndromes are
associated with overlapping clinical manifestations such as
hearing impairment and malformations of the semicircular
canals. The syndromes are heterogeneous, both with respectto the genes involved and the clinical abnormalities found.
Materials and Methods: Eleven patients from eight
families were shown to have bilateral profound hearingimpairment with variable additional clinical features.
Complete or partial agenesis of the semicircular canals gave
suspicion of either CHARGE or Waardenburg syndrome.
Results: Genetic testing was carried out which included
genes involved in these two syndromes. Here we present
eight families harboring SOX10 pathogenic variants. The
patients demonstrated a spectrum of SOX10 mutations of
which six were novel, six occurred de novo and two were
found to be dominantly inherited. Both familial cases pre-sented with novel SOX10 mutations.
Conclusions: The results presented here add six novel
pathogenic variants, one missense and four frameshift var-iants, to the spectrum of SOX10 mutations and associated
clinical features involved in Waardenburg syndrome are
described. Grant references: University of Tromsø - TheArctic University of Norway.
M. Fjellberg Moldenæs: None. N. Dahl Rendtorff:
None. L. Sandbjerg Hindbæk: None. Ø. Nilssen: None.
L. Tranebjærg: None.
P02.21C
Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) gene
panel testing in 200 Danish individuals with primary
non-syndromic hearing impairment
N. D. Rendtorff
1, H. G. Karstensen1, L. S. Hindbæk1,
L. Tranebjærg1,2
1The Kennedy Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Hearing impairment is the most common
sensory impairment and is genetically heterogeneous.Identi ﬁcation of the causative variants underlying hearing
impairment is challenging, since >100 different genes for1224non-syndromic hearing impairment have so far been
reported.
Materials and Methods: In this study, 200 index
patients, mostly of Danish origin, with hearing impairment
underwent targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)
using hearing impairment gene panels for Illumina plat-forms. Causative variants were con ﬁrmed by Sanger
sequencing and segregation analysis was performed when
relevant samples were available. Prior to NGS sequencing,DFNB1 and SLC26A4-related hearing impairment had
been excluded by Sanger sequencing in most patients.
Result: Of the 200 patients sequenced, we were able to
detect causative variants in 73 cases (37%). Furthermore, in
an additional 12 cases (6%) only one pathogenic variant
was identi ﬁed so far. The study emphasizes the genetic
heterogeneity of hearing impairment since causative var-
iants were found in 41 different genes. In total, 113 different
likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants were detected.Forty-four variants (38%) were novel (absent from the
literature).
Conclusions: Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing
allowed us to detect causative variants in 73 of tested cases.
In this cohort, the diagnostic yield was slightly higher in
cases with presumed autosomal recessive hearing impair-ment and in patients with an early onset of hearing
impairment. Copy number variation detection studies are
ongoing. Regarding the non-solved cases, selected familieswill be analyzed by whole exome sequencing.
N.D. Rendtorff: None. H.G. Karstensen: None. L.S.
Hindbæk: None. L. Tranebjærg: None.
P02.22D
First reported Northern European with CABP2 -related
non-syndromic hearing loss
A. T. Højland
1,2,3, H. Okkels1,4, M. B. Petersen1,3,2
1Research and Knowledge Center in Sensory Genetics,
Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,
2Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University,
Aalborg, Denmark,3Department of Clinical Genetics,
Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,4Section
of Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Clinical
Biochemistry, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark
Introduction: Autosomal Recessive Deafness 93 is caused
by homozygous mutations in the CABP2 gene located at
11q13.2. Five families with CABP2 -related Autosomal
Recessive Deafness 93 have been reported in PubMed.
Four families (three Iranian and one Pakistani) arehomozygous for the NM_016366.2:c.637 +1G>T mutationand one Italian family is homozygous for the c.466G>T, p.
(Glu156*) mutation.
Materials and Methods: We report an eight-year-old
boy of non-consanguineous Danish Caucasian parents with
prelingual bilateral moderate sensorineural non-syndromic
hearing loss. Both parents had adult onset non-syndromichearing loss and several members of the mother ’s family
also had early-onset hearing loss. Diagnostic whole-exome
sequencing was performed using DNA from the index onthe NextSeq 500 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA) using
SureSelect CRE Exome Kit v2 (Agilent Technologies Inc.,
Santa Clara, CA). Data analysis was performed by an in-house pipeline limited to 123 known hearing loss genes
using VarSeq version 2.0.2 (Golden Helix Inc., Bozeman,
MT). The mutation was veri ﬁed by direct sequencing.
Results: NM_016366.2:c.637 +1G>T was found in a
homozygous state in the index. No other causative variants
were identi ﬁed.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time the
NM_016366.2:c.637 +1G>T mutation is identi ﬁed in a
patient of Caucasian descend and the ﬁrst time CABP2 -
related non-syndromic hearing loss is reported in a patient
of Northern European descend. Grants: None
A.T. Højland: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; The Foundation for Pro-
motion of Medical Science, The Hede Nielsen FamilyFoundation. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col-
laborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; The Obel Family Founda-
tion, Jacob Madsen & wife Olga Madsen ’s Foundation,
Doctor Sofus Carl Emil Friis & wife Olga Doris Friis ’s
Foundation, Aase & Ejnar Danielsen ’s Foundation, Axel
Muusfeldt ’s Foundation, L. F. Foght ’s Foundation, The
Augustinus Foundation. H. Okkels: None. M.B. Petersen:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; Jacob Madsen & wife Olga Madsen ’s
Foundation, The Augustinus Foundation, Doctor Sofus CarlEmil Friis & wife Olga Doris Friis ’s Foundation, Axel
Muusfeldt ’s Foundation, L.F. Foght ’s Foundation.
P02.23A
Presumed, unknown second mutation in GJB2
monoallelic patients is not a CNV in the DFNB1 (GJB2/
GJB6) region, but it must exist
D. Safka Brozkova, P. Lassuthova, A. Uhrova
Meszarosova, P. Seeman
DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd
Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague,
Czech Republic, Prague 5, Czech RepublicAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1225Introduction: In almost 40% of patients with autosomal
recessive hearing loss, biallelic pathogenic mutations in the
GJB2 gene are detected. For 6% patients with only one
pathogenic GJB2 mutation (monoallelic) the second is
unknown. Moreover, there is a signi ﬁcant excess of
monoallelic among hearing loss population (6%) compared
to the normal hearing population (3%). Therefore we
assume the second causal mutation, yet unknown, in part ofmonallelic hearing loss patients which explain their hearing
loss. Because of the character of GJB2 mutations, we
expected to ﬁnd the CNV, most likely one deletion within
the critical region.
Materials and Methods: The CNV analysis was per-
formed with SureSelect custom panel covering continuouschr13:20.735.021-21.102.144. Altogether 33 monoallelic
patients were examined with use of three biallelic GJB2
patients as controls. The CNV analysis was performed withNextGene sw.
Results: The shared 1.6kb large deletion was found in
four monoallelic. Nevertheless, the deletion was not possi-ble to con ﬁrm with use of another independent method as
Sanger sequencing or PCR. Even the haplotype analysis did
not reveal any common haplotype in monoallelic. More-over, the NGS of a gene panel of 71 recessive hearing loss
genes did not reveal causal mutation in other gene in group
of 15 monoallelic.
Conclusion: Therefore we believe the second unknown
and undiscovered mutation which contribute and cause
hearing loss in the substantial part of GJB2 monoallelic
patients exist, but is probably not the CNV in the critical
DFNB1 region.
Supported by: Ministry of Health of the CZ - nr 16-
31921A
D. Safka Brozkova: None. P. Lassuthova: None. A.
Uhrova Meszarosova: None. P. Seeman: None.
P02.24B
First missense variant in N-terminal cytoplasmic regionof KCNQ4: analysis of the genotype-phenotype
correlation
M. Oldak
1, A. Madejska1, D. Ozieblo1,2, M. Leja1,2,
H. Skarzynski3
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate
School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University ofWarsaw, Warsaw, Poland,
3Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in KCNQ4 are a well-
known cause of autosomal dominant hearing loss (ADHL).There is a phenotypic variability observed in patients with
different type and localization of KCNQ4 pathogenic
variants. To date, only three frameshift mutations were
described in the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of KCNQ4
in ADHL families with late-onset and pure high
frequency HL.
Materials and Methods: DNA was collected from a ﬁve-
generation family with progressive high frequency ADHL.
High throughput sequencing on proband ’s DNA was per-
formed. In family members (n =15) segregation analysis of
the identi ﬁed variants with HL was conducted using Sanger
sequencing. Deep genotype-phenotype correlation analysiswas performed using cross-sectional linear regression test-
ing of pure tone audiometry results.
Results: Genetic testing revealed a novel, probably
pathogenic c.274G>A (p.Glu92Lys) variant in KCNQ4 ,
which fully segregated with HL in the studied family.
Detected variant has not been reported in population data-bases and was classi ﬁed as pathogenic. The p.Glu92Lys is
theﬁrst missense variant identi ﬁed in the N-terminal cyto-
plasmic region of KCNQ4. HL observed in the analyzedfamily was more severe at mid frequencies as compared to
the previously published families with truncating variants
located in this domain.
Conclusions: Identi ﬁcation of KCNQ4 p.Glu92Lys in a
ADHL family con ﬁrms the association between missense
KCNQ4 pathogenic variants and a high frequency HL with
similar annual progression at mid and high frequencies. The
data suggest that the type of KCNQ4 detected variants
provides a better prognostic factor than their topologicallocalization.
Supported by: NCN Research Grant no. 2016/22/E/NZ5/
00470 SONATA BIS6.
M. Oldak: None. A. Madejska: None. D. Ozieblo:
None. M. Leja: None. H. Skarzynski: None.
P02.25C
Genetic basis of autosomal dominant hearing loss in
pediatric patients
D. Ozieblo
1,2, M. Leja1,2, H. Skarzynski3, M. Oldak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland,
2Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Oto-Rhino-
Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland
Introduction: Autosomal Dominant Hearing Loss (ADHL)
is the second most common form of inherited hearing losswith an onset after the second decade of life. Current
knowledge on the genetic aspects of ADHL in Polish1226patients is limited, which signi ﬁcantly affects the diagnosis,
genetic counselling and prevents prediction of disease
progression.
Materials and Methods: Thirteen families with ADHL
diagnosed before 18 years of age were enrolled in the study.
DNA was isolated from peripheral blood or oral cavityswab samples from probands and family members. High-
throughput genetic analysis using the TruSight One panel
(Illumina Inc.) and the MiSeq sequencer was carried out forthe probands. To con ﬁrm the presence of identi ﬁed genetic
variants and their segregation with ADHL in individual
families Sanger ’s sequencing was performed.
Results: Genetic cause of ADHL was identi ﬁed in
approximately 60% (8/13) of the families. The identi ﬁed
variants were located in ACTG1 ,COCH ,DIAPH1 ,EYA4 ,
KCNQ4 ,PTPRQ ,TBC1D24 andTMC1 . Among the iden-
tiﬁed variants approximately 60% (6/8) were novel. In the
remaining families the selected variants did not segregatewith ADHL.
Conclusions: Our results show high genetic heterogeneity
of ADHL in Polish pediatric patients. Considering frequentidenti ﬁcation of new genetic variants, it is necessary to
perform thorough clinical examination and segregation
analysis of the selected variants with ADHL in the largestpossible number of family members. In patients with no
genetic cause identi ﬁed, the study area should be extended
and include all protein coding regions or whole genome.
Supported by: NCN SonataBIS6 grant no. 2016/22/E/
NZ5/00470
D. Ozieblo: None. M. Leja: None. H. Skarzynski:
None. M. Oldak: None.
P02.27A
Novel variants in known genes - results of genetic testing
in families with autosomal dominant hearing loss
D. Ozieblo
1,2, M. L. Leja1,2, A. Sarosiak1,2, H. Skarzynski3,
M. Oldak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate
School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University ofWarsaw, Warsaw, Poland,
3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology
Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of
Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland
Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common
disability of human senses and genetic factors play animportant role in its development. Autosomal dominant HL
(ADHL) is usually characterized by postlingual age of onset
and progression. To date 63 loci with 45 different geneswere causally involved in the pathogenesis of ADHL.Materials and Methods: Multigenerational families with
ADHL were recruited in the study (n =19). Genomic DNA
was isolated from whole blood and buccal swabs samples.
In probands ’DNA samples a multigene high throughput
sequencing was performed. Family segregation analysis of
the identi ﬁed variants was conducted using Sanger
sequencing. All detected variants were analyzed in the
context of population databases and literature. Pathogeni-
city of identi ﬁed variants was predicted by different com-
putational approaches.
Results: Genetic testing revealed probably pathogenic
variants in almost 63% (12/19) of the analyzed families.The majority of identi ﬁed variants were novel, previously
not reported and hitherto not linked to the disease (7/12).
Novel variants were missense changes and all of them(except for two genetic changes located in MYO6 ) were
found in different genes.
Conclusions: Our study revealed a high involvement of
novel probably pathogenic variants in the development of
ADHL and con ﬁrmed a high heterogeneity of the identi ﬁed
genetic changes. High throughput sequencing in HL patientsgenerates large amount of data that should be interpreted
carefully and con ﬁrmed by family studies. There is also a
need for functional validation of the detected novel variants.
Supported by: NCN Research Grant no. 2016/22/E/NZ5/
00470 SONATA BIS6.
D. Ozieblo: None. M.L. Leja: None. A. Sarosiak: None.
H. Skarzynski: None. M. Oldak: None.
P02.28B
Cochlear implantation outcome in patients with DFNB1
locus pathogenic variants - implications for precision
medicine
D. Ozieblo
1,2, A. Obrycka3, A. Lorens3, H. Skarzynski4,
M. Oldak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate
School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Department of Implants and
Auditory Perception, Institute of Physiology and Pathologyof Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,
4Oto-Rhino-Laryngology
Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of
Hearing, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Almost 80% of children with profound
prelingual hearing loss (HL) have a genetic cause ofdeafness; most often two GJB2/GJB6 (DFNB1 locus )
recessive pathogenic variants. Cochlear implantation (CI)
is a treatment of choice in profound HL patients but onlyfew studies combine the etiology of HL with CI outcome.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1227Materials and Methods: Patients with profound pre-
lingual HL who received CI before the age of 2 years and
had a completed DFNB1 genetic testing were enrolled in
the study (n =159). LittlEARS questionnaire and relative
auditory development delay (RADD) at 6thmonth after CI
activation were used to assess auditory development.
Results: Statistically signi ﬁcant differences were
observed in RADD between patients implanted early
(before 12 months of age) vs. late (after 12 months of age)and between patients with a short ( ≤6 months) vs. long ( ≥
6 months) hearing aids (HAs) experience. Interestingly, in
the most genetically homogenous patient group with twoGJB2 c.35delG pathogenic variants there was no statisti-
cally signi ﬁcant difference in RADD between patients
implanted early and late and between patients with a shortand long HAs experience.
Conclusions: In children with homozygous GJB2
c.35delG pathogenic variants, application of CI before 12 or24 months of age brings similar outcome. Children with an
unknown genetic cause of HL should be implanted before
12 months of age to achieve better results in auditorydevelopment. Further studies in the non-DFNB1 group are
planned to determine the link between genetic background
of HL and the CI outcome.
Supported by: NCN Grant 2017/27/N/NZ5/02369
D. Ozieblo: None. A. Obrycka: None. A. Lorens: None.
H. Skarzynski: None. M. Oldak: None.
P02.31A
Hypermethylated genes and pathways in Polish childrenwith high myopia
M. Gajecka
1,2, S. Vishweswaraiah3, J. A. Karolak2,1,
M. Mrugacz4, U. Ratnamala5, N. K. Mishra6, C. Guda6,
S. S. Chettiar7, K. R. Johar7, U. Radhakrishna3,
J. Swierkowska1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Poznan, Poland,2Department of Genetics and
Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,3Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oakland University WilliamBeaumont School of Medicine, Royal Oak, MI, United
States,
4Department of Ophthalmology and Eye
Rehabilitation, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok,Poland,
5Department of Pharmacology, Creighton
University, Omaha, NE, United States,6Department of
Genetics, Cell Biology & Anatomy College of Medicine,University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
United States,
7Department of Zoology, School of Sciences,
Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, IndiaIntroduction: High myopia (HM) is an eye disorder
characterized by refractive error (RE) greater than -6.0
diopters (D) with both environmental and genetic factors
involved. Although a number of loci, candidate genes, and
sequence variants have been identi ﬁed in HM, the general
genetic factor explaining the causes of HM has not beenspeciﬁed. The aim of this study was to unravel the role of
epigenetic changes in HM which could explain the relation
between HM and environmental factors.
Materials and Methods: In order to verify if the dysre-
gulated methylation of genes could contribute to the HM
development, using a genome-wide DNA methylationarray, we studied 18 Polish cases (aged 4-12 years, RE
between -6.0 and -15.0 D) and 18 matched controls. CpGs
with the highest fold change or the highest difference in themethylation level between cases and controls were ana-
lyzed. Pathway overrepresentation analyses among hyper-
methylated genes were performed using ConsensusPathDB.
Results: In total, 1,541 CpGs, representing 1,745 genes,
were hypermethylated ( ≥2.0-fold change, FDR p ≤0.05,
ROC-AUC ≥0.75) in HM subjects compared to controls.
The most hypermethylated CpGs with more than 20% dif-
ference in the methylation level between cases and controls
were located in TIMM50 ,RAB3C ,MICAL3 ,RWDD4A ,
XRCC2 , and FARP2 . Enrichment analysis of hypermethy-
lated myopia-related genes set (>5 genes shared, p ≤0.01)
revealed overrepresentation of genes from several path-ways, including signal transduction, transcription, and sig-
naling pathways as receptor tyrosine kinases, JAK-STAT,
TGF-beta, EGF-EGFR.
Conclusions: Methylation of genes and disruption of
identi ﬁed pathways could contribute to HM phenotype.
M. Gajecka: None. S. Vishweswaraiah: None. J.A.
Karolak: None. M. Mrugacz: None. U. Ratnamala:
None. N.K. Mishra: None. C. Guda: None. S.S. Chettiar:
None. K.R. Johar: None. U. Radhakrishna: None. J.
Swierkowska: None.
P02.32B
Diagnostic yield of whole exome sequencing-based
genetic testing for patients with inherited eye diseases
K. Wells, K. Kämpjärvi, E. Mårtensson, M. Mehine,
J. Känsäkoski, L. Sarantaus, H. Västinsalo, J. Schleit,
I. Saarinen, M. Muona, S. Myllykangas, T. Alastalo,J. W. Koskenvuo, S. Tuupanen
Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, FinlandGenetic testing is essential in the diagnosis and management
of inherited eye diseases (IEDs). However, IED diagnosticscan be compromised by poorly validated and curated tests.
We aimed to develop and validate a high quality whole1228exome sequencing (WES) based platform and to assess
diagnostic yield in a large IED cohort. Performance of the
WES assay with bespoke clinical content, was tested
through next generation sequencing (NGS) of reference
samples using the Illumina NovaSeq platform. The assay
was designed to cover clinically-relevant intronic anddifﬁcult-to-sequence regions, and detect copy number
variants (CNVs). Based on this assay, 23 ophthalmology
gene panels were curated. The assay showed high averagesequencing depth (183x) and coverage (99.7% regions
covered >20x), and uniform coverage over dif ﬁcult-to-
sequence regions, including RPGR ORF15. Detection
sensitivity was high for SNVs (0.998), INDELs (0.97), 1-
exon CNVs (0.93) and 5-exon CNVs (0.99). The Usher
Syndrome Panel gave the highest diagnostic yield (>80%).The most frequently ordered 266-gene Retinal Dystrophy
Panel yielded a diagnosis in 58% (of 1587) cases.
Diagnoses were made in a total of 111 genes, the mostcommon genes being ABCA4 ,USH2A, RPGR, RHO and
PRPH2 , as well as in newly implicated IEDs genes, and in
custom targeted deep intronic regions. Approximately 3%of patients had a diagnostic CNV. A WES assay with
boosted clinical content provides high diagnostic yields for
IED patients. The genetic variability of diagnoses in ourcohort supports the use of comprehensive NGS panels in
IED diagnostics, to optimize diagnostic yield and
clinical care.
K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. E. Mårtensson:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
genetics. M. Mehine: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
genetics. L. Sarantaus: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. H. Västinsalo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. M.
Muona: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint genetics. S. Myllykangas: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. T. Alastalo: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. J.W. Kosken-
vuo: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Signi ﬁ
cant; Blueprint genetics.
S. Tuupanen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint genetics.P02.33C
New insights into the phenotypic spectrum of PROM1-
associated retinopathy
M. del Pozo-Valero1, I. Martín-Mérida1,2, B. Jiménez-
Rolando3, A. Arteche1, A. Ávila-Fernández1,2, F. Blanco-
Kelly1, R. Riveiro-Álvarez1, C. Van Cauwenbergh4,E .D e
Baere4, C. Rivolta5, B. García-Sandoval3, M. Cortón1,2,
C. Ayuso1,2
1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria –Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital
(IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain,2Center for Biomedical
Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain,3Department of Ophthalmology, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria –Fundación Jiménez Díaz
University Hospital (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain,
4Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University and
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,5Department of
Computational Biology, Unit of Medical Genetics,
University of Lausanne, Laussane, Switzerland
Purpose: Inherited retinal dystrophy (IRD) refers to a group
of progressive and degenerative diseases that affect thephotoreceptor cells and lead to visual impairment. One of
the genes associated with IRD is PROM1 . Disease-causing
PROM1 variants have been associated with different
phenotypes. The aim was to provide a detailed analysis of
the genetic and phenotypic characteristics of the PROM1 -
associated retinopathy in a large cohort of patients.
Methods: PROM1 screening was performed using clas-
sical molecular techniques and/or targeted Next-Generation-
Sequencing in a cohort of 2216 IRD families. Copy numbervariation analysis was carried out in unsolved monoallelic
cases. Detailed ophthalmic evaluation was performed in 25
patients.
Results: Thirty-two families presented PROM1 variants,
including likely pathogenic and unknown signi ﬁcance var-
iants, 10 of which are novel. Causative variants wereidenti ﬁed in 21 families segregating in autosomal recessive
(17) or dominant (4) pattern, 3 of them with founder effect.
Phenotypic analysis in 25 patients carrying disease-causingPROM1 variants revealed clinical heterogeneity regardless
of genotype. Most of the patients suffered from cone-rod
dystrophy and some patients presented with macular dys-trophy or retinitis pigmentosa, all presenting macular
damage.
Conclusions: Our study reports the largest and compre-
hensive description of genetic and clinical ﬁndings in
PROM1 -retinopathy. The prevalence of PROM1 variants
that seems to reliably explain the IRD phenotype in ourcohort is about 1%. This study also highlights the great
heterogeneity of PROM1 -associated phenotypes.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1229Regardless of the initial diagnosis of primary cone or rod
loss, all patients developed a common macular involve-
ment, a characteristic phenotypic ﬁnding of PROM1 .
M. del Pozo-Valero: None. I. Martín-Mérida: None. B.
Jiménez-Rolando: None. A. Arteche: None. A. Ávila-
Fernández: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. R. Riveiro-
Álvarez: None. C. Van Cauwenbergh: None. E. De
Baere: None. C. Rivolta: None. B. García-Sandoval:
None. M. Cortón: None. C. Ayuso: None.
P02.35A
Contribution of DRAM2 gene in inherited retinal
dystrophies with early macular involvement
V. Abad-Morales1,2, S. Ruiz-Nogales1,2, R. Navarro1,3,
P. Méndez1,2, M. Riera1,2, A. Burés-Jelstrup1,3,
B. Corcóstegui1,3, E. Pomares1,2
1Fundació de Recerca de l ’Institut de Microcirurgia
Ocular, Barcelona, Spain,2Department of Genetics, Institut
de Microcirurgia Ocular (IMO), Barcelona, Spain,
3Department of Retina, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular
(IMO), Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Macular Dystrophies (MD) are a group of
Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRD) characterized by the
degeneration of the central retina or macula, principallyformed by cone photoreceptors. Although there are more
than 55 MD genes, a considerable percentage of these cases
remain unsolved.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing of a cohort of IRD
families was performed, analyzing a panel of 300 IRD
genes in order to determine the genetic pathogenic cause.For some new mutations, functional analyzes were ruled out
from patients blood samples.
Results: Three new DRAM2 homozygous mutations were
identi ﬁed in three independent families: one frameshift and
two splicing variants. All patients shared a singular phe-
notype, with an early macular involvement followed by aperipheral degeneration. However, the age of onset and the
evolution of the pathology were different in each case. At a
molecular level, functional studies revealed alterations ingene expression differing between patients.
Conclusions: DRAM2 wasﬁrstly associated to IRD in
2015, and only scanty cases and 10 different pathogenicmutations have been reported to date. Thus, its function in
the retina and the associated phenotypes are still much
unknown. In this context, the results obtained signi ﬁcantly
contribute to the comprehension of the role of this gene in
the molecular bases of IRD, increasing the number and type
of reported pathogenic variants and their functional effects,and strengthening the DRAM2 genotype-phenotype corre-
lations in the retina.Grants: This study was supported by Fundació Privada
Cellex (Fi-201501) and Fundació de Recerca de l ’Institut de
Microcirurgia Ocular (Fi-201401).
V. Abad-Morales: None. S. Ruiz-Nogales: None. R.
Navarro: None. P. Méndez: None. M. Riera: None. A.
Burés-Jelstrup: None. B. Corcóstegui: None. E.
Pomares: None.
P02.36B
Next generation sequencing in patients with bilateral
optic atrophy: Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and
beyond
M. Volk
1, A. Maver1, A. Fakin2, N. Teran1, M. Jarc
Vidmar2, S. Petrovi ć2, M. Hawlina2, B. Peterlin1
1Clinical institute of medical genetics, UMC Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Eye hospital, UMC Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is caused by
missense mutations in the mitochondrial genes (mtDNA)
encoding complex I subunits of the respiratory chain.
However, mutations affecting genes in the nuclear genomemay strikingly resemble the clinical presentation of LHON.
We conducted a study to de ﬁne best testing strategy using
next generation sequencing in bilateral optic atrophy andinconclusive family history. Here we report on 30 unrelated
individuals referred to our institution for genetic testing
because of the optic nerve atrophy and clinically suspectedLHON. None of the patients had lesions suggestive for
multiple sclerosis on brain MRI. Genetic analysis consisted
of mtDNA sequencing followed by clinical exome sequen-cing. In two unrelated patients mtDNA sequencing
identi ﬁed typical LHON pathogenic variants
(m.11778G>A, m.3700G>A). Exome sequencing in threeunrelated patients revealed OPA1 mutation (c.2489G>A,
likely pathogenic variant), compound heterozygous muta-
tions in ACO2 (c.2253dupC, VUS and c.719G>C, patho-
genic variant) and a de novo mutation in WFS1
(c.2480C>T, likely pathogenic variant). Upon genetically
guided clinical review, the last patient was found to exhibitsigns on macular OCT, typical for Wolfram syndrome. We
found possible causative variants in 5 of 30 patients with
bilateral optic atrophy and clinically suspected LHON. Inaddition to typical LHON mitochondrial variants we found
causative variants associated with autosomal dominant,
autosomal recessive and syndromic forms of optic neuro-pathy and reclassi ﬁed clinical diagnoses. Our results
provide evidence that a combined approach with mtDNA
and clinical exome sequencing is recommended in cases ofclinically suspected LHON and negative family history.1230M. Volk: None. A. Maver: None. A. Fakin: None. N.
Teran: None. M. Jarc Vidmar: None. S. Petrovi ć:None.
M. Hawlina: None. B. Peterlin: None.
P02.37C
Targeted next generation sequencing revealshomozygous PDE6C mutation in a pedigree with
macular aplasia
K. Kamenarova
1, S. Cherninkova2, K. Mihova1,
F. Shakola1, V. Mitev1, I. Tournev2, R. Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Centre, Medical University –Soﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of Neurology, University
Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Introduction: Macular, or foveal aplasia refers to the lack
of foveal depression with continuity of all neurosensory
layers in the presumed location of the fovea. It has been
reported in cases of aniridia, albinism, microphthalmia andachromatopsia. Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD), among
which macular aplasia (MA), constitute a group of diseases
characterized by clinical variability and pronounced geneticheterogeneity. By using IRD-panel next-generation sequen-
cing, we aimed to identify the disease-causing mutation in a
large Bulgarian pedigree with MA inherited in autosomal-recessive pattern.
Materials and Methods: A large pedigree with MA,
most likely achromatopsia, accompanied by nystagmus anddecreased visual acuity presented from birth was recruited
and DNA from the proband was sequenced using the Illu-
mina
®platform and TruSight One sequencing panel. Protein
coding and splice-site variants were ﬁltered in a panel with
341 genes related to retinal dystrophies.
Results: Genetic analysis identi ﬁed a homozygous mis-
sense variant c.2141T>A (p.Ile714Asn) in a conserved
amino acid within the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of
the cone photoreceptor phosphodiesterase, PDE6C . The
commonly used prediction tools classi ﬁed the PDE6C-
c.2141T>A variant to be putatively damaging/deleterious.
There is only one PDE6C- c.2141A allele found in the Non-
Finnish European population suggesting an extremely low
frequency for this change. Segregation study is in progress.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed a family affected by
autosomal-recessive dystrophy of the central photoreceptor
system and found homozygous possibly pathogenic variant
inPDE6C , mutations in which have been previously
reported in patients with autosomal-recessive inherited
achromatopsia and early-onset cone photoreceptor dys-
function. Grant references: DUNK01/2/2009 and Grant-D-109/03.05.20018.K. Kamenarova: None. S. Cherninkova: None. K.
Mihova: None. F. Shakola: None. V. Mitev: None. I.
Tournev: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P02.38D
Burden of missense variants in hearing loss genes insporadic Meniere disease
A. Gallego-Martinez
1, T. Requena1, P. Román-Naranjo1,
J. Lopez-Escamez1,2
1Centro P ﬁzer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de
Andalucía de Genómica e Investigación Oncológica
(GENYO), Granada, Spain,2Department of
Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria Ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves,
Granada, Spain
Introduction: Meniere disease (MD) is a rare inner ear
disorder de ﬁned by episodes of vertigo, sensorineural
hearing loss (SNHL) and tinnitus. MD has been describedmostly in sporadic cases, being familial cases around 10%
of total observed cases. Between 20-45% of the cases have
bilateral hearing loss. The aim of this study is to investigatethe burden of rare variants in SNHL genes in sporadic
cases of MD.
Methods: We designed a targeted-sequencing panel
including SNHL genes in supporting cells and sequenced
890 Spanish MD patients. The frequency of rare variants
(with a MAF inferior to 0.1) in the gene panel was com-pared with three independent datasets as controls for the
gene burden analysis. Interaction model between rare and
common variants is proposed for most relevant genes inMD cases.
Results: Patients with sporadic MD showed a signi ﬁcant
enrichment of missense variants in SNHL genes that wasnot found in the controls. The list of genes includes GJB2 ,
USH1G ,SLC26A4 ,ESRRB and CLDN14 . A rare synon-
ymous variant with unknown signi ﬁcance was found in the
MARVELD2 gene in several unrelated patients with MD.
Conclusions: There is a burden of rare variation in certain
SNHL genes in sporadic MD. Furthermore, the interactionof common and rare variants in SNHL genes may have and
additive effect on MD phenotype.
Funding: FPS-PI0496-2014, Spain; EF-0247-2017 grant
from Consejeria de Salud, Spain; Luxembourg National
Research Fund (INTER/Mobility 17/11772209), Lux-
embourg, and 2016-MeniereSociety Grant, UK.
A. Gallego-Martinez: None. T. Requena: None. P.
Román-Naranjo: None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1231P02.39A
Burden of rare variants in OTOF gene in familial
Meniere disease
P. Roman-Naranjo1, C. A. Jimenez-Ruiz1, M. C. Moleon2,
A. Gallego-Martinez1, J. A. Lopez-Escamez1,2
1Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO),
Granada, Spain,2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto
de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA, Hospital
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain
Introduction: Meniere disease (MD) is a rare inner ear
disorder characterized by vertigo, sensorineural hearing loss
(SNHL) and tinnitus. Familial aggregation is found in 10%of MD cases with autosomal dominant inheritance and
several genes already described, such as DTNA ,FAM136A
andSEMA3D genes. Thus, the goal of this study is to de ﬁne
new candidate genes for familial MD (FMD).
Materials & Methods: We recruited 62 FMD cases to
perform whole-exome sequencing. Variant calling wasperformed with GATK. Candidate genes were prioritized
based on pathogenicity using PhenIX. Single rare variant
analysis (SRVA) focused on SNHL genes was performedusing MAF<0.001. Likewise, a gene burden analysis
(GBA) with MAF<0.05 was performed to analyze the
interaction of common and rare variants. We studied therelationship between rare and common variants which
modulate gene expression.
Results: Forty-percent of FMD cases carried one novel or
ultrarare likely pathogenic (CADD>15) variant in SNHL
genes. Ninety-four rare variants were selected from SRVA.
A total of 222 rare variants were retrieved with GBAresulting in a high enrichment of variants in OTOF gene
(corrected p-value: 3x10
-4). Four rare variants in our cohort
showed a signi ﬁcant association with three common var-
iants regulating the expression of OTOF gene.
Conclusions: There is a burden of rare variants in SNHL
genes. Particularly, the interaction of rare and commonvariants in OTOF gene may play an important role in FMD.
Funding: Supported by the Luxembourg National
Research Fund INTER/Mobility/17/11772209 and EF-0247-2017 from Andalusian Health Government to JALE.
P. Roman-Naranjo: None. C.A. Jimenez-Ruiz: None.
M.C. Moleon: None. A. Gallego-Martinez: None. J.A.
Lopez-Escamez: None.
P02.41C
Differential expression analysis suggests lipid
metabolism plays a role in North Carolina Macular
DystrophyE. Tavares
1, C. Tang1, A. Paterson1,S .L i1, M. Liang1,
M. Wilson1, E. Campos1, A. Vincent1,2, E. Héon1,2
1The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, Toronto,
ON, Canada,2Department of Ophthalmology and Vision
Sciences, The Hospital for Sick Children, University ofToronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Introduction: North Carolina Macular Dystrophy (NCMD)
is a high penetrance autosomal dominant inherited disease.
The non-coding SNPs in the linkage region on chromosome
6 fall within a DNase I hypersensitive site upstream ofPRDM13 and which regulates PRDM13 expression during
development. This study aimed to understand the molecular
basis of NCMD through differential expression analysis.
Methods: PSSM scanning was used to predict changes in
binding of known transcription factors in retina for the non-
coding variants on chromosome 6. RNA-seq from skin-derived RNA for three sibling pairs (affected/unaffected
each) within a family was done for differential gene
expression analysis.
Results: These variants introduce a gain of binding sites
for two important retinal transcription factors (PAX6 and
OTX2) upstream of PRDM13. This can potentially alter thePRDM13 regulation in retinal tissue. RNA-seq revealed ~50
differently expressed genes between the affected and unaf-
fected. Although we did not ﬁnd a direct association of
these genes to the known genes involved in macular dys-
trophies, GO enrichment analysis showed ~30 statistically
signiﬁcant processes with lipid metabolism being most
signiﬁcant and it was previously linked to age-related
macular dystrophy.
Conclusions: The introduction of PAX6 and OTX2
binding sites upstream of PRDM13 can potentially cause
PRDM13 overexpression and may interfere with lipid
metabolism and oxidative stress by increasing the amountof lipids in the retina.
Funding: Mira Godard, FFB, McLaughlin Centre.
E. Tavares: None. C. Tang: None. A. Paterson: None.
S. Li: None. M. Liang: None. M. Wilson: None. E.
Campos: None. A. Vincent: None. E. Héon: None.
P02.43A
The most common forms of non- GJB2 -related
nonsyndromic (NSHL) and disguised syndromic (SHL)hearing impartment in Russian patients
O. L. Mironovich
1, E. A. Bliznetz1, T. G. Markova2,
M. R. Latayants2, T. V. Markova1, L. A. Bessonova1,
M. S. Petukhova1, O. N. Makienko1, D. M. Guseva1,
I. V. Anisimova1, O. P. Ryzhkova1, A. V. Polyakov112321Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for
Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation,2Federal
State Budgetary Institution «National Research Center for
Audiology and Hearing Rehabilitation», Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Hearing loss is a common disorder, and
according to the audiological screening in Russia, con-
genital hearing impairment affects nearly 3 in every 1000live births. Apart from the GJB2 gene, more than 100 genes
responsible for NSHL and more than 400 genes associated
with SHL are known. Currently, massive parallel sequen-cing (MPS) is the optimal diagnostic method for non- GJB2 -
related forms of hearing impairment.
Materials and Methods: DNA samples of 205 Russian
patients with NSHL (without mutations in GJB2 gene) and
10 patients with the incoming diagnosis of Pendred, Bran-
chiootorenal, Usher and Alstrom syndromes were tested byusing custom targeted MPS panel which includes 33 genes
of NSHL and SHL. 25 DNA samples were searched for
abnormal copy numbers with MLPA.
Results: Among 205 patients with NSHL, pathogenic and
probably pathogenic variants have been identi ﬁed in 41
cases (20%) in following genes: STRC (10), USH2A (6),
SLC26A4 (4), MYO7A (4), OTOF (4), POU3F4 (2), TECTA
(2), TMPRSS3 (2), PTPRQ (1), ADGRV1 (1), TMC1 (1),
LOXHD1 (1), ACTG1 (1), MYO15A (1), OTOA (1) . Diag-
nostic ef ﬁciency in patients with SHL was 80% (8/10). In
patients with NSHL, syndromic forms have been identi ﬁed
in 9% of total cases (18/205). The majority of causativemutations in STRC andOTOA were large CNVs (80% and
50%). Mutations c.11864G>A, c.2171_2174delTTTG,
c.107A>C in USH2A, STRC, SLC26A4 genes are assumed
to be frequent in Russian patients.
Conclusions: The proportion of detected genetic forms of
hearing loss in Russia is about 12% of all non-syndromichearing loss.
O.L. Mironovich: None. E.A. Bliznetz: None. T.G.
Markova: None. M.R. Latayants: None. T.V. Markova:
None. L.A. Bessonova: None. M.S. Petukhova: None. O.
N. Makienko: None. D.M. Guseva: None. I.V. Anisi-
mova: None. O.P. Ryzhkova: None. A.V.
Polyakov: None.
P02.44B
Prenatal diagnosis of Norrie disease after exome
sequencing of affected proband during ongoing
pregnancy
A. V. Marakhonov
1,2, S. A. Repina1, I. A. Akimova1,
M. V. Shurygina3, T. A. Vasilyeva1, S. I. Kutsev1,4,
V. V. Kadyshev1, R. A. Zinchenko1,51Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok,
Russian Federation,3S. Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery
Federal State Institution, Moscow, Russian Federation,
4Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University,
Moscow, Russian Federation,5Moscow Regional Research
and Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation
Objectives: Hereditary ophthalmic pathology is a geneti-
cally heterogeneous group of diseases that occur either as an
isolated eye disorder or as a symptom of hereditary
syndromes (chromosomal and monogenic). That is whydiagnostic search in some cases of ophthalmic pathology
could be time- and cost-consuming. The most challenging
situation could arise when prenatal diagnosis is neededduring ongoing pregnancy.
Materials and Methods: A family is referred to the
RCMG for affected child birth risk prognosis at 7-8 week ofgestation because the previous child, six-years-old boy, has
congenital aniridia, glaucoma, retinal detachment, severe
psychomotor delay, lack of speech, several ophthalmicsurgeries. The affected child had been previously tested for
PAX6 mutations and 11p13 copy number variation which
revealed no changes.
Results: Considering ongoing pregnancy, lack of patho-
genic changes and precise diagnosis in an affected boy,
NGS sequencing of clinically relevant genes was performedwhich revealed a novel hemizygous substitution
NM_000266.3( NDP _v001):c.385G>T, p.(Glu129*), in
NDP gene associated with Norrie disease (OMIM#310600).
Subsequent Sanger validation of the affected boy and his
mother con ﬁrmed identi ﬁed substitution inherited in X-
linked recessive mode. Amniotic ﬂuid testing revealed the
fetus is hemizygous for the variant. Complications were
developed during subsequent interruption of pregnancy
driven by medical necessity.
Conclusions: Clinical polymorphism of hereditary oph-
thalmic pathology could severely complicate the establish-
ment of exact diagnosis and make it time- and cost-consuming. NGS appears to be the method-of-choice in
complicated cases which could substantially hasten the
establishment of diagnosis and genetic risk estimation.
Supported by RFBR grant №19-015-00122.
A.V. Marakhonov: None. S.A. Repina: None. I.A.
Akimova: None. M.V. Shurygina: None. T.A. Vasilyeva:
None. S.I. Kutsev: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A.
Zinchenko: None.
P02.45C
Screening TYR gene variations in Turkish
oculocutaneuse albinism patientsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1233O. HATIRNAZ NG1,E .Y ılmaz1, Z. Parlakgüne ş2,
K. Yararba ş3, S. Ziylan2, Y. Alanay3, U. Ozbek3
1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Ayd ınlar University, School of
Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ISTANBUL,
Turkey,2Yeditepe University, Medical Faculty, Department
of Eye Diseases, ISTANBUL, Turkey,3Acibadem Mehmet
Ali Ayd ınlar University, School of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetics, ISTANBUL, Turkey
Introduction: Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is charac-
terised by a generalized reduction in pigmentation of hair,skin and eyes and variable ocular ﬁndings including
nystagmus, reduced visual acuity and photophobia. The
most common mutated gene in OCA is TYROSINASE
(TYR) . Currently, no data available on the frequency or
molecular background of Albinism in Turkey.
Materials and Methods: Forty OCA patients (23 male
and 17 female, 3 pairs of siblings) with a median age 19.2
years (min: 6mo-max 70.1 years) were enrolled. Following
DNA isolation, the coding regions of TYR genes were
analysed by PCR and direct sequencing.
Results: We have detected 28 different TYR variations in
31(77.5%, 17 homozygous, 16 compound heterozygous and1 heterozygous) of the OCA patients (Table1). The most
frequent variants were c.815G>A, p.Trp272* and
c.741C>A, p.Cyc247* with an allele frequency of 0.06.Among 28 variations ﬁve of them were novel (Table 1). The
allele frequencies of two common TYR polymorphisms
S192Y and R402Q were 34% and 14.6% respectfully.
Conclusion: TYR gene is commonly mutated in OCA
patients in Turkey. The patient with only heterozygous TYR
variant, addition to other 8 patients with no variation shouldbe evaluated for other related genes. Further studies with
new patients and investigation of other melanin related
genes in TYR negative patients are ongoing.
Table 1: TYR variations and their allele frequencies
detected in our patients.
Gene cNomen pNomen coding effect alle freq Known/Novel
TYR NM_000372.4 c.815G>A p.Trp272* stop gain 0,0658 rs779454147
TYR NM_000372.4 c.741C>A p.Cyc247* stop gain 0,0658 rs1185485047
TYR NM_000372.4 c.996G>A p.
Met332Ilemissense 0,0526 CM91273
TYR NM_000372.4c.1217 C>T p.
Pro406Leumissense 0,0526 CM910385
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1204C>T p.Arg402* stop gain 0,0395 CM942074
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1 A>G p.Met1Val missense 0,0395 CM941342TYR NM_000372.4 c.573delA p.Gly191* stop gain 0,0395 rs1364823765TYR NM_000372.4 c.613C>A p.
Pro205Thrmissense 0,0395 rs61754362
TYR NM_000372.4 c.230G>A p.
Arg77Glnmissense 0,0263 rs61753185
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1118C>A p.
Thr373Lysmissense 0,0263 rs617543388
TYR NM_000372.4 c.816G>C p.
Trp272Cysmissense 0,0263 11116710
TYR NM_000372.4 c.446A>C missense 0,0263 rs797046082p.
Tyr149Ser
TYR NM_000372.4
c.919_925delTCCAGAAp.
Leu140fs*frame shift 0,0263 CM90077
TYR NM_000372.4 c.616G>A p.
Ala206Thrmissense 0,0263 rs28940880
TYR NM_000372.4 c.140G>A p.
Gly47aspmissense 0,0263 rs61753180
TYR NM_000372.4 c.61C>T p.Pro21Ser missense 0,0263 rs61753178
TYR NM_000372.4 c.661G>T p.Glu221* stop gain 0,0263 novelTYR NM_000372.4 c.1058G>A p.
Gly353Glumissense 0,0132 rs1415792453
TYR NM_000372.4 c.225T>A p.Tyr85* stop gain 0,0132 rs746208814
TYR NM_000372.4 c.139G>T p.
Gly47Cysmissense 0,0132 rs796051878
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1430G>A p.Trp477* stop gain 0,0132 rs748052034
TYR NM_000372.4 c.763C>T p.Gln255* stop gain 0,0132 CM91283
TYR NM_000372.4 c.715C>T p.
Arg239Trpmissense 0,0132 rs774670098
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1193A>G p.Glu398G missense 0,0132 CM41866
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1255_1256insTTG insertion 0,0132 novel
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1036-
9_1041delTAATGAACAGGATTTsplice site 0,0132 novel
TYR NM_000372.4 c.1036 +3A>C splice site 0,0132 novel
TYR NM_000372.4 c.308G>C p.
Cyc103Sermissense 0,0132 novel
O. Hatirnaz ng: None. E. Y ılmaz: None. Z. Par-
lakgüneş:None. K. Yararba ş:None. S. Ziylan: None. Y.
Alanay: None. U. Ozbek: None.
P02.46D
Copy number analysis of the OPN1LW andOPN1MW
genes by MLPA
A. S. Hoekstra1, L. Haer-Wigman2, M. Tjon-Pon-Fong2,
M. Zegers1, M. Ketema1, R. Vijzelaar1
1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Introduction: X-linked cone dysfunction disorders such as
Blue Cone Monochromacy and Cone Dystrophy are caused
by pathogenic variants and rearrangements in OPN1LW and
OPN1MW which share more than 98% sequence similarity.
Located in tandem, they are susceptible to meiotic
mispairing, unequal homologous and nonhomologousrecombination. This might lead to different copy numbers
ofOPN1LW and/or OPN1MW or the formation of hybrid
opsin genes. Because of the frequent exchange, Xchromosomes have around one to ﬁveOPN1MW copies,
whereas they rarely have more than one OPN1LW copy.
Using the current diagnostic tests, it remains dif ﬁcult to
determine the copy number and presence of gene
rearrangements in OPN1LW andOPN1MW .
Methods: A novel multiplex ligation-dependent probe
ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) assay was developed and tested on
14 patient samples with a known copy number status of
OPN1LW andOPN1MW . Copy number and rearrangements
inOPN1LW andOPN1MW were analysed in more than 100
DNA samples.1234Results: The copy number of OPN1LW andOPN1MW
was con ﬁrmed in the 14 patients and could be easily
determined in 75 male and female DNA samples and in 45
clinical samples consisting of affected individuals and car-
riers. Ten patients with hybrid opsin genes were identi ﬁed,
including one patient with two hybrid genes.
Conclusion: The newly developed MLPA assay enables
determination of the copy number status and identi ﬁcation
of gene rearrangements in OPN1LW and OPN1MW . The
addition of MLPA to routine sequencing of OPN1LW and
OPN1MW will improve detection of the cause of X-linked
cone dysfunction disorders.
A.S. Hoekstra: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. L. Haer-Wigman: None. M.
Tjon-Pon-Fong: None. M. Zegers: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Ketema: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland.
R. Vijzelaar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; MRC-Holland.
P02.47A
Novel mutations in TMEM126A causing non-syndromic
autosomal recessive optic atrophy
N. Weisschuh1, M. Synofzik2,3, C. Kernstock1, S. Schimpf-
Linzenbold4, F. Schuettauf5, A. Neu6, K. Kloth7
1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany,
2Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tuebingen,
Germany,3German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Tuebingen, Germany,4CeGaT GmbH and Praxis
für Humangenetik, Tuebingen, Germany,5Department of
Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
6Department of Pediatrics,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany,7Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Reports on autosomal recessive optic atrophy (arOA) are
sparse and so far, only one gene has been speci ﬁcally
associated with non-syndromic arOA, namely TMEM126A .
To date, all reports of TMEM126A mutations are from
patients of Maghrebian origin, who all carry an identical
nonsense mutation. We report two novel variants in the
TMEM126A gene from two non-Maghreb patients/families,
both resulting in an arOA phenotype.
The proband of family A was diagnosed with visual loss
in early childhood but a diagnosis of optic atrophy was onlymade at 14 years. A diagnostic gene panel revealed a splice
donor variant (c.86 +2T>C) in the TMEM126A gene. Ana-
lysis of this variant based on RNA from whole bloodrevealed a single aberrant transcript lacking exon 2, pre-
sumably representing a functional null allele. Two siblingsfrom family B were diagnosed with optic atrophy in early
childhood. A missense variant (p.S36L) in the TMEM126A
gene was identi ﬁed in a gene panel-based diagnostic setting
in both siblings. This missense variant is ultra rare in the
general population, affects a highly evolutionarily con-
served amino acid and segregates with the disease withinthe family. The three probands reported in this study had a
relatively mild clinical course without any evidence of a
syndromic (e.g. neurological) comorbidity, which is in linewith previous studies.
We provide additional evidence for the implication of
biallelic TMEM126A mutations in arOA. Our ﬁndings
extend both the mutational spectrum and geographic pre-
sence of TMEM126A in arOA.
N. Weisschuh: None. M. Synofzik: None. C. Kern-
stock: None. S. Schimpf-Linzenbold: None. F. Schuet-
tauf: None. A. Neu: None. K. Kloth: None.
P02.48B
A familial optic atrophy associated with mild
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by SOX5haploinsuf ﬁciency
A. Gouronc
1, Y. Perdomo2, L. Maurin2, A. Schalk1,S .E l
Chehadeh3, E. Schaefer3, H. Dollfus2,3, S. Scheidecker1
1Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,2Centre
de Référence pour les Affections Rares en Génétique
Ophtalmologique (CARGO), Hôpitaux Universitaires deStrasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
3Service de Génétique
Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France
Introduction: Inherited optic neuropathies (ION) are a
clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorderscaused by nuclear or mitochondrial DNA variants. Isolated
and syndromic forms are described. The most frequent ION
are autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA), due toOPA1 variant, and Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
(LHON), caused by mitochondrial DNA variant.
Materials and Methods: Herein we report on three
patients from a family suffering from bilateral optic neu-
ropathy and suggesting an autosomal dominant inheritance.
Two of them show additional features such as speech delay,mild learning disabilities and behavior disorders. The
sequencing of a panel of ION ’s genes including the OPA1
gene is normal. The SNP array analysis reveals an 82 kbintragenic heterozygous deletion of the SOX5 gene that
segregates with the disease.
Discussion: The SOX5 haploinsuf ﬁciency leads to Lamb-
Shaffer syndrome classically associating global develop-
mental delay, with predominant speech impairment, mild toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1235severe intellectual disability and mild dysmorphic features.
Some patients have additional features such as brain
abnormalities or musculoskeletal anomalies. Optic atrophy
is described in only two patients carrying SOX5 hetero-
zygous de novo variants: a 53 kb intragenic deletion and a
point variant resulting in a premature stop codon. These twopatients displayed a moderate to severe neurodevelopmental
disorder.
Conclusion: Here we report on the ﬁrst family of
inherited autosomal dominant optic atrophy due to SOX5
heterozygous deletion associated with mild neurodevelop-
mental features. This observation suggests that a SOX5 gene
analysis could be performed in patients presenting with
optic atrophy associated with developmental disorder
even mild.
A. Gouronc: None. Y. Perdomo: None. L. Maurin:
None. A. Schalk: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. E.
Schaefer: None. H. Dollfus: None. S. Scheidecker: None.
P02.49C
PAX6 non-coding sequence variants cause congenital
aniridia
A. Filatova
1, T. Vasilyeva1, A. Marakhonov1,2,
R. Zinchenko1,3, M. Skoblov1,2
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal
University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation,3Pirogov
Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow,Russian Federation
Introduction: Congenital aniridia (AN) is a rare autosomal
dominant panocular disorder caused by mutations in the
PAX6 gene. A previously conducted molecular genetic
study of a large cohort of Russian patients with AN revealedseveral groups of PAX6 nucleotide variants which patho-
genicity is not obvious, including variants out of canonical
splicing site dinucleotides, possibly affecting splicing, and5ʹ-UTR variants. These variants were classi ﬁed as VUS or
likely pathogenic according to the ACMG recommenda-
tions. Thus, to validate the pathogenicity of such variantsfunctional studies are required.
Materials and Methods: To determine the effect of
PAX6 variants on splicing we used a minigene assay. To
study 5 ʹ-UTR variants we generated luciferase constructs
with full-length PAX6 5ʹ-UTR (wt and mutants). The
translation ef ﬁciency was measured by luciferase assay, and
the RNA expression level was evaluated by qPCR.
Results: Using a minigene assay, seven out of eight
investigated probably affecting slicing variants (six deepintronic and two exonic) were showed to disrupt normal
splicing patterns and result in frame shifting followed bymRNA degradation by NMD mechanism. Besides, ﬁve 5 ʹ-
UTR variants were found to lead to a signi ﬁcant decrease in
the translation ef ﬁciency, including three of them, which
also lead to aberrant splicing. Our further analysis allows us
to suggest the mechanism of 5 ʹ-UTR variants pathogenicity
through disruption of upstream ORF which possibly existsinPAX6 5ʹ-UTR.
Conclusions: Using functional analysis we have con-
ﬁrmed the pathogenicity of 12 PAX6 noncoding mutations.
Moreover, our results suggest the exact mechanism of their
pathogenic action.
A. Filatova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. A. Mar-
akhonov: None. R. Zinchenko: None. M. Skoblov: None.
P02.50D
Mutations in PLS1 , encoding ﬁmbrin, cause autosomal
dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ADNSHL)
A. Morgan
1, D. Koboldt2,3, E. Barrie2, E. Crist2,3,4,
M. Mezzavilla5, F. Faletra5, T. Mosher2,3,4, R. Wilson2,3,
K. Manickam3,4, P. Gasparini1,5, D. Dell ’Orco6,
G. Girotto1,5
1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,2Institute for Genomic
Medicine at Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus,
OH, United States,3Department of Pediatrics at The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, United States,4Division of
Genetic and Genomic Medicine at Nationwide Children ’s
Hospita, Columbus, OH, United States,5IRCCS Burlo
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,6Department of Neurosciences,
Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, Section of Biological
Chemistry, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Introduction: NSHL is a common sensory disorder
characterized by high genetic heterogeneity. Despite huge
efforts in genes discovery, almost half of patients still fail toreceive a molecular diagnosis.
Methods: Two unrelated ADNSHL-families of European
ancestry negative for mutations in known deafness-genesunderwent next-generation sequencing. Data were ﬁltered
according to frequency, pathogenicity and pattern of
inheritance. To prioritize genes a population-based analysiswas performed (including statistics on natural selection in
Europeans and gene constrains from gnomAD database)
followed by in silico protein modelling.
Results: Among the genes found mutated in the two
analysed families, interestingly, PLS1 showed signatures of
natural selection and low observed/expected ratio of bothmissense and loss of function mutations. Thus, these ﬁnd-
ings suggested a level of conservation and allowed to
prioritize PLS1 in which two novel likely-pathogenic mis-
sense variants were identi ﬁed.PLS1 encodes ﬁmbrin, one of
the most abundant actin-bundling proteins of the stereocilia.1236Recently, it was demonstrated that Pls1-/-mice show a
moderate/progressive form of HL across all frequencies
(PMID: 25124451). In silico protein modelling displayed
that both variants affect the actin-binding domain-1, and
suggested an overall destabilization of the protein structure,
reducing the protein ’s ability to bind F-actin.
Conclusion: Present results (genomic data of two inde-
pendent ADNSHL-families, literature updates, evidence of
evolutionary constrains and protein modelling results) pro-vide evidence that PLS1 is required for normal hearing and
once mutated might cause ADNSHL. The identi ﬁcation of
PLS1 as a new ADNSHL-gene provides a new possible
target for the development of therapeutic approaches.
A. Morgan: None. D. Koboldt: None. E. Barrie: None.
E. Crist: None. M. Mezzavilla: None. F. Faletra: None.
T. Mosher: None. R. Wilson: None. K. Manickam: None.
P. Gasparini: None. D. Dell ’Orco: None. G.
Girotto: None.
P02.51A
Coincidental occurrence of Schnyder corneal dystrophyand posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 3
P. Liskova
1, L. Dudakova1, P. Skalicka1,2, A. E. Davidson3
1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic,2General University Hospital in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic,3UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
London, United Kingdom
Purpose: To report the simultaneous occurrence of two rare
corneal dystrophies.
Methods: Case report of a 30-year-old male with a family
history of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 3
(PPCD3) was invited for ophthalmic examination. Sanger
sequencing of the coding regions and intron/exon bound-aries of disease-associated genes, ZEB1 andUBIAD1 was
performed.
Results: The clinical ﬁndings suggested co-occurrence of
PPCD3 and Schnyder corneal dystrophy (SCD) in the pro-
band. This dual diagnosis was supported by genetic ﬁndings.
He was identi ﬁed to carry a previously reported heterozygous
nonsense mutation in ZEB1 ; c.2157C>G, p.(Tyr719*), and a
novel heterozygous missense mutation in UBIAD1 ;
c.569T>C; p.(Ile190Thr). The mother of the proband onlycarried the c.2157C>G ZEB1 variant and slit-lamp examina-
tion of her corneas showed endothelial lesions characteristic
of PPCD3. The sister of the proband carried the c.569T>C inUBIAD1 and had corneal crystal deposition in her anterior
stroma consistent with the diagnosis of SCD.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the coincidental occur-
rence of two rare and genetically distinct corneal dystro-
phies in a single patient. Furthermore, it highlights the needto perform comprehensive phenotyping in combination with
appropriate genetic diagnostic testing to achieve an accurate
diagnosis. This work was supported by GACR 17-12355S.
P. Liskova: None. L. Dudakova: None. P. Skalicka:
None. A.E. Davidson: None.
P02.52B
Molecular genetic study of primary congenital
glaucoma: the mutational analysis of CYP1B1 and
LTBP2 genes
V. Szabó
1, K. Knézy1, M. Csidey1, A. Szigeti1, E. Maka1,
M. Bausz1, K. Sényi1, Z. Nagy1, G. Holló1, P. Kövy2,
T. Krähling2, A. Tordai3, H. Andrikovics2, A. Bors2
1Semmelweis University, Dept. of Ophthalmology,
Budapest, Hungary,2Central Hospital of Southern Pest -
National Institute of Hematology and Infectious Diseases,Budapest, Hungary,
3Semmelweis University, Dept. of
Pathophysiology, Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: Purpose of our study was to examine the
mutations of CYP1B1 andLTBP2 genes in patients and their
relatives with primary congenital glaucoma, (PCG) and toevaluate genotype-phenotype correlations.
Patients and Methods: molecular analysis of 26 children
of 21 families with PCG was performed. First we examinedthe common mutation p.Glu387Lys of CYP1B1 gene using
RFLP technique. In cases where wild-type or heterozygous
p.Glu387Lys variant was detected, Sanger-sequencing ofCYP1B1 was performed. Common p.Arg299Ter
(c.895C>T) mutation in LTBP2 gene was also genotyped.
We carried out a retrospective evaluation, using clinical dataas follows: age at diagnosis, ophthalmological status, pre-
and postoperative visual acuity and intraocular pressure and
pedigree.
Results: we identi ﬁed two mutations in 20 patients
(76,92%) in our study group. The p.Arg299Ter (c.895C>T)
mutation in LTBP2 gene was found in one family in
homozygous form. We identi ﬁed the homozygous p.
Glu387Lys mutation of CYP1B1 gene in 12 members of 8
families, in two siblings of one family we found twodeletions causing frameshift (p.Arg355Hisfs*69/p.
His401Leufs*24), compound heterozygous mutations
described in the literature before were identi ﬁed in further 5
families. No causative mutation was detected in 6 families
(28,57%) neither in CYP1B1 gene, nor in examined position
ofLTBP2 gene.
Conclusion: No genotype-phenotype correlations were
found in our study group with PCG, one could not conclude
on the grounds of genotype of clinical course and prognosis.This is the ﬁrst study investigating the mutations ofAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1237CYP1B1 gene and the p.Arg299Ter (c.895C>T) in LTBP2
gene of PCG in Hungary.
V. Szabó: None. K. Knézy: None. M. Csidey: None. A.
Szigeti: None. E. Maka: None. M. Bausz: None. K.
Sényi: None. Z. Nagy: None. G. Holló: None. P. Kövy:
None. T. Krähling: None. A. Tordai: None. H. Andri-
kovics: None. A. Bors: None.
P02.53C
Expanding the CPAMD8-associated eye disease
spectrum to primary congenital glaucoma: lessons
learned from a large consanguineous family withpseudodominance
H. Verdin
1, I. Balikova1,2,3, J. Van De Velde1,
P. G. Kestelyn2, B. P. Leroy1,2, E. De Baere1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium,2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University
and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
3Department of Ophthalmology, Children Hospital Queen
Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium
Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is de ﬁned as an
isolated trabeculodysgenesis that occurs in the ﬁrst three
years of life and is most often caused by biallelic mutations
in CYP1B1. Other early-onset, developmental glaucomasmay arise secondary to developmental malformations of the
anterior segment of the eye, and occur as part of an anterior
segment dysgenesis (ASD) disorder. Consequently, theseoverlapping phenotypes may challenge the diagnosis
of PCG.
Here we studied a highly consanguineous Jordanian
pedigree with over 17 affected individuals in three gen-
erations, displaying a clinical diagnosis of PCG. In addition
to PCG, the proband also presented with iris atrophy,ectropion uveae and corectopia. Moreover, the familial
history revealed the presence of other ocular manifestations
in the family including cataracts, lens luxation and irisabnormalities. Using homozygosity-based ﬁltering of
exome data, we identi ﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant
in CPAMD8: c.785_788del, p.Tyr262Serfs*17. This variantis not present in population databases and segregates with
the phenotype in the family. Recently, CPAMD8 was
reported as the cause for a unique autosomal recessive ASDthat is characterized by bilateral iris hypoplasia, ectopia
lentis, corectopia, ectropion uveae, and cataracts, clinical
features also observed here. Interestingly, two affectedsiblings who were initially diagnosed with PCG received a
clinical diagnosis of megalocornea in retrospect. In con-
clusion, we identi ﬁed the molecular cause underlying a
PCG phenotype in a large consanguineous family using
combined homozygosity-mapping and WES. Based on thisfamily and the previously reported families, CPAMD8-
associated ASD should be taken into consideration as a
differential diagnosis for PCG.
H. Verdin: None. I. Balikova: None. J. Van De Velde:
None. P.G. Kestelyn: None. B.P. Leroy: None. E. De
Baere: None.
P02.54D
Whole exome sequencing and linkage analysis ofextended pedigrees to identify glaucoma susceptibility
genes
P. Graham
1, J. Peralta1,2, N. Blackburn1,2, J. Blangero1,2,
M. Wirtz3, A. Hewitt1, D. Mackey4, K. Burdon1,
J. Charlesworth1
1Menzies Institute for Medical Research, Hobart, Australia,
2South Texas Diabetes and Obesity Institute, Brownsville,
TX, United States,3Casey Eye Institute, Portland, OR,
United States,4Lions Eye Institute, Perth, Australia
The use of next generation sequencing in extended
pedigrees has signi ﬁcant potential for identifying functional
variants linked with complex disease. We are using wholeexome sequencing (WES) of ﬁve large, complex families
from Tasmania (Australia) and Oregon (USA) to identify
susceptibility genes for primary open-angle glaucoma(POAG), the leading cause of irreversible blindness world-
wide. Extended pedigrees, enriched for POAG, provide a
powerful tool to search for rare and private genetic variantsinﬂuencing the disease, where enrichment of rare variants
occurs as a function of segregation from the founders. The
families in this study range in size from 48 to 201individuals (28 to 91 sequenced) and span 5 to 7
generations. These families are being used to locate
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for intraocular pressure(IOP), an important glaucoma endophenotype. Variance
components linkage analysis of IOP was conducted on the
WES data from 249 individuals and we identi ﬁed QTLs on
chromosomes 2,3,6,7 and 15. The chromosome 2 locus
(2q22.2-24.3) spans a 20 million base pair region. Three of
theﬁve families independently contribute linkage informa-
tion to this peak, which is a novel locus for both IOP and
POAG. Further analysis is being undertaken to identify
genes with family speci ﬁc, potentially deleterious variants;
which will be validated in large POAG case/control cohorts.
Finding genes involved with POAG susceptibility will
increase our understanding of the biological pathwaysinvolved with the disease process and from that, diagnostic
tools and more effective treatments can be developed.
P. Graham: None. J. Peralta: None. N. Blackburn:
None. J. Blangero: None. M. Wirtz: None. A. Hewitt:1238None. D. Mackey: None. K. Burdon: None. J.
Charlesworth: None.
P02.55A
PRPS1loss-of-function variants, from isolated hearing
loss to severe congenital encephalopathy
S. marlin1,2, O. Mercati1, M. Abi Warde3, G. Lina-
Granade4, M. Rio5, S. Heide6, P. de Lonlay7, I. Ceballos-
Picot8, M. Robert9, V. Couloigner10, J. Beltrand11,
N. Boddaert12, D. Rodriguez13, A. Rötig14, H. Prokisch15,
S. Lyonnet2, N. Loundon10, J. Kaplan16, J. Bonnefont17,
A. Munnich18, C. Besmond18, L. Jonard1,17
1Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Institut
Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris,
France,2Laboratoire d ’Embryologie et de Génétique des
Malformations Congénitales, INSERM UMR 1163, InstitutImagine, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France,
3Département de NeuroPédiatrie, CHU, Strasbourg,
France,4Service d ’Otorhinolaryngologie et chirurgie
cervico-faciale Pédiatrique, CHU, Lyon, France,
5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, APHP, Paris, France,6Département de
Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP,
Paris, France,7Centre Référence des Maladies héréditaires
du Métabolisme, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP,Paris, France,
8Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolomique
et Protéomique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP,
Paris, France,9Service d ’Ophtalmologie pédiatrique,
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France,
10Service d ’Otorhinolaryngologie et chirurgie cervico-
faciale Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France,
11Service Endocrinologie, Gynécologie
et Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France,12Département de
Radiologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades,
AP-HP; UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France,13Service de NeuroPédiatrie,
Hôpital Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France,14Laboratoire
de Génétique des maladies Mitochondriales, INSERM
UMR1163, Institute Imagine, Université Paris Descartes,Paris, France,
15Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany,16Laboratoire
de Génétique Ophtalmologique INSERM UMR1163,Institute Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, Paris,
France,
17Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France,
18Université Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris,
France
We describe two sporadic and two familial cases with loss-
of-function variations in PRPS1 , which is located on the Xchromosome and encodes phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate
synthetase 1 (PRS-1). We illustrate the clinical variability
associated with decreased PRS-1 activity, ranging from
mild isolated hearing loss to severe encephalopathy. One of
the variants we identi ﬁed has already been reported with a
phenotype similar to our patient ’s, whereas the other three
were unknown. The clinical and biochemical information
we provide will hopefully contribute to gain insight into the
correlation between genotype and phenotype in this rarecondition, in females as well as in males. Moreover, our
observation of a new family in which hemizygous males
display hearing loss without any neurological or ophthal-mological symptoms prompts us to suggest analysing
PRPS1 in cases of isolated hearing loss.
S. marlin: None. O. Mercati: None. M. Abi Warde:
None. G. Lina-Granade: None. M. Rio: None. S. Heide:
None. P. de Lonlay: None. I. Ceballos-Picot: None. M.
Robert: None. V. Couloigner: None. J. Beltrand: None.
N. Boddaert: None. D. Rodriguez: None. A. Rötig: None.
H. Prokisch: None. S. Lyonnet: None. N. Loundon:
None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Bonnefont: None. A. Mun-
nich: None. C. Besmond: None. L. Jonard: None.
P02.56B
Biallelic sequence and structural variants in RAX2 are a
novel cause for autosomal recessive inherited rod-
dominated retinal disease
S. Van de Sompele
1, C. Smith2, M. Karali3,4, M. Corton5,6,
K. Van Schil1, F. Peelman7, T. Cherry8, T. Rosseel1,
H. Verdin1, J. Derolez1, T. Van Laethem1, K. N. Khan9,
M. McKibbin9, C. Toomes2, M. Ali2, A. Torella3,
F. Testa10, B. Jimenez11, F. Simonelli10, J. De Zaeytijd12,
J. Van den Ende13, B. P. Leroy1,12,14, F. Coppieters1,
C. Ayuso5,6, C. F. Inglehearn2, S. Ban ﬁ3,4, E. De Baere1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,2Section of
Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, School of Medicine,University of Leeds, St James ’s University Hospital, Leeds,
United Kingdom,
3Medical Genetics, Department of
Precision Medicine, Università degli Studi della Campania“Luigi Vanvitelli ”, Naples, Italy,
4Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy,5Genetics
Department, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-FundaciónJimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,
6Center
of Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases,
Madrid, Spain,7Flanders Institute for Biotechnology (VIB),
Department of Medical Protein Research, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium,8Center for Developmental Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Seattle Children ’s Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States,9Department ofAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1239Ophthalmology, St. James ’s University Hospital, Leeds,
United Kingdom,10Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary
Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental Sciences,
Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli ”,
Naples, Italy,11Department of Ophthalmology, Fundación
Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,
12Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,13Center for
Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp,Belgium,
14Division of Ophthalmology, The Children ’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States
RAX2 encodes a homeobox-containing transcription factor,
in which four monoallelic pathogenic variants have been
previously described in autosomal dominant cone-dominated retinal disease. Here, exome sequencing in a
European cohort with inherited retinal disease (IRD)
(n=2086) revealed biallelic RAX2 sequence and structural
variants in ﬁve unrelated European index cases, displaying
non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa
(ARRP) with an age of onset ranging from childhood to themid 40s (average mid 30s). Protein structure modeling of
the novel recessive missense variants points to loss-of-
function while a dominant-negative effect is predicted forthe previously reported dominant RAX2 alleles. Structural
variants were ﬁne-mapped to disentangle their underlying
mechanisms and haplotyping of c.335dup in two casessuggests a common Belgian ancestry. One additional
unrelated Belgian ARRP patient carried the same
c.335dup allele in the absence of a second RAX2 coding
or structural variant, suggesting a role for non-coding
variants in RAX2 associated ARRP. To conclude, we found
biallelic pathogenic variants in RAX2 to be associated with
ARRP, revealing RAX2 as a novel gene for recessively
inherited rod-dominated retinal diseases. The identi ﬁcation
ofRAX2 biallelic pathogenic variants in ﬁve families of
European origin indicates that this gene may underlie a non-
negligible fraction of ARRP cases of other populations that
still lack a molecular diagnosis. The RAX2 mutational
spectrum was broadened from sequence to structural
variants (SVs). Finally, the identi ﬁcation of pathogenic
structural variants in RAX2 stresses the importance of SV
assessment in WES and WGS data in IRD.
Funding: BOF15/GOA/011; BOF/01D04716; FWO/
1145719N; FWO/1802215N; Italian Telethon Foundation
S. Van de Sompele: None. C. Smith: None. M. Karali:
None. M. Corton: None. K. Van Schil: None. F. Peel-
man: None. T. Cherry: None. T. Rosseel: None. H.
Verdin: None. J. Derolez: None. T. Van Laethem: None.
K.N. Khan: None. M. McKibbin: None. C. Toomes:
None. M. Ali: None. A. Torella: None. F. Testa: None.
B.
Jimenez: None. F. Simonelli: None. J. De Zaeytijd: None.
J. Van den Ende: None. B.P. Leroy: None. F.Coppieters: None. C. Ayuso: None. C.F. Inglehearn:
None. S. Ban ﬁ:None. E. De Baere: None.
P02.57C
Investigation of the role of a homozygous mutation in
BBS10 in non syndromic retinal degeneration
A. V. Vig1,2, E. Tavares2, O. Kehelwathugoda1,2,
A. Mollica1,2, J. Maynes2,1, A. Vincent2,1, E. Heon2,1
1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,2The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
Introduction: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is rare auto-
somal recessive disorder, characterized by retinal degenera-tion, obesity, digital anomalies, genito-urinary defects, and
variable cognitive impairment. It is part of a broader
pleotropic class of diseases called ciliopathies. Ciliopathiesare caused by mutations in genes that play important roles
in the function of cellular signaling organelles called cilia.
BBS10 encodes a chaperonin –like protein that mediates
assembly of the BBSome, which transports vesicles to cilia.
BBS10 is one of the most frequently mutated BBS genes,
accounting for approximately 16% of cases.
Methods: A 29 yo female from a consanguineous family
had non-syndromic cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and did not
have any mutation identi ﬁed using standard of care clinical
genetic testing. Whole exome sequencing was performed.
Candidate variants were assessed based on family segre-
gation, predicted effect on protein structure and function,amino acid conservation, and population frequency.
Results: Whole genome sequencing revealed a novel
homozygous mutation in BBS10 . The variant is rare and
segregated in the family. It occurs at a residue which is
highly conserved among chaperonins. Based on modelling
of BBS10 secondary structure, it is predicted that the variantcould 1) affect multimer assembly or 2) alter how ATP
hydrolysis induces the protein conformation changes that
are vital to chaperone function.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed a rare homozygous
variant we presume signi ﬁcant in BBS10 in a patient with
non-syndromic CRD. We are exploring the functionalconsequences of the variant through phenotyping a patient-
derived ﬁbroblast cell line.
Funding: FFB, Mira Godard, McLaughlin Centre, ORF
A.V. Vig: None. E. Tavares: None. O. Kehelwathu-
goda: None. A. Mollica: None. J. Maynes: None. A.
Vincent: None. E. Heon: None.
P02.58D
Clinical utility of a custom NGS panel in routineevaluation of retinal dystrophies1240I. Hernan, E. Borràs, M. Gamundi, B. Mañé, V. García-
Prieto, B. Delàs, M. Carballo
Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, SpainIntroduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are a broad group
of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders
affecting the retina. The non-syndromic forms of RD can
be attributed to mutations in more than 100 genes.Consequently, next generation sequencing (NGS) technol-
ogies are among the most promising approaches to identify
mutations in RD patients.
Materials and Methods: A cohort of patients including
independent cases with various forms of RD, especially
Retinitis Pigmentosa and Stargardt disease were analysed.To identify the RD causative gene, a custom SureSelect
capture panel (Agilent) targeting 104 genes associated with
non-syndromic retinal disease was developed. NGS librar-ies were run on Illumina MiSeq or HiSeq Sequencer.
Analyses, annotation, ﬁltration and variant curation were
done using GeneSystems software (Sistemas Genómicos).When it was possible, segregation analysis of the candidate
variant was performed in additional family members by
Sanger sequencing.
Results: A pathogenic variant was identi ﬁed in 25 RD
patients (58%), including novel mutations in ABCA4,
CACNA1F, EYS andPRCD gene. In 7 patients, a variant of
unknown signi ﬁcance was detected; a functional test would
be necessary to assess their clinical signi ﬁcance.
Conclusions: Five novel variants have been identi ﬁed as
a causative mutation for RD using the custom capture panel.
The designed NGS assay achieves a detection rate of almost
60% and provides an adequate routine assay for geneticanalysis of patients with retinal disease.
I. Hernan: None. E. Borràs: None. M. Gamundi: None.
B. Mañé: None. V. García-Prieto: None. B. Delàs: None.
M. Carballo: None.
P02.59A
Copy number variants (CNVs) identi ﬁed by
comprehensive genetic testing of inherited retinal
dystrophies
L. Guidugli
1, S. Tuupanen1, M. Mehine1, K. Kämpjärvi1,
L. Koskinen1, K. Wells1, J. Känsäkoski1, M. Valori1,
I. Saarinen1, M. Muona1, E. Sankila2, S. Myllykangas1,
J. W. Koskenvuo1, T. Alastalo1
1Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland,2Helsinki University
Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Retinal dystrophies (RD) are disorders that damage the
photoreceptors in the retina and cause visual impairment.Prompt, comprehensive genetic diagnosis of RD can assist
in risk assessment, symptom management and selection of
the appropriate targeted treatment. The genetic testing needs
to take into account sequence alterations and copy number
variants (CNVs). We evaluated the rates and characteristics
of CNVs in 2754 patients tested using a comprehensiveRD panel.
DNA from patients was sequenced by targeted OS-Seq
using the Illumina NextSeq500 sequencing platform or theIDT xGEN Exome Research Panel using the Illumina
NovaSeq platform. CNVs were detected by CNVkit and an
in-house developed deletion caller.
CNVs in 47 genes matching the patient ’s phenotype were
reported in 4.6% of the cases. Of the CNVs, 71.1% were
partial gene deletions, 13.3% whole gene deletions, 3.1%one exon deletions, and 0.8% partial exon deletions. 11.7%
of the identi ﬁed CNVs were duplications (partial or whole
gene). 88.3% of CNVs were likely pathogenic or patho-genic, 11.7% were variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance. Of the
likely pathogenic and pathogenic CNVs, 73.4% were
diagnostic. USH2A and PRPF31 were enriched in CNVs
compared to other genes. Notably, CNVs were identi ﬁed
also in genes in which CNVs are not commonly reported,
e.g.ABCA4 andRPE65 .
These results highlight the importance of comprehensive
genetic testing for the diagnosis of retinal dystrophies. We
identi ﬁed CNVs ranging from one exon to whole gene
deletions in multiple genes. In addition, we detected a
relative high percentage of copy number duplications that
warrant further investigation.
L. Guidugli: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Tuupanen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M.
Mehine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. M. Valori: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M.
Muona: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patentor other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J.W. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-
erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1241Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics.
P02.60B
Prevalence and characteristics of RPGR ORF15
variants in patients with inherited retinal dystrophies
J. Sistonen1, S. Tuupanen1, K. Kämpjärvi1, P. Siivonen1,
M. Mehine1, J. Känsäkoski1, K. Wells1, J. Schleit1,
M. Valori1, P. Salmenperä1, E. Sankila2, E. Salminen1,
T. Alastalo1, J. Koskenvuo1, S. Myllykangas1
1Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland,2Helsinki University
Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: The exon ORF15 in RPGR is a mutational
hotspot for X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP). How-
ever, it generally performs poorly in standard sequencing-
based assays due to a highly repetitive purine-rich sequence.To address the clinical importance of RPGR ORF15 and the
lack of high-quality next generation sequencing (NGS)
-based diagnostics, we aimed to develop a comprehensiveclinical test for inherited retinal dystrophies.
Materials and Methods: We optimized a whole exome
sequencing work ﬂow with the Illumina NovaSeq 6000
platform to cover 266 retinal dystrophy-associated genes,
including the dif ﬁcult-to-sequence region in RPGR ORF15.
We evaluated the performance of RPGR sequencing in 1587
unselected patient samples.
Results: In our clinical cohort, the overall diagnostic
yield was 58%. A molecular diagnosis in RPGR was
identi ﬁed in 5.7% (90/1587) of the patients. The 90
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants consisted of 63 fra-
meshift (70.0%), 21 nonsense (23.3%), three missense(3.3%), and two consensus splice site (2.2%) variants, and
one gross deletion (1.1%). Seventy-one out of 90 (79%)
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were detected in theORF15, of which 28 (39%) were in the dif ﬁcult-to-sequence
central region between residues p.824 and p.1077. Female
patients accounted for 24% of the diagnostic cases.
Conclusions: Our results highlight the importance of
RPGR ORF15 sequencing in retinal dystrophy patients. The
high-quality NGS-based assay enables rapid and reliablemolecular diagnostics of RPGR ORF15, and enhances the
identi ﬁcation of patients for ongoing gene therapy trials.
J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Tuupanen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K.
Kämpjärvi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. P. Siivonen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Mehine: A.Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Wells: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Valori: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁ
cant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Sal-
menperä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. E. Salminen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-
erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P02.61C
Prevalence and genetic characteristics of RPE65-
associated retinal disease
J. Tommiska
1, T. Alastalo2, K. Kämpjärvi1, L. Guidugli2,
J. Känsäkoski1, K. Wells1, H. Västinsalo1, M. Kaare1,
L. Sarantaus1, P. Salmenperä1, M. Gentile1, S. Bruce1,
E. Sankila3, J. W. Koskenvuo1, S. Myllykangas1,
S. Tuupanen1
1Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland,2Blueprint Genetics,
San Francisco, CA, United States,3Helsinki University Eye
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
RPE65 variants are associated with severe retinal diseases
including Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and retinitis
pigmentosa (RP). Recent advancements in targeted therapyhave incentivised genetic diagnostics and increased the
efforts to identify RPE65 patients eligible for therapy. We
evaluated the prevalence of RPE65 variants in 2240 retinal
dystrophy patients by using next-generation
sequencing (NGS).
Methods: Patients with LCA, RP, rod-cone dystrophy, or
early onset retinal dystrophy were tested at a CLIA certi ﬁed
laboratory 2016 - 2018. Analysis was done using in-house
developed and validated NGS, bioinformatics and clinicalinterpretation.1242Results: Of 18 patients (0.8%) with RPE65 -related dis-
ease, 7 (38.8%) had LCA, 4 (22.2%) had RP, 6 (33.3%)
were affected with severe early onset retinal dystrophy, and
one (5.5%) had congenital stationary night blindness
(CSNB). The median age at molecular diagnosis was 13
years (range 1 - 60 years). Of the 35 disease-associatedRPE65 variants 18 (51%) were missense, 10 (29%) protein
truncating, 5 (13%) splice site variants, and 2 (5.7%) copy
number variants (CNVs). Two (11.1%) patients carried aCNV: a single exon deletion and a deletion of the whole
RPE65 gene, respectively. Twelve (67%) patients had at
least one loss-of-function variant. One patient had thec.1430A>G, p.(Asp477Gly) variant associated with auto-
somal dominant disease and displayed an atypical
form of RP.
Conclusions: RPE65 has a signi ﬁcant role in LCA and is
important in differential diagnostics of retinal dystrophies.
Our results also highlight the importance of high-qualitygenetic diagnostics covering both sequence variants and
CNVs for optimized diagnosis and clinical care.
J. Tommiska: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K.
Kämpjärvi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. L. Guidugli: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Känsäkoski:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Västinsalo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. M. Kaare: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Sarantaus: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-
erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. S. Bruce: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila:
A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. J.W.
Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Tuupanen: A.Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics.
P02.62D
Identi ﬁcation of pathogenic mutations in genes involved
in non syndromic hearing loss and Usher syndrome
F. Cesca
1,2, E. Bettella1,2, R. Polli1,2, E. Leonardi1,2,
M. C. Aspromonte1,2, M. Bellini1,2, A. Sensi3, S. Bigoni4,
P. Scimemi5,6, R. Santarelli5,6, A. Murgia1,2
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment,
Department of Women ’s and Children ’s Health, University
of Padua, Padua, Italy,2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca
Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padua, Italy,3U.O.
Medical Genetics Romagna, M. Bufalini Hospital, Cesena,
Italy,4Medical Genetics Unit, Ferrara University Hospital,
Ferrara, Italy,5Audiology and Phoniatric Service,
Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua,
Italy,6Santi Giovanni e Paolo Hospital, ULSS3
Serenissima, Venice, Italy
Non-syndromic hearing loss is characterized by a vast
genetic heterogeneity; some syndromic forms have onset asisolated deafness and then evolve later in life, as Usher
syndrome. We developed an NGS targeted gene-panel of 59
genes using the Ion Torrent PGM
TMplatform combined
with a customized bioinformatic pipeline for the analysis of
DNA samples from clinically highly selected subjects with
sensorineural hearing loss, negative for GJB2 mutations/
GJB6 deletions. Among the 158 subjects tested, 64 were
found to carry pathogenic variants (41%) that in 18 cases
(28%) altered genes involved both in NSHL and Ushersyndrome ( ADGRV1, CDH23, MYO7A, PCDH15, USH1C,
USH2A ); 13 of these subjects were under 15 years of age
and were largely referred for NSHL. 7/18 positive-subjectscarried mutation in CDH23 , the most frequently mutated
gene in our cohort. We achieved a diagnosis of Usher
syndrome type I in three subjects (3 y.o.; 6 y.o.; 16 y.o.)with congenital profound hearing loss, retinal anomalies/
retinitis pigmentosa and/or history of motor delay, who
carried mutations in CDH23, MYO7A andPCDH15 . Usher
syndrome type II was diagnosed in a 12 y.o. boy referred
for congenital bilateral mild hearing loss and subsequently
found to have early signs of retinal alteration. 13 novellikely pathogenic mutations were identi ﬁed in NSHL/Usher
genes; 1 splice-site mutation has been further characterized
at the RNA level. We demonstrate the importance andefﬁcacy of integrating the powerful NGS technology with a
comprehensive careful clinical evaluation, to reach an
earlier diagnosis and provide important prognostic andfollow-up information.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1243F. Cesca: None. E. Bettella: None. R. Polli: None. E.
Leonardi: None. M.C. Aspromonte: None. M. Bellini:
None. A. Sensi: None. S. Bigoni: None. P. Scimemi:
None. R. Santarelli: None. A. Murgia: None.
P03
Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney, liver,
gastrointestinal)
P03.01A
Visceral myopathy due to a novel deletion of the ACTG2
gene: a case report
M. Kraatari1,2,3, H. Kokkonen2,4, M. Mäkinen2,5,
S. Turunen6, J. Moilanen1,2,3, O. Kuismin1,2,3
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University
Hospital, Oulu, Finland,2Medical Research Center, Oulu
University Hospital, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,
3PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland,4Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab,
Oulu, Finland,5Cancer and Translational Medicine
Research Unit, Department of Pathology, University ofOulu, Oulu, Finland,
6Department of Children and
Adolescents, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland
Introduction: ACTG2 -related disorders are a part of
visceral myopathy, a rare hereditary myopathic degenera-
tion of gastrointestinal and urinary tracts causing chronicintestinal pseudo-obstruction. Visceral myopathy is char-
acterized by impaired intestinal function and motility
resulting in severe abdominal pain, malnutrition and evendeath. Inter- and intrafamilial variability is present.
Diagnostic criteria include absence of mechanical obstruc-
tion and histological examination of intestinal biopsies.
Materials and Methods: We report a 10-year-old boy
referred to Oulu university hospital in March 2016 due to
pseudo-obstruction of the small intestine. Previously, per-sistent ductus arteriosus was closed operatively and diag-
nosis of functional growth hormone disturbance was placed.
He had suffered from periodic abdominal pain, vomitingand slow weight gain from infancy. His clinical picture was
severe and he was completely dependent on parental
nutrition. Clinical suspicion of visceral myopathy wasaroused.
Results: Deletion/duplication analysis of ACTG2 identi-
ﬁed a heterozygous likely pathogenic deletion encompass-
ing the entire ACTG2 . Chromosomal microarray showed a
heterozygous microdeletion 2p13.1 of 84 kb including the
exons 2-9 of ACTG2 and entire DGUOK . The deletion was
not identi ﬁed in the parents and thus, was considered de
novo .Conclusions: We identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous dele-
tion of ACTG2 explaining the patient ’s phenotype. Muta-
tions in ACTG2 cause visceral myopathy. The
microdeletion also included DGUOK . Mutations in
DGUOK lead to autosomal recessive deoxyguanosine
kinase de ﬁciency causing neurological symptoms and liver
dysfunction. No other pathogenic mutations were identi ﬁed
inDGUOK . To the authors ’knowledge, no deletions in
ACTG2 have previously been reported causing visceral
myopathy.
M. Kraatari: None. H. Kokkonen: None. M. Mäkinen:
C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt ofdrugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Amgen. S. Tur-
unen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau,
symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Abbvie. J. Moila-
nen: None. O. Kuismin: None.
P03.02B
The genetic background in a group of 56 Polish patients
with suspected Alport syndrome
P. Halat-Wolska
1, E. Ciara1, L. Obrycki2, J. Antoniewicz2,
K. Gadomska-Prokop2, J. Kosi ńska3, M. Rydzanicz3,
D. Siestrzykowska1, P. Stawi ński3,4, B. Cha łupczy ńska1,
D. Jurkiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Pelc1, D. Piekutowska-
Abramczuk1, K. Iwanicka-Pronicka1,5, P. Iwanowski1,
J. Lesiak2,A . Łuba2, A. Niemirska2, A. Rogowska6,
D. Wicher1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, R. Grenda2,
K. Chrzanowska1,R .P łoski3, M. Litwin2
1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children ’s Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of
Nephrology, The Children ’s Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland,3Department of Medical Genetics,
Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland,4Department
of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology ofHearing, Warsaw, Poland,
5Department of Audiology and
Phoniatrics, The Children ’s Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland,6Department of Ophthalmology, The
Children ’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is a clinically and
genetically heterogeneous nephropathy caused by patho-
genic variants in COL4A3-COL4A5 . While most (80%) AS
cases are X-linked, approximately 15% and 5% areautosomal recessive or dif ﬁcult to differentiate from thin
basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) dominant
forms. Digenic inheritance among COL4A3-COL4A5 or
their concomitance with other glomerulopathy or chronic
kidney disease (CKD) related genes, has been recently
proposed to explain the variable phenotypic expression andincomplete penetrance frequently observed in AS patients.1244Materials and Methods: NGS analysis of 55 glomer-
ulopathy and CKD related genes was performed in a group
of 56 unrelated Polish patients with suspected AS.
Results: In all patients clinical diagnosis was con ﬁrmed
at the molecular level. Overall, 17 known and 32 novel,
likely pathogenic alterations in COL4A3 -COL4A5 were
identi ﬁed. The inheritance was X-linked in 73% of cases,
remaining 9% autosomal recessive and 18% were dominant
AS/TBMN. Changes were randomly distributed across allCOL4A3 -COL4A5 coding regions, however we revealed a
recurrent COL4A5 variant c.1871G>A in twelve patients.
Additionally, four patients with this alteration had likelypathogenic variant in COL4A3 ,HNF1B orMYH9 , which
may modify disease ’s severity.
Conclusions: The results of this study broaden the gen-
otypic spectrum of AS, which will facilitate future research
on the genotype-phenotype correlations. Multiple-gene
sequencing is an effective approach to obtain geneticinformation in AS, particularly about the mode of inheri-
tance which is important for counselling and may help to
predict the clinical course, especially for those patients withmild, non-speci ﬁc or atypical phenotype.
Partially supported: CMHI-M29/18
P. Halat-Wolska: None. E. Ciara: None. L. Obrycki:
None. J. Antoniewicz: None. K. Gadomska-Prokop:
None. J. Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. D.
Siestrzykowska: None. P. Stawiński:None. B. Cha łupc-
zyńska: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. P. Kowalski: None.
M. Pelc: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. K.
Iwanicka-Pronicka: None. P. Iwanowski: None. J.
Lesiak: None. A.Łuba: None. A. Niemirska: None. A.
Rogowska: None. D. Wicher:
None. M. Krajewska-
Walasek: None. R. Grenda: None. K. Chrzanowska:
None. R. P łoski: None. M. Litwin: None.
P03.03C
Genotype/phenotype correlations in carriers of a single
autosomal COL44A3 andCOL4A4 mutation
A. Cian ﬂone1,2,3, H. Storey4, F. Flinter1, F. Forzano1
1Clinical Genetics department, Guy ’s & St Thomas ’NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,2Department
of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetic
and Maternal and Infantile Sciences (DINOGMI),University of Genova, Genova, Italy,
3Ospedale Policlinico
San Martino IRCCS-Medical Genetic Unit, Largo R. Benzi
10, Genova, Italy,4Molecular Genetics, Viapath, Guy ’s
Hospital, London, United Kingdom
Alport ’s syndrome is complex: 85% cases show X linked
inheritance with pathogenic mutations in COL4A5 and 15%
autosomal recessive inheritance with pathogenic mutationsinCOL4A3 andCOL4A4 . All affected individuals develop
renal failure, usually as young adults.
Carriers of a single autosomal mutation develop Thin
Basement Membrane Nephropathy (TBMN) associated
with ‘benign familial haematuria ’. We analysed a cohort of
119 individuals (29 probands and 85 relatives identi ﬁed by
cascade testing) with heterozygous mutations in COL4A3 or
COL4A4 identi ﬁed by Next Generation Sequencing and
assessed genotype/phenotype correlations. 70% had hae-maturia, 38% developed proteinuria, 21% had chronic
kidney disease and 10% reached end stage renal disease.
36% of our cohort had a single mutation in COL4A4
c.2906C>G p.(Ser969Ter), representing 18% of cases of
proteinuria. 50% of these patients developed proteinuria
compared with 31% of patients with other mutations. Therisk of eGFR falling below 60ml/min increased from 6% to
8% in patients with the COL4A4c.2906C>G p.(Ser969Ter)
mutation. Single COL4A3/4 mutations are recognised sus-
ceptibility factors for developing proteinuria, hypertension
and renal disease in later life, but these risks have pre-
viously not been quanti ﬁed. It is recommended that all
patients with a single COL4A3/4 mutation should have
annual checks of blood pressure and urine, with a low
threshold for prescribing an ACE inhibitor, and this isimportant for those with the high-risk genotype.
In conclusion, this is the largest study ever performed of
the implications of carrying a single autosomal COL4A3/4
mutation and our ﬁndings clarify the risk of renal disease in
this population.
A. Cian ﬂone: None. H. Storey: None. F. Flinter: None.
F. Forzano: None.
P03.04D
Molecular genetic analysis in patients with clinically
suspected autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease
L. Obeidova
1, V. Elisakova1, T. Seeman2, J. Reiterova3,
J. Vcelak4, J. Stekrova1
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic,2Department
of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University
in Prague and Motol University Hospital in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Nephrology, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and
General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic,4Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech
Republic
Introduction: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease (ARPKD) is a severe form of chronic kidney
disease, frequently diagnosed prenatally or in an early age.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1245ARPKD is primaly caused by mutations in the PKHD1
gene, nevertheless, phenotype of polycystic kidneys
clinically resembling ARPKD can be caused by mutations
in number of other genes, such as HNF1 β, PKD1, PKD2,
NPHP etc. Thus, the molecular genetic analysis can be very
useful in differential diagnosis of ARPKD in patient. Theresults of molecular genetic analysis in eleven patients with
clinically suspected ARPKD, who did harbor mutations in
other genes than PKHD1, are presented.
Materials and Methods: The molecular analysis was
carried out using next-generation sequencing method with
enrichment capture-based and amplicon-based library pre-paration. The panel of approximately 80 genes associated
with the formation of polycystic kidneys was analyzed.
Results: The most frequent mutations found in our group
of patients were variants in the TMEM67 gene (5 patients).
In three patients, mutation in PKD1 was detected (in one
patient in combination with PKHD1 mutation in trans). Twopatients harbored combination of two mutations: (1) muta-
tion in PKHD1 and TMEM237, (2) PKHD1 mutation and
deletion of 3 exons in the NPHP3 gene. In one patient,deletion of whole HNF1 βgene was identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: Because of an etiologic heterogeneity of
polycystic kidney disease phenotype, the complex muta-tional analysis, encompassing analysis in other genes
(especially TMEM67), should be used for reliable differ-
ential diagnosis. Supported by the grant projects GAUK
1015 ,PROGRES- Q25/LF1 andRVO VFN64165
L. Obeidova: None. V. Elisakova: None. T. Seeman:
None. J. Reiterova: None. J. Vcelak: None. J.
Stekrova: None.
P03.05A
Gastrointestinal dysfunction in autism spectrum
disorder: New insights from the Foxp1 +/-mouse with
altered gut motility and achalasia
H. Fröhlich
1, M. Kollmeyer1, M. Stuhlinger1, V. Linz1,
D. Groneberg2, A. Reigl2, E. Zizer3, A. Friebe2,
B. Niesler1, G. Rappold1
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany,2Institute of Physiology, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany,3Department of Internal Medicine I,
University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany
Gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction is common in individuals
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but these symptoms
are often overlooked and it is still not clear how GI
dysfunction relates to the core features of ASD.FOXP1 syndrome is characterized by autistic traits, such
as social de ﬁcits, language impairment, and intellectualdisability. But feeding dif ﬁculties, constipation, and other
GI problems were also reported. Whether these symptoms
are due to primary impairment or a secondary effect of
altered behaviour or side effects of psychotropic medication
remains unclear.
We investigated the GI tract of patient-relevant Foxp1
+/-mice. These mice have a lower body weight than wild
type animals and show altered feeding behaviour. Foxp1
was expressed in all GI sections and was reduced in Foxp1+/-mice compared with WT. A pronounced atrophy of the
tunica muscularis was detected in the oesophagus and
colon, caused by reduced muscle cell proliferation. Nitricoxide-induced relaxation of the lower oesophagus sphincter
was impaired and achalasia con ﬁrmed in vivo by mano-
metry. Several Foxp1 targets previously identi ﬁed by
microarray analysis in the brain were signi ﬁcantly deregu-
lated in the oesophagus of Foxp1 +/- mice. The total gut
transit was signi ﬁcantly prolonged. Spatiotemporal maps
depicting the colonic contraction patterns revealed strongly
disturbed contractility and peristalsis. Overall, our ﬁndings
provide the ﬁrst evidence that GI disturbances in patients
with FOXP1 autism spectrum disorder may be caused by
impaired gut motility and achalasia, driven by FOXP1-
dependent deregulation of genes. Furthermore, this is theﬁrst report of achalasia being caused by a heterozygous
gene deletion.
H. Fröhlich: None. M. Kollmeyer: None. M. Stuhlin-
ger: None. V. Linz: None. D. Groneberg: None. A. Reigl:
None. E. Zizer: None. A. Friebe: None. B. Niesler: None.
G. Rappold: None.
P03.06B
HLA and non-HLA susceptibility genes to childhoodsteroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in the Japanese
population
X. Jia
1, T. Horinouchi2, Y. Hitomi1, Y. Kawai1, K. Nozu2,
C. Nagano2, T. Yamamura2, M. Nagasaki3, K. Tokunaga1,
K. Iijima2
1Dept Human Genetics, Grad Sch Medicine, Univ Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan,2Dept Pediatrics, Grad Sch Medicine, Kobe
Univ, Kobe, Japan,3Dept Integrative Genomics, Tohoku
Medical Megabank, Tohoku Univ, Sendai, Japan
Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS) is the most common
cause of kidney disease in children, about 80% of pediatric
patients respond to steroid treatment and are classi ﬁed as
steroid-sensitive NS (SSNS). Previous genome-wide asso-
ciation studies (GWASs) have identi ﬁedHLA-DR/DQ as
the predominant risk factors of childhood SSNS. Our groupreported the ﬁrst GWAS for childhood SSNS in Japanese.
Genome-wide signi ﬁcant associations were identi ﬁed in1246HLA-DR/DQ region and disease-associated HLA alleles and
haplotypes were further clari ﬁed (J Am Soc Nephrol , 2018).
To identify other loci contributing to susceptibility to
childhood SSNS, especially in non- HLA regions, we
performed an extended GWAS with a larger number of
samples. Discovery stage including 897 patients withchildhood-onset SSNS and 2,807 adult healthy controls
was carried out in the Japanese population, genotyped using
Affymetrix ‘Japonica Array ’. Whole-genome imputation
was conducted using a phased reference panel of 2,049
healthy Japanese individuals (2KJPN panel). Quality
control was performed to exclude the samples with lowcalling rate (<97%) and the variants with low genotyping
rate (<97%), minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.5% and
Handy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) test p-value <1×10
-5.
Association analysis was conducted using logistic regres-
sion with the adjustment of gender and principal compo-
nents. In this discovery GWAS, the most signi ﬁcant
association was detected in HLA-DR/DQ region as we
reported before (P =2.98×10-32, odds ratio (OR) =0.34).
Furthermore, two regions on chromosome 19 and 18 showedgenome-wide signi ﬁcant associations (p =3.28×10
-18,
OR=1.95; p =5.38×10-9,O R=1.65). Replication studies
were successfully performed in other Asian sample sets.
X. Jia: None. T. Horinouchi: None. Y. Hitomi: None.
Y. Kawai: None. K. Nozu: None. C. Nagano: None. T.
Yamamura: None. M. Nagasaki: None. K. Tokunaga:
None. K. Iijima: None.
P03.07C
Two genetic disease in one family: Cockaine Syndrome
(ERCC8 ) and Fanconi Bickels ( SLC2A2 )
M. Doco-Fenzy1, N. Calmels2, H. Thorn1, C. Poirsier1,
M. Spodenkiewiscz1, E. Gouy1, L. Le Collen1, R. Santer3,
B. Digeon4, A. Doe5, A. Lebre1, A. Lehmann6,
C. Obringer7, V. Laugel7, G. Thie ﬁn8
1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, Reims, France,
2Service de génétique, strasbourg, France,3genetic,
Hambourg, Germany,4Service de Pédiatrie, CHU-Reims,
Reims, France,5Service de Neurologie, CHU-Reims,
Reims, France,6Genome center Sussex university,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,7Service de Génétique, CHU-
Strasbourg, strasbourg, France,8Service de
Gastroentérologie, CHU-Reims, Reims, France
We report a rare consanguinous family suffering from 2
congenital autosomic recessive genetic disease. The parents
are cousins and have 7 children. 3 boys and 1 girl show
Cockaine syndrome (OMIM #216400) and 3 children (1 girland 2 boys) show Fanconi-Bickels symptoms (OMIM#227810) linked to GLUT2 de ﬁciency. Two boys are
affected by both Cockaine and GLUT2 de ﬁciency.
Fanconi-Bickels syndrome is related to SLC2A2 muta-
tions (3q26) and glucose transporter protein-2 (GLUT2)
defect. The typical clinical picture is characterized by
hepatorenal glycogen accumulation resulting in hepato- andnephromegaly. In this family the patients with SLC2A2
mutation show growth retardation, major hepatomegaly and
renal failure. The homozygous mutation is intronic: lVS9-1g>a /IVS9-1g>a.
In Cockaine syndrome, 2 genes are affected ERCC6 and
ERCC8 . Here a new homozygous pathogenic variation has
been identi ﬁed in ERCC8 (5q12.1): c.730C>T (exon 9)
(Calmel N et al .Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 ).ERCC8
encodes the CSA protein involved in DNA repair. Thepatients aging 15 to 28 years in the family show neonatal
photosensibility, growth retardation, dysmorphic features,
lypoatrophy, intellectual de ﬁciency, late onset deafness and
tremor. The RRS test (Recovery RNA synthesis after DNA
damage) was altered and UDS test (unscheduled DNA
synthesis) was normal. ERCC8 is involved in CockaineSyndrome and UV-Sensitive syndrome, both very rare in
Europe (1/200000 and 1/1000000 respectively).
The occurrence of several genetic pathology in the same
family is now more frequently presented. We report here the
association of two very rare syndromes affecting most
children in a unique family.
M. Doco-Fenzy: None. N. Calmels: None. H. Thorn:
None. C. Poirsier: None. M. Spodenkiewiscz: None. E.
Gouy: None. L. Le Collen: None. R. Santer: None. B.
Digeon: None. A. Doe: None. A. Lebre: None. A. Leh-
mann: None. C. Obringer: None. V. Laugel: None. G.
Thieﬁn:None.
P03.08D
Apparently isolated congenital hyperinsulinism due toKDM6A mosaic pathogenic variant
M. Yacobi Bach
1, E. Elkon Tamir2, S. Ben Shachar1,
O. Eyal3
1Genetics institute, Tel Aviv, Israel,2Pediatric
Endocrinology institute, Tel Aviv, Israel,3Pediatric
Endocrinology institute, Tel Aviv, Israel
Introduction: Kabuki Syndrome- KS is a syndrome with
multiple congenital anomalies. It is characterized by
dysmorphic facial features, craniofacial and skeletalanomalies, dermatoglyphic abnormalities, mild to moderate
cognitive decline, and postnatal growth de ﬁciency. Con-
genital hyperinsulinism as the presenting feature of KS, wasdescribed in 10 affected individuals. The gene KDM6A is
responsible for KS in approximately 5% of patients.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1247KDM6A mosaicism was reported in at least one patient
with typical KS manifestations .
Case report: A 20-month-old girl diagnosed with iso-
lated, persistent congenital hyperinsulinism responsive only
to Diazoxide treatment. She has no dysmorphic features,
normal development, and no structural anomalies. Mole-cular Analysis of the coding regions and exon/intron
boundaries of 16 genes responsible for congenital hyper-
insulinism was performed on a clinical basis by targetednext generation sequencing. A mosaic pathogenic variant in
the gene KDM6A c.514C>T p.Arg172Ter was detected in at
least 20%. of the cells. No other variants were identi ﬁed.
Discussion: It has been suggested previously that female
patients with KDM6A mutations have milder phenotypes
than males. This is the ﬁrst report of KDM6A pathogenic
variant causing isolated congenital hyperinsulinism in an
apparently healthy girl. It is likely that the combination of a
mosaic state of variant and female gender resulted in con-genital hyperinsulinism. We suggest the gene KDM6A will
be included in the molecular studies of isolated congenital
hyperinsulinism .
M. Yacobi Bach: None. E. Elkon Tamir: None. S. Ben
Shachar: None. O. Eyal: None.
P03.10B
Genetic Drivers of Congenital Chylothoraces
S. Schneider
1,2, A. C. Hilger1,2, H. Thiele3, J. Altmüller3,
A. Müller2, H. Reutter1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,2Department of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Cologne Center for
Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Congenital chylothoraces (CCT) are rare
fetal conditions, occurring in 1/10,000 pregnancies. Its
clinical course varies from small thoracic effusions to life ‐
threatening thoracic compression and secondary hydropsfetalis. Primary CCT result from malformations of the
thoracic lymphoid system, secondary CCT result from
cardiac anomalies or in ﬂammatory disease. Previous studies
suggest underlying genetic causes and found several genes
to be mutated in some patients with lymphatic disorders.
The aim of this study is to investigate new genetic driversfor primary CCT.
Methods: We applied whole-exome sequencing (WES)
in two affected sibling pairs and their healthy parents. Toidentify disease causing variants we applied standardized
ﬁltering of WES-data. First, we ﬁltered for autosomal-
recessive and autosomal-dominant novel variants. Second,the predicted deleteriousness and the conservation of the
mutations was controlled. Third, further research on thecandidate genes was done to specify the functional effects
of the mutations. The variants found in potential candidate
genes were validated and segregated by re-sequencing.
After prioritisation of the best candidate gene, re-
sequencing of this candidate gene in a cohort of 30 spora-
dic cases is warranted.
Results: Theﬁltering of WES-data identi ﬁed four rare
homozygous variants in ZNF512 (p.His90Arg), SMC6 (p.
Thr679Met), BRE (p.Ser11Cys) and GCKR (p.Arg149Lys).
Conclusions: We suggest novel recessive candidate
genes for congenital chylothoraces. Re-sequencing in a
cohort of 30 sporadic cases with congenital chylothoracesand functional studies in zebra ﬁsh of the most promising
candidate genes is pending.
S. Schneider: None. A.C. Hilger: None. H. Thiele:
None. J. Altmüller: None. A. Müller: None. H.
Reutter: None.
P03.11C
A novel homozygous nonsense mutation (p.R516X) in
theSLC5A5 gene causing congenital hypothyroidism
F. B. Isik
1, M. D. Sozuguzel1, B. K. Aydin2, C. Parlayan1,
M. Yildiz2, H. Cangul1
1Istanbul Medipol University, istanbul, Turkey,2Kanuni
Sultan Süleyman Training and Research Hospital, istanbul,Turkey
Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the most common
neonatal endocrine disorder with an incidence of 1 in 3500
live births and 2% of CH cases have familial origin. Unless
a timely treatment is introduced, CH causes mentalretardation and growth delay. More than 10 causative genes
have been described for the pathogenesis of inherited CH to
date. In this study we investigated a Mendelian cause of CHin a consanguineous family with 2 affected children. Both
cases showed short stature, mental retardation and bone age
retardation. Next generation sequencing analysis of 16candidate CH genes identi ﬁed a homozygous nonsense
change (p.R516*, c.1546C>T) in the S LC5A5 gene
(NM_000453.2) in both cases. We con ﬁrmed the presence
of this variant by Sanger sequencing and both parents and
the unaffected sibling carried this variant at heterozygous
state, underlying the co-segregation of the variant with thedisease status in the family. Moreover, this variant was not
present in 400 ethnically matched control chromosomes. p.
R516* variant in the S LC5A5 gene is not currently listed as
a mutation in clinical databases. Since (i) it introduces a
premature stop codon in the gene; (ii) co-segregates with the
disease status in the family and (iii) is not present in 400ethnically matched control chromosomes, here we report it
as a novel mutation causing congenital hypothyroidism.1248F.B. Isik: None. M.D. Sozuguzel: None. B.K. Aydin:
None. C. Parlayan: None. M. Yildiz: None. H.
Cangul: None.
P03.12D
Molecular analysis of CYP21A2 gene in 100 patients
with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-
hydroxylase de ﬁciency
E. Fylaktou1, A. Sertedaki1, E. Charmandari1,2
1Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes,
First Department of Pediatrics, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Medical School, ‘Aghia Sophia ’
Children ’s Hospital, Athens, Greece,2Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Biomedical Research
Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece
Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due
to 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency is an autosomal recessive
condition in which mutations of the cytochrome P450 21-hydroxylase gene ( CYP21A2 ) result in decreased synthesis
of glucocorticoids and often mineralocorticoids. The
clinical spectrum of the disease ranges from most severe,to mild forms depending on the degree of 21-hydroxylase
activity.
Materials and Methods: Seventy-one cases (69 referred
for CAH and 2 for prenatal diagnosis), as well as 29 siblings
of carriers/patients with CAH, were tested for CYP21A2
gene mutations. Long range PCR was employed to selec-tively amplify the CYP21A2 gene against its pseudogene,
followed by Sanger sequencing. MLPA analysis was
undertaken for samples with an indication of duplication/deletion of the gene.
Results: Thirty patients with CAH were compound het-
erozygotes or homozygotes, while forty were heterozygotesforCYP21A2 gene mutations. One of the prenatal cases was
compound heterozygote, while the other was simple het-
erozygote for CYP21A2 gene mutations. The most common
mutations detected were as follows: p.V281L (25%), p.
P30L (14%), I2 Splice Site (10%), p.I172N (4%), p.Q318X
(2%), p.P482S (3%), p.P453S (13%) and *13G>A 3' UTR(7%). Four parents with no clinical symptoms were found to
be compound heterozygotes for the non-classic form of
CAH. Eight samples harbored genomic rearrangements inone or both alleles of the gene.
Conclusion: Molecular analysis of the CYP21A2 gene is
essential for proper management of patients with CAH dueto 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency, as well as for genetic coun-
seling and prenatal diagnosis.
E. Fylaktou: None. A. Sertedaki: None. E.
Charmandari: None.P03.13A
Application of next-generation sequencing in the search
of genetic causes for Taiwanese patients with syndromic
disorders of sex development
M. TsaiDepartment of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan
Objective: This study aimed primarily to establish a rapid
and high-throughput genetic test for syndromic disorders ofsex development (DSD). Meanwhile, the applicability and
effectiveness of next-generation sequencing were evaluated
in searching for the remaining unknown causative genes ofthis inherited disease.
Methods: Patients with clinically diagnosis of DSD with
additional dysmorphic features were recruited. We appliedtheﬁlter-based hybridization method as the main strategy
for whole exome sequence (WES) enrichment. The ampli-
ﬁed exomes were hybridized against the DNA libraries and
sequenced subsequently. We ﬁnally used the integrated
computing programs to call the genetic variants for DSD.
Results: We enrolled a total of 10 syndromic DSD
patients. Targeted amplicons were smoothly generated with
adequate capture ef ﬁciency (coverage 98% of exons and
100% >30 read depths). Among them, we found 2 patientscompatible with CHARGE syndrome (one is c.1480C>T, p.
Arg494X and the other is c.6571G>A, p.Glu2191Lys in
CHD7 gene), one with Robinow syndrome(c.1571delCGGGTGGGGCAGCGfs in DVL1 gene), one
with OPHN1 syndrome (c.1171T>A, p.Arg391Trp in
OPHN1 gene), and one with FG syndrome (c.1864C>T, p.Glu622Lys in FLNA gene).
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed a number of genetic variants
accounting for syndromic DSD in Taiwanese population.With identi ﬁcation of these causative genes, it extended our
current understanding of sex development and related
congenital disorders. Further functional veri ﬁcation of these
variants may be needed on the cell line models.
Funding: This research was funded by the research
grants awarded by the National Cheng Kung University
Hospital (NCKUH-10702001 and NCKUH-10307006).
M. Tsai: None.
P03.14B
Splice site mutation in GRHPR gene in Iranian family
with ESRD and nephrocalcinosis
R. Miri Moosavi1, S. Saber1, A. Ebrahimi1,
T. Malakoutian2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12491Jordan medical and genetic laboratory, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,2Department of Nephrology,
Hasheminejad Kidney Center, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: End-stage renal disease (ESRD) occurs when
your kidneys clearly begin to shut down. Both genetic and
epigenetic increase risk of ESRD. A three-to nine-fold
greater risk of ESRD is observed in individuals with afamily history of ESRD, so role of genetic study is
important nowadays.
Material and Method: A 43-year-old, Iranian man were
detected ESRD with nephrocalcinosis (multiple stones).
According to nephrologist decision, primary hyperoxaluria
was considered so that was candidate for kidney and livertransplant. So, genetic analysis was requested to approve
mentioned diagnosis. Whole exome sequencing (WES) test
was performed to ﬁnd variants responsible for renal
disorder.
His parents had consanguineous marriage. His father and
two sisters suffered from nephrocalcinosis. According toresults of WES test and analysis all genes responsible to
renal disorder, one likely pathogenic/pathogenic variant
(c.735-1G>A) in splice site region was found in GRHPR
gene. This gene is responsible for primary hyperoxaluria
type 2 with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
Clinical manifestations in patients were same as Men-
tioned disease, after examining of clinical data. Familial
segregation was done and his father and two sisters are
carrier of this variant. Liver transplant might be consideredwithin kidney transplant in this case.
Conclusion: Genetic analysis should be considered in
renal failure to do the best management in therapy.
R. Miri Moosavi: None. S. Saber: None. A. Ebrahimi:
None. T. Malakoutian: None.
P03.15C
GCK mutations in Croatian MODY patients
A. Merkler
1,A . Špehar Uroi ć1, N. Krni ć1, H. Ljubi ć1,
D. Caban1, A. Acman Bari šić1,D .K a štelan1,2, J. Serti ć1,2
1University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia,
2University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is clinically and genetically heterogeneous group
of diabetes inherited in autosomal dominant manner. Itusually occurs in adolescence or young adulthood and
accounts for at least 1-3% of all diabetes. GCK-MODY is
one of four most common type of MODY with estimatedprevalence of 1:1000. It is characterized by mild, stablefasting hyperglycemia which is often discovered inciden-
tally during routine medical screening.
Materials and Methods: After clinical examination, 56
patients with stable hyperglycemia, small 2 hour increment
in OGTT, positive family history of type 2 or gestational
diabetes and negative pancreatic antibodies were tested forGCK-MODY. The promoter, whole coding region and
ﬂanking intronic regions of the GCK gene were analyzed by
Sanger sequencing. Pathogenicity of identi ﬁed mutations
was veri ﬁed in reference databases for mutations related
with GCK-MODY.
Results: 17 different mutations in GCK gene were found
in 32 patients. Most of the mutations were in exon 7 (six
mutations in 16 patients) and in exon 9 ( ﬁve mutations in 5
patients). The most common mutation was p.Thr228Met inexon 7 found in 8 patients from 4 different famillies. One
patient was apparently homozygous for mutation p.
Gly170Asp, but its true homozygosity is not yet con ﬁrmed,
it can be a result of an allele dropout due to SNP in the
primer region. In one patient we detected a novel variant
c.806T>G, p.Phe269Cys in exon 7.
Conclusions: GCK-MODY is frequently underdiagnosed
and inadequately treated. Treatment is rarely necessary if
the mild hyperglycemia remains stable.
A. Merkler: None. A.Špehar Uroi ć:None. N. Krnić:
None. H. Ljubi ć:None. D. Caban: None. A. Acman
Bari šić:None. D. Ka štelan: None. J. Sertić:None.
P03.16D
Novel variants in DHH gene identi ﬁed with 46,XY
gonadal dysgenesis
A. Aghayev
1, G. Toksoy1, S. Poyrazoglu2, B. Karaman1,
S. Avc ı1, Z. Yavas Abal ı2, U. Altunoglu1, F. Bas2,
F. Darendeliler2, S. Basaran1, Z. Uyguner1
1Dept. Med. Genet., Istanbul Med. Faculty, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Dept. Ped. Endocrinology,
Istanbul Med. Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Desert Hedgehog (DHH) a member of the
hedgehog family, is located in 12q13.1 and acts on earlytesticular development, testis cord formation and differ-
entiation of fetal Leydig cells. To date, six homozygous
mutations have been described in DHH in 46,XY patientsconferring phenotypes ranging from partial to complete
gonadal dysgenesis, associated with of without
polyneuropathy.
Materials and Methods: We investigated three patients
from two families with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, for
pathogenic sequence alterations in 31 associated genes, within-house-designed next generation sequencing (NGS) tar-
geted gene panel, using an Ion Torrent platform. Ultrasound1250and histopathological examination of the gonads with
electrophysiological examination of peripheral nerves were
performed. Protein modeling was done to predict the effect
of the missense mutations.
Results: We have identi ﬁed three different homozygous
mutations, one in two siblings, c.[1146G>A];[1146G>A],(p.[Trp382*];[Trp382*]), and two in singleton case,
c. [71G>C;1063C>T];[71G>C;1063C>T], (p.[Gly24Ala;
Arg355Cys];[Gly24Ala;Arg355Cys]). One of the siblingspresented with penoscrotal hypospadias, bilateral inguinal
testes, Mullerian structure evident on biopsy, no response to
HCG at one-year and raised as female initially. Secondsibling presented micropenis, bilateral inguinal testes, no
Mullerian structure, response was normal to HCG at age
14 days and raised as male. In addition, both patients suf-fered from polyneuropathy. Third patient presented at age
19 days with penoscrotal hypospadias, bilateral inguinal
testes, no Mullerian structure, low AMH and raised as male.
Conclusions: DHH mutation should be analyzed in
patients with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis for diagnosis and
the presence of potential neuropathy and gonadal tumors.
A. Aghayev: None. G. Toksoy: None. S. Poyrazoglu:
None. B. Karaman: None. S. Avc ı:None. Z. Yavas Abal ı:
None. U. Altunoglu: None. F. Bas: None. F. Darendeliler:
None. S. Basaran: None. Z. Uyguner: None.
P03.17A
HBx destabilizes TIP60 in HBV-induced hepatocellular
carcinoma
S. Hora
1,2, N. Kumari1, D. Rajagopalan1, L. Hooi1,
T. B. Toh1, K. K. Lee1,W .S .T e o1, T. Tan2, P. L. Chen1,
E. K. Chow1, H. P. Koef ﬂer1,S .J h a1,3
1Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore,2Department of Biochemistry, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore,
3Department of Biochemistry, National University of
Singapore, Sinagpore, Singapore
TIP60(TAT-interactive protein of 60 kDa),is a lysine
acetyltransferase (KAT5) and acts as a haplo-insuf ﬁcient
tumor suppressor in multiple cancer-types. TIP60 is known
to be destabilized by different onco-viruses and this
intrigued us to inspect its role in another onco-viruspathogenesis, hepatitis B virus (HBV). HBV, the leading
cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 6
thmost
common cancer in the world. Among the four overlappingopen reading frames of HBV, the HBV X gene (HBx) is
considered the causative agent for malignant transformation
associated with HBV infection. In this conference I amgoing to discuss data that show TIP60 being targeted by
HBx, a proto-oncogene of HBV proteasomally, by utilizingan E3 ubiquitin ligase, EDD1 in the cell. By utilizing
various cell culture models, we demonstrate that HBx and
TIP60 form a complex with EDD1. Interestingly, this
hacking of TIP60 protein, enables increased proliferation of
hepatocytes, as con ﬁrmed by various growth assays and
mechanistically by increased expression of TERT and
decreased levels of TIP60 protein. Additionally, tissue
microarray analysis(TMA)of HBV-positive malignant
tumor samples demonstrate a strong correlation betweenTIP60 and EDD1 levels, further supporting our hypothesis.
We therefore propose TIP60 as one of the cellular targets in
HBx mediated viral infection and to utilize small moleculeinhibitors against the identi ﬁed ubiquitin-ligase in HBx-
mediated HBV-carcinogenesis. In conclusion, our study has
identi ﬁed a relatively unknown role of HBx, its destabiliza-
tion of an epigenetic writer and the mechanism involved in
this phenomenon. This work was supported by MOE grants
(MOE AcRF Tier 1 T1-2012 Oct-04 and T1-2016 Apr-01)and CSI(R-713-006-014-271). SH is supported by NUS-
Research Scholarship awarded by NUS Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine.
S. Hora: None. N. Kumari: None. D. Rajagopalan:
None. L. Hooi: None. T.B. Toh: None. K.K. Lee: None.
W.S. Teo: None. T. Tan: None. P.L. Chen: None. E.K.
Chow: None. H.P. Koef ﬂer:None. S. Jha: None.
P03.18B
Next generation sequencing approach for determining
the molecular basis of familial hematuria
O. Beltcheva
1, K. Kamenarova1, K. Mihova1, A. Boueva2,
D. Roussinov3, G. Zlatanova3, V. Lazarov4, P. Miteva3,
M. Gaydarova3, B. Deliyska4, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry
and Biochemistry, Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Nephrology and Dialysis Clinics, SBALDB “Dr.
Lisichkova ”, Varna, Bulgaria,3SBAL Pediatric Diseases,
Nephrology and Hemodialysis Clinic, Department ofPediatrics, Medical University -So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Nephrology Clinic, University Hospital “Queen
Giovanna ”, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Hematuria is a non-speci ﬁc symptom of
kidney or urinary tract pathology. The presence of blood inthe urine could be due to trauma, infections, systemic
disease, disorders of the coagulation or genetic mutations
affecting the development and function of particular celland tissue types. The presence of family history is indicative
of a hereditary condition such as disorders of the basement
membrane, complement or podocytes. Differential diag-nosis of hematuria is crucial for successful treatment of the
underlying condition.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1251Materials and Methods: Illumina TruSight One
Sequencing Panel was used for mutation screening in 8
families with multiple members with hematuria. The index
patients were referred with initial diagnoses of glomerulo-
pathy, thin basement membrane nephropathy, uric acid
nephropathy, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, tubu-lointerstitial nephritis and/or chronic kidney disease.
Results: Using next generation screening we determined
the genetic cause of hematuria in Bulgarian families.Pathogenic variants were found in the type IV collagen
(autosomal recessive and dominant variants in COL4A4, X-
linked in COL4A5) and complement genes. Both missenseand splice mutations, known pathogenic and novel variants
were found. A potential role of heterozygous C1QC muta-
tions in the pathogenesis of G3 glomerulopathy wasobserved.
Conclusion: Clinical diagnosis of hereditary hematuria is
often hindered by phenotype variability, lack of informationfor disease progression in older family members, dif ﬁculties
in obtaining biopsy samples, etc. Addition of massive par-
allel sequencing of large gene to the diagnostic procedurewould allow timely and precise determination of the
molecular cause of the disease.
Grant references: D-73/2018; DUNK 01/2/2009
O. Beltcheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K.
Mihova: None. A. Boueva: None. D. Roussinov: None. G.
Zlatanova: None. V. Lazarov: None. P. Miteva: None.
M. Gaydarova: None. B. Deliyska: None. V. Mitev:
None. R. Kaneva: None.
P03.19C
A rare diagnosis: Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome in a
patient with pulmonary ﬁbrosis, oculocutaneous
albinism and thrombocytopathy
J. Trizuljak
1,2, M. Doubková3, A. Hrazdírová3,
Z. Vrzalová2, I. Blaháková2, L. Radová2,Š. Pospí šilová1,2,
M. Doubek1,2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and
Oncology, University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine,
Brno, Czech Republic,2Central European Institute of
Technology, Brno, Czech Republic,3Department of
Pulmonary Diseases and Tuberculosis, University Hospital
and Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic
Introduction: Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) is an
autosomal recessive disorder associated with oculocuta-neous albinism, bleeding diathesis, granulomatous colitis,
and highly penetrant pulmonary ﬁbrosis in some subtypes,
Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations inHPS1, HPS3, HPS4 and several other genes lead to clinical
manifestation of the disease.Materials and Methods: A 57-year-old patient with
congenital oculocutaneous albinism, thrombocytopathy and
late onset accelerated pulmonary ﬁbrosis was referred to our
clinic. Negative family history of these symptoms suggested
autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance. We performed
NGS analysis of proband-parents trio. Whole-exomelibraries were prepared according to the Nimblegen Seq-
Cap EZ Exome v3 protocol and sequencing was performed
on NextSeq 500 for all of them. Furthermore, we performedin silico analysis of a virtual gene panel, including HPS1,
AP3B1, HPS3, HPS4, HPS5, HPS6, DTNBP1, BLOC1S3 ,
andPLDN .
Results: Whole-exome sequencing identi ﬁed a com-
pound heterozygous genotype in HPS1 gene in the proband.
We identi ﬁed a pathogenic frameshift variant c.1189delC
(p.Gln397Serfs*2), resulting in a premature stop codon,
associated with HPS. Furthermore, we identi ﬁed a rare,
previously undescribed nonsense variant, c.1507C>T (p.Gln503*), resulting in a premature stop and mRNA
degradation. Presence of both variants was veri ﬁed by
Sanger sequencing. The following molecular-genetic ana-lysis of parents con ﬁrmed their heterozygous carrier status.
Conclusions: Compound heterozygous mutations in
HPS1 in the proband lead to disruption of HPS1 gene and
clinical manifestation of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome with
severe pulmonary ﬁbrosis leading to respiratory failure and
death. This study was supported by Czech Ministry ofHealth (grant AZV 16-29447A) and Masaryk University
(grant MUNI/A/1105/2018).
J. Trizuljak: None. M. Doubková: None. A. Hraz-
dírová: None. Z. Vrzalová: None. I. Blaháková: None. L.
Radová: None. Š. Pospí šilová: None. M. Doubek: None.
P03.20D
Genetic testing for hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia diagnosis: identi ﬁcation of new ENG and
ACVRL1 mutations in Italian families
F. Cro ’
1, C. Lapucci1, E. Buscarini2
1Synlab Italia - Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Castenedolo, Italy,2Hospital "Maggiore" ASST - European
Reference Network (ERN) HHT, Crema, Italy
Introduction: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
(HHT) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by
mucocutaneous telangiectasias, epistaxis and visceral arter-
iovenous malformations (AVMs). HHT-type-1 is caused byENG gene mutations and it is characterized by a high
incidence of pulmonary and cerebral AVMs. Type-2 is
caused by ACVRL1 gene mutations and it is associatedwith hepatic AVMs. Mutations in SMAD4 gene cause
Juvenile Polyposis/HHT syndrome. Here we report two1252cases with suspected HHT-1 and HHT-2 in which new
ENG and ACVRL1 mutations where found.
Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from blood
samples of patients with suspected HHT. ENG, ACVRL1
and SMAD4 genes were analyzed by Next Generation
Sequencing and results were con ﬁrmed by Sanger
Sequencing.
Results: Case-1: mutation c.780_781insCCTACG (p.
Ser260_Trp261insProTh) on ENG gene was identi ﬁed in a
16-year-old boy with epistaxis, PAVM and HHT-1 family
history. This mutation hasn ’t been reported yet. Genetic
testing was also performed in patient ’s three brothers and
two cousins. The mutation was identi ﬁed in one brother (4-
years-old, experiencing bleeding episodes) and both cousins
(9 and 7 years-old). Two brothers (15 and 9 years-old,without any HHT symptoms) resulted negative. Case-2:
mutation c.1327T>G (p.Cys443Gly) on ACVRL1 gene was
identi ﬁed in a 45-years-old woman with severe liver AVMs
and enlisted for transplantation, rare epistaxis and no HHT
family history. The mutation, consistent with clinical sus-
pect of HHT-2, hasn ’t been described yet.
Conclusions: Here we report new ENG and ACVRL1
mutations thought to be causative of hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia. Further clinical evaluation on carrier and not-carrier relatives will be performed.
F. Cro ’:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Synlab Italia. C. Lapucci: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Synlab Italia. E. Buscarini: None.
P03.21A
Enrichment for large deletions encompassing genes
expressed in the enteric nervous system in Hirschsprung
disease patients with additional associated anomalies
K. C. MacKenzie
1, C. S. Tang2, J. D. Windster1,3,T .L e4,5,
B. M. de Graaf1, R. van der Helm1, Y. van Bever1,C .E .J .
Sloots3, C. Meeussen3, D. Tibboel3, A. de Klein1,R .M .H .
Wijnen3, S. Lyonnet4,6,5, M. Garcia-Barcelo2,P .K .H .
Tam2, M. Alves1, A. Brooks1, R. M. W. Hofstra1,
E. Brosens1
1Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre –Sophia
Children ’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department
of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China,3Paediatric Surgery,
Erasmus Medical Centre –Sophia Children ’s Hospital,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,4Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris
Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France,
5Laboratory of embryology and genetics of congenital
malformations, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France,
6Service de Génétique, Necker Enfants Malades University
Hospital,, Paris, FranceHirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by absence
of enteric ganglia, primarily in the distal colon. Approxi-
mately 18% of patients have additional anatomical
malformations or associated neurodevelopmental disorders,
including autism and intellectual disability. A subset of
these patients have a known genetic syndrome in whichHSCR has a variable expression or penetrance. In others,
the genetic etiology is unknown and we hypothesize that
rare Copy Number Variation (CNV) impacts their diseasedevelopment. Indeed, rare Copy Number (CN) losses were
signiﬁcantly enriched in patients with HSCR and additional
anomalies without a known causal variant (n =23, p=3.64E
-
7), and not in isolated HSCR (n =20, p=0.700) or in HSCR
patients with a known RET or other causal variant (n =15,
p=0.705). Of the HSCR patients with additional anomalies
tested, at least ﬁve (three males and two females) had a
large de novo CNV and one male inherited an X-linked CN
loss. Patients with a known causal variant had a signi ﬁcant
lower burden of the known HSCR predisposing risk
haplotypes (P =0.0232), and isolated HSCR patients a
higher burden (P =0.0277) compared to patients with HSCR
and additional anomalies without a known causal variant.
The rare CN losses identi ﬁed are enriched for dosage
sensitive genes, expressed in the developing mouse entericnervous system (ENS; p =1.760E-10): SLC8A1 ,DDR1 ,
GNL1 ,GABBR1 ,MAPK8 ,UFD1L ,FHIT ,AKT3 ,TUBB ,
TBX2 ,BCAS3 andUSP32 . Additionally, the latter four, had
rare putative deleterious variants in HSCR patients without
a deleterious CNV, con ﬁrming our hypothesis that rare
CNV contributes to syndromic HSCR with unknowngenetic etiology.
K.C. MacKenzie: None. C.S. Tang: None. J.D. Wind-
ster: None. T. Le: None. B.M. de Graaf: None. R. van
der Helm: None. Y. van Bever: None. C.E.J. Sloots:
None. C. Meeussen: None. D. Tibboel: None. A. de
Klein: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. S. Lyonnet: None.
M. Garcia-Barcelo: None. P.K.H. Tam: None. M. Alves:
None. A. Brooks:
None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. E.
Brosens: None.
P03.22B
The impact of NRG1 expressions and methylation on
multifactorial Hirschsprung disease in Indonesia
Gunadi1, A. Kalim2, N. Budi2,N .A r ﬁan2, E. Purnomo3,
K. Iskandar3
1Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing,
Universitas Gadjah Mada/Dr. Sardjito Hospital,
Yogyakarta, Indonesia,2Faculty of Medicine, Public Health
and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta,Indonesia,
3Faculty of Medicine, Public Health andAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1253Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/UGM Academic
Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Background: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a complex
genetic disorder characterized by absence of ganglion cells
in the gastrointestinal tract. Our previous study revealed thatNRG1 rare variant frequency in Indonesian HSCR patients
is <1%. Therefore, we wished to investigate NRG1
expression and methylation effect on HSCR pathogenesisin Indonesia.
Methods: NRG1 type I ( HRG α, HRG β1, HRG β2,
HRG β3, HRG γandNDF43 isoforms), type II and type III
expressions in both ganglionic and aganglionic colon of
HSCR patients and control colons were analysed by real-
time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Next, we treatedthe extracted gDNA from HSCR patients ’and control
colons with sodium bisulfate and analyzed the methylation
pattern of NRG1 exon 1 with methylation-speci ﬁc PCR.
Results: NRG1 expressions were up-regulated in HSCR
patients colon compared with control (type I: 13.81±1.79
vs.15.22±1.22 vs. 17.78±1.27; type II: 13.93±1.52 vs.15.67±1.52 vs. 16.57±1.02; type III: 11.98±2.86 vs.16.24
±2.28 vs. 17.51±1.48, respectively), with p-value of 0.02,
0.03 and 0.01, respectively. Furthermore, HRG β1/HRG β2
expressions almost reached a signi ﬁcant difference between
ganglionic and control colons (13.07±1.32 vs. 14.75±1.26,
p=0.09). Most HSCR patients (80%) and controls (75%)
revealed partially methylated NRG1 .NRG1 methylation
levels were lower in the ganglionic and aganglionic than
control colons, however did not reach a signi ﬁcant level
(p=0.31 and 0.13, respectively).
Conclusions: We shows the aberrant NRG1 expression in
Indonesian HSCR patients and might not be due to DNAmethylation. Moreover, our study provides further insights
into the contribution of aberrant NRG1 expression in the
HSCR pathogenesis.
Gunadi: None. A. Kalim: None. N. Budi: None. N.
Arﬁan:None. E. Purnomo: None. K. Iskandar: None.
P03.23C
The circadian aspect of PNPLA3 p.I148M and TM6SF2
p.E167K in hypercholesterolemia
U. Kovac1, J. Kovac2, E. Malicev3, E. A. Jasper4,
K. Trebu šak Podkraj šek1,2, T. Battelino2,1,
K. K. Ryckman4, D. Rozman1
1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, University
Children´s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia,3University of
Ljubljana, Blood Transfusion Centre of Slovenia,Ljubljana, Slovenia,
4University of Iowa, Department of
Epidemiology, Iowa, IA, United StatesBackground and aims: Lipid metabolism is under
circadian control and long-term disturbance can lead to
metabolic syndrome. Herein we test the hypothesis that
variants rs738409 (p.I148M) in PNPLA3 and rs58542926
(p.E167K) in TM6SF2 associated with pathogenesis of
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease also represent novel
hypercholesterolemia-associated variants. We propose that
both non-synonymous variants associate with the change ofcircadian behavior in hepatic cells and contribute to the
development of the hypercholesterolemia.
Materials and Methods: DNA samples from a Slovenian
general screening programme of preschool children, age of
5, with known total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol diag-
nosed with FH were obtained (N =121). The frequency of
variants rs738409 and rs58542926 were compared to Eur-
opean individuals from 1000 Genomes and Exome variant
server databases. With CRISPR/Cas9 technology we gen-erated HepG2 cells with different PNPLA3 and/or TM6SF2
genotypes and assessed the metabolic, expression and pro-
liferation aspects.
Results: An association between the PNPLA3 rs738409
and TM6SF2 rs58542926 minor allele with hypercholes-
terolemia has been identi ﬁed if compared to European
males from 1000 Genomes (OR =1.451, 95%CI =1.093-
1.926, p<0.01; OR =0.3583, 95%CI =0.1536-0.8358,
p<0,05) and European Americans from EVS database(OR=1.491, 95%CI =1.075-2.097, p<0.05; OR =0.3621,
95%CI=0.1603- 0.8181, p<0,01). HepG2 cells were found
homozygous for rs738409 minor allele and rs58542926major allele. We currently evaluate the circadian expression
of both genes and the effect of cholesterol on genotypes of
genetically modi ﬁed cell lines.
Conclusions: We propose both polymorphisms as a
novel hypercholesterolemia-associated genetic variant that
disrupts the circadian rhythm and contribute to elevatedplasma lipids.
Acknowledgement: Slovenian Research Agency pro-
gram grant P1-0390 and graduate fellowship.
U. Kovac: None. J. Kovac: None. E. Malicev: None. E.
A. Jasper: None. K. Trebu šak Podkraj šek:None. T.
Battelino: None. K.K. Ryckman: None. D.
Rozman: None.
P03.24D
Large deletions are an underappreciated cause of
hyperinsulinism
T. W. Laver
1, M. N. Wakeling1, R. Caswell1, B. Bunce2,
J. A. L. Houghton2, K. A. Patel1, K. Hussain3, S. Ellard1,
S. Flanagan112541Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Exeter,
United Kingdom,2Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation
Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom,3Sidra Medicine, Doha,
Qatar
Introduction: Hyperinsulinism is a disorder where dysre-
gulated insulin secretion leads to hypoglycaemia. 50% of
patients do not have a mutation in a known gene. Large
contiguous gene deletions have been reported as anextremely rare cause of hyperinsulinism but are not
routinely screened thus these may be an underappreciated
cause of the disorder.
We aimed to assess the contribution of large deletions to
the aetiology of hyperinsulinism.
Materials and Methods: Using off-target CNV (copy
number variant) calling from targeted next generation
sequencing data we screened 865 patients with hyper-
insulinism for large deletions (>1Mb).
Results: We identi ﬁed causative contiguous gene dele-
tions in 16/865 patients in our cohort. 13 were previously
reported to cause hyperinsulinism: X chromosome deletions(Turner syndrome) (n =3), 9p deletions (n =9) and a 16p
deletion (n =1). We also identi ﬁed 3 patients with over-
lapping de novo deletions on chromosome 20. These were
the only novel large (>1Mb) de novo deletions within the
cohort. They are a new cause of hyperinsulinism.
Conclusions: 2% of patients in our cohort had causative
large contiguous gene deletions. This is likely to be an
underestimate of the prevalence of large deletions in
hyperinsulinism as some patients will have had cytogenetictesting prior to referral for hyperinsulinism genetic testing.
Large deletions are a rare but signi ﬁcant cause of hyper-
insulinism and should be screened for as part of geneticpanel tests for the disease. We also highlight a novel cause
of hyperinsulinism: 20p11.2 deletions.
Funding: Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society
(105636/Z/14/Z and WT098395/Z/12/Z).
T.W. Laver: None. M.N. Wakeling: None. R. Caswell:
None. B. Bunce: None. J.A.L. Houghton: None. K.A.
Patel: None. K. Hussain: None. S. Ellard: None. S.
Flanagan: None.
P03.25A
Searching for genes related to idiopathic central
precocious puberty (ICPP) in a Spanish cohort
N. V. Ortiz Cabrera
1,2, R. Riveiro Álvarez2, M. A. López
Martínez2, J. Cruz Rojo3, L. Garzón Lorenzo3, T. Gavela
Pérez2, P. Pérez Segura2, I. Aragón Gómez2, L. Soriano
Guillén2, M. J. Trujillo Tiebas2
1Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,
2Health Research Institute-Jiménez Díaz FoundationUniversity Hospital, Madrid, Spain,3Hospital Universitario
12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain
In the last decade, the number of Idiopathic Central
Precocious Puberty (ICPP) cases has decreased thanks to
the discovery of mutations in different genes. Theidenti ﬁcation of loss of function of the maternal imprinted
gene MKRN3 is the principal genetic cause of ICPP
1-12.
More recently DLK1 has also been discovered as another
imprinted gene implicated in the pathogenesis of ICPP13.
Aims of the study: 1) To analyze the presence of
pathogenic variants in 13 genes related to GnRH pathway;2) To evaluate the diagnostic yield of the coding region
analysis of MKRN3; 3) To determine the presence of copy
number variation (CNV) of DLK1 andMKRN3 genes; 4) To
exclude uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome14.
Patients and Methods: patients with ICPP were gathered
from 2015 to 2018. In 20 patients we analyzed the clinicalexome ﬁltered by 13 genes that included MKRN3 . Addi-
tionally, in another 11 patients we analyzed MKRN3 coding
region by Sanger sequencing. In all patients we analyzed: a)DLK1 coding region by Sange sequencing; b) CNVs of
MKRN3 andDLK1 by MLPA technique; c) UPD of chro-
mosome 14 using STRs markers.
Results: from the 31 patients recruited we found two
likely pathogenic variants in MKRN3 in one sporadic case
and in one familial case.
Conclusion: MKRN3 gene is the most frequent genetic
cause both sporadic and familial ICPP so we propose it as
theﬁrst one to be screened in the genetic approach of
patients with ICPP.
N.V. Ortiz Cabrera: None. R. Riveiro Álvarez: None.
M.A. López Martínez: None. J. Cruz Rojo: None. L.
Garzón Lorenzo: None. T. Gavela Pérez: None. P. Pérez
Segura: None. I. Aragón Gómez: None. L. Soriano
Guillén: None. M.J. Trujillo Tiebas: None.
P03.26B
Complex indel variant calling in a repetitive genomicregion
S. L. Wilkinson
1, M. Edwards1, S. John1, F. Honti1,
J. Mackintosh2, D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1,3
1Clinical Genetics and Genomics Laboratory, Royal
Brompton and Hare ﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London,
United Kingdom,2Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton
and Hare ﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom,3Genomic Medicine, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
KingdomAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1255Introduction: Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) represents a
collection of many different pulmonary disorders that
interfere with the tissue and space surrounding the alveoli,
causing irreversible damage. We performed genetic testing
on a patient diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
who also had telomere lengths in the 1stcentile.
Materials and Methods: Next-Generation sequencing
was performed on patient DNA using our in-house Respi-
gene™panel of 172 genes. An in-house bioinformatics
pipeline, con ﬁgured to interpret genes associated with rare
respiratory conditions, was used to classify SNVs
and CNVs.
Results: Initial analysis did not detect any potentially
pathogenic variants in genes associated with ILD in the
patient. Another laboratory reported a RTEL1 splice variant:
c.1266+3A>G. Further investigation using different variant
callers detected a 78bp deletion at the RTEL1 exon 15/
intron 15 boundary. Sanger sequencing and Tapestationanalysis con ﬁrmed the patient to be heterozygous for the
78bp deletion. This deletion is classi ﬁed as a VUS, but we
consider it more likely pathogenic than benign. The c.1266+3A>G variant showed an allelic balance of less than 40%,
and our results suggest it is an artefact caused by bioin-
formatic misalignment of the complex repeat region.
Conclusion: Complex and repetitive genomic regions
still prove challenging for routinely-used variant calling
software and Sanger sequencing. The error in variant callingmay have resulted in a missed genetic diagnosis in this
patient. Increasing intronic ﬂanking regions for bioinfor-
matic analysis when performing targeted sequencing and‘training ’of bespoke bioinformatic pipelines will improve
detection of complex variants in the exon/intron boundaries
and beyond.
S.L. Wilkinson: None. M. Edwards: None. S. John:
None. F. Honti: None. J. Mackintosh: None. D.J. Morris-
Rosendahl: None.
P03.27C
Changes in human physiology in response to three-weekinactivity or how your training trains your microbiome
R.Šket
1,2, T. Debevec3,4, S. Kublik5, M. Schloter5,
N. Treichel5, B. Murovec6, D. Makuc7,K .P e čnik7,
J. Plavec7, I. Mekjavi ć3, O. Eiken8, J. Kova č1,
Z. Prevor šek9, B. Stres2,10,11
1University Medical Centre Ljubljana Slovenia, Division of
Paediatrics, Unit of Special Laboratory Diagnostics,Ljubljana, Slovenia,
2Group for Microbiology and
Microbial Biotechnology, Department of Animal Science,
Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,Slovenia,
3Department of Automation, Biocybernetics and
Robotics, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia,4Faculty of Sport, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,5Research Unit for Comparative Microbiome
Analysis, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany,
6Laboratory for Machine Inteligence, Faculty of Electrical
Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
7Slovenian NMR Centre, National Institute of Chemistry,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,8Department of Environmental
Physiology, Swedish Aerospace Physiology Centre, RoyalInstitute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden,
9Group for
Genetics, Animal Biotechnology and Immunology,
Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty,University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
10Faculty of
Civil and Geodetic Engineering, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,11Center for Clinical Neurophysiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Introduction: We explored pathophysiological conse-
quences of inactivity and hypoxia on human physiology
and intestinal microbiota in healthy males during therandomized crossover design of run-in (5 day) and
experimental phases [21-day normoxic bedrest (NBR),
hypoxic bedrest (HBR) and hypoxic ambulation (HAmb)(hypoxic ~4000 m simulated altitude)] in a strictly
controlled laboratory environment, with balanced ﬂuid
and dietary intakes and 24/7 medical surveillance.
Materials and Methods: Incorporating system medicine
approach, intestinal transit spanning constipation,
eosinophil-derived neurotoxin, bile acids, diet composition,intestinal electrical conductivity, indole etc., along with
NMR metabolomics, were assessed. Furthermore, structure,
diversity and function of intestinal microbiota using shot-gun metagenomics were investigated. Finally, all observa-
tions were integrated and analyzed in correlation to negative
physiological symptoms, related to obesity and metabolicsyndrome in same participants.
Results: Inactivity negatively affected fecal consistency
and in combination with hypoxia aggravated the state of gutinﬂammation. On the other hand, many of the microbial
parameters were shown to lag behind the changes in human
physiology and intestinal environment, since signi ﬁcant
changes in bacterial community were delayed until week four
in HBR only, where members of the genus Bacteroides and
proteins involved in iron acquisition and metabolism, cellwall, capsule, virulence and mucin degradation were enriched.
Conclusions: Our multi-omics approach suggest a time-
dependent and complex interplay between the host physiol-ogy (including apparent constipation), immunity (in ﬂamma-
tion), controlled diet, intestinal environment variables and
microbiome physiology during the acute cessation of exer-cise. Funding: PlanHab project (Grant no. 284438) and
Young Research Fellowship to R Š(SRA#37426).1256R.Šket: None. T. Debevec: None. S. Kublik: None. M.
Schloter: None. N. Treichel: None. B. Murovec: None. D.
Makuc: None. K. Pečnik: None. J. Plavec: None. I.
Mekjavić:None. O. Eiken: None. J. Kovač:None. Z.
Prevor šek:None. B. Stres: None.
P03.28D
A novel homozygous CARMIL2 variant leads to
infantile-onset colitis and gastrointestinal eosinophilicdisease without recurrent infections
A. Kurolap
1,2, O. Eshach Adiv1,2,3, L. Konnikova4,5,6,
L. Werner7, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui8, M. Steinberg2,
V. Mitsialis5,6, A. Mory2, M. Y. Nunberg7, S. Wall5,
R. Shaoul1,3, J. D. Overton8, A. R. Shuldiner8, Y. Zohar1,9,
T. Paperna2, S. B. Snapper5,6,10, D. S. Shouval7, H. Baris
Feldman1,2
1The Bruce and Ruth Rappaport School of Medicine,
Technion, Haifa, Israel,2The Genetics Institute, Rambam
Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel,3Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa,
Israel,4Devision of Newborn Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States,5Division of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston
Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,6Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,7Pediatric
Gastroenterology Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children ’s
Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel,
8Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, United States,
9Institute of Pathology, Rambam Health Care Campus,
Haifa, Israel,10Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology
and Endoscopy, Brigham and Women ’s Hospital, Boston,
MA, United States
Introduction: Infantile-onset colitis refers to in ﬂammatory
gastrointestinal (GI) disorders manifesting before the two
years of age. Nearly 100 genes have been implicated insyndromes presenting with early-onset colitis. We aimed to
decipher the genetic basis of severe infantile colitis and
eosinophilic GI disease without recurrent infections in a 10-years-old boy, and subsequently characterize his GI and
immunological phenotypes.
Materials and Methods: We used trio whole exome
sequencing (WES) for pathogenic variant discovery. Protein
expression was studied using western blot (WB) analysis
and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Immunologicalworkup included in vitro T-cell studies, ﬂow cytometry and
CyTOF analyses.
Results: WES revealed a rare homozygous variant in
CARMIL2: c.1590C>A; p.Asn530Lys. The variant was
predicted pathogenic and co-segregated with the disease inthe nuclear family. WB and IHC studies revealed markedly
reduced CARMIL2 expression in patient cells compared to
controls. Comprehensive in vitro immunological analyses
demonstrated severely reduced regulatory T-cells (T
reg) with
impaired CD4+T cell proliferation and T reggeneration.
CyTOF analysis revealed signi ﬁcant shifts in the innate and
adaptive immune cells of the patient compared to ulcerative
colitis patients and healthy controls.
Conclusions: Pathogenic bi-allelic CARMIL2 variants
cause an immunode ﬁciency syndrome characterized by
recurrent infections and skin lesions, occasionally with
concurrent diarrhea. This study expands our knowledge onthe immune landscape alterations caused by CARMIL2
defects and underscores the role of CARMIL2 as a candidate
gene for early-onset in ﬂammatory and eosinophilic GI
disease. The predominant GI manifestations in the patient
warrant further study of CARMIL2 function in the gut.
A. Kurolap: None. O. Eshach Adiv: None. L. Konni-
kova: None. L. Werner: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals Inc.. M. Steinberg: None. V. Mitsialis:
None. A. Mory: None. M.Y. Nunberg: None. S. Wall:
None. R. Shaoul: None. J.D. Overton: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals
Inc.A.R. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc.. Y. Zohar:
None. T. Paperna: None. S.B. Snapper: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-
niﬁcant; NIH grants HL59561, DK034854, and AI50950;
the Helmsley Charitable Trust; and the Wolpow Family
Chair in IBD Treatment and Research. D.S. Shouval: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; The Israel Science Foundation and
Jefferey Modell Foundation grants. H. Baris
Feldman: None.
P03.29A
Clinical utility of gene panel sequencing for diagnosis of
early-onset chronic kidney disease
A. Domingo Gallego
1, M. Pybus1, G. Bullich1, P. Ruiz1,
L. Lorente-Grandoso1, M. Furlano1, G. Fraga2,
G. Ariceta3, M. Borregán3, J. Piñero-Fernández4,
L. Rodríguez-Peña4, I. Llano-Rivas5, R. Sáez6,
L. Guirado1, R. Torra1, E. Ars1
1Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain,2Hospital de la
Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,3Hospital Vall
d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,4Hospital Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,5HospitalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1257Universitario Cruces, Bizkaia, Spain,6Hospital Donostia,
San Sebastián, Spain
Introduction: Inherited kidney diseases (IKD) are the
leading cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in the ﬁrst
three decades of life and encompass a broad range ofnephropathies.
Methods: Targeted next generation sequencing with high
sequencing depth of a large IKD-gene panel was performedin 426 patients with early-onset CKD (<30 years), including
patients with: 1) congenital abnormalities of the kidney and
urinary tract (CAKUT) (n =89) (with bilateral anomalies
and/or extrarenal defects and/or familial CAKUT), 2) renal
cystic ciliopathies (n =180), 3) suspected inherited glo-
merular disease (n =129) and 4) renal tubulopathies/
nephrolithiasis/nephrocalcinosis (n =28).
Results: Causative mutations were found in 64% (271/
426) of patients: 42% (37/89) with CAKUT, 76% (137/180)with renal cystic ciliopathies, 60% (77/129) with suspected
inherited glomerular disease and 71% (20/28) with renal
tubulopathy/nephrolithiasis/nephrocalcinosis. Copy numbervariants were detected in 11% of all genetically diagnosed
patients (29/271). Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 57
different genes, 10 of which ( COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5,
HNF1B, NPHP3, PAX2, PKD1, PKD2, PKHD1 andTSC2 )
explained 75% (203/271) of patients.
Conclusion: Our IKD-gene panel allowed a precise
molecular diagnosis in nearly two-thirds of patients with
early-onset CKD. The high diagnosis yield of our approach
can be explained by 1) the ef ﬁcient detection of copy
number variants and variants in complex genomic regions,
such as PKD1 gene, due to the high sequencing depth and
2) the strict clinical inclusion criteria to favor genetic testingin patients with likely monogenic cause of nephropathy.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III/FEDER(PI16/01998,
PI18/00362).
A. Domingo Gallego: None. M. Pybus: None. G. Bul-
lich: None. P. Ruiz: None. L. Lorente-Grandoso: None.
M. Furlano: None. G. Fraga: None. G. Ariceta: None. M.
Borregán: None. J. Piñero-Fernández: None. L. Rodrí-
guez-Peña: None. I. Llano-Rivas: None. R. Sáez: None.
L. Guirado: None. R. Torra: None. E. Ars: None.
P03.30B
Large effect of rare variants with large effect sizes in(sporadic) IPF
J.Šelb, M. Rijavec, K. Osolnik, P. Koro šec
University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases
Golnik, Golnik, SloveniaIntroduction: Rare variants in telomere metabolism
associated genes have recently been shown to be important
contributors to idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), regard-
less of the family history. We aimed to validate the result in
an independent cohort of IPF patients.
Methods: We calculated that in order to have 80% power
to detect at least one IPF patient with a causative mutation
in a telomere metabolism associated gene, if the prevalence
of mutations is the same as in the above referenced study(13.2%), we had to sequence 11 patients for the presence of
mutations in those genes. To get a random sample we
included 11 consecutive IPF patients, regardless of theirfamily history of IPF, at their control visit at our University
Clinic. All patients had IPF diagnosis according to ATS/
ERS/JRS/ALAT guidelines. Sequencing of telomere meta-bolism associated genes was performed on the Illumina
platform.
Results: Demographic statistics of our sample were
comparable to other IPF demographics with regard to age
(mean age =71.2 years), IPF family history (1/11 (9.1%))
and sample male predominance (8/11 (72.7%)). In 2 out of11 (18.2%) patients, none of which had a family history of
IPF and were therefore classi ﬁed as sporadic IPF cases, the
causative variant was found (NM_001283009(RTEL1):c.326_329del (p.I109fs); NM_001193376(TERT):
c.1374delC (p.W459fs)). Despite suf ﬁcient coverage (mean
coverage =121X) we didn ’t conﬁrm the causative variant
in the only patient with a family history of IPF in our
cohort.
Conclusions: Causative variants in telomere metabolism
associated genes play a signi ﬁcant role also in sporadic IPF.
J.Šelb:None. M. Rijavec: None. K. Osolnik: None. P.
Koro šec:None.
P03.31C
A new form of hereditary iron overload unlinked toknown hereditary hemochromatosis genes
D. Wallace, N. SubramaniamIHBI, School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is normally caused by
homozygosity for pathogenic mutations in the HFE
(homeostatic iron regulator) gene. Other autosomal reces-
sive forms of HH are associated with mutations in genes
involved in iron homeostasis including hemojuvelin ( HJV),
hepcidin ( HAMP ) and transferrin receptor 2 ( TFR2 ).
Autosomal dominant forms of iron overload are associated
with mutations in the cellular iron exporter ferroportin(SLC40A1 ), with a single case linked to a mutation in the
5’UTR of the H-ferritin gene ( FTH1 ). We describe a family1258with apparent autosomal dominant iron overload with
characteristics similar to the classical form of ferroportin
disease. The condition is characterised by elevated serum
ferritin levels with normal or mildly elevated transferrin
saturation. Perls ’Prussian blue staining of liver biopsy
sections in two affected individuals show prominent irondeposition in both Kupffer cells and hepatocytes. Sequen-
cing of the coding sequences and splice sites of genes
known to cause HH revealed no mutations in the proband.Whole genome SNP genotyping was performed on 15
members of the pedigree. Linkage analysis showed
haplotypes on regions of chromosomes 1, 3, 12, 18 and19 that were shared among the four most clearly affected
members of the pedigree but not present in the three most
clearly unaffected members. These regions encompass atotal of 93 megabases, approximately 3% of the human
genome and contain over 1500 canonical genes. Impor-
tantly, these genomic intervals do not contain the SLC40A1
gene indicating that affected members of this family do not
have a variant form of ferroportin disease.
D. Wallace: None. N. Subramaniam: None.
P03.32D
Transcriptome pro ﬁling in regenerating rat liver after
partial hepatectomy, portal vein ligation, and associated
liver partition and portal vein ligation for staged
hepatectomy
D. Colak
1, O. Al-Harazi1, I. H. Kaya2,3, O. M. Mustafa1,
F. Meng4,5, A. M. Assiri5,6,2, D. K. Dhar4,5,7,
D. C. Broering4,2
1Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Scienti ﬁc Computing
Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2College of Medicine, AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,3Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Scienti ﬁc
Computing Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Department
of Surgery and Organ Transplantation Center, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,5Comparative Medicine Department, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,6Institute for Research and Medical Consultations,
Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, SaudiArabia,
7Institute for Liver and Digestive Health,
Regenerative Medicine & Fibrosis Group University
College London, Royal Free Hospital, London, UnitedKingdom
Introduction: Liver has phenomenal capacity to regenerate,
which has been shown clinically where diseased liver parts
are removed to preserve and stimulate the growth of theremaining healthy tissues. Several surgical techniques have
been developed for such purpose, including partial
hepatectomy (PH), intraoperative portal vein ligation
(PVL), and associated liver partition and portal vein ligation
for staged hepatectomy (ALPPS). Indeed, while clinical
outcomes are somewhat comparable, different proceduresshow clinically distinct recovery patterns. The observable
clinical differences likely mirror some underlying variations
in the patterns of gene activation and regenerationpathways.
Materials and Methods: We provided a comprehensive
comparative analysis of the gene regulation in regeneratingrat livers temporally spaced at 24h and 96h after PH, PVL,
and ALPPS using the next-generation RNA sequencing
transcriptomics analysis.
Results: The time-dependent factors appear to be the
most important determinant of post-injury alterations of
gene expression in liver regeneration. Early transcriptomicchanges that were found in all three procedures included
cell cycle associated genes and immune-response activation
genes as well as transcription factors, DNA replicationregulators, G1/S-transition regulators, and cytokinesis.
Conclusions: The functional pathway and gene network
analyses revealed both unique and overlapping molecularmechanisms and pathways for each surgical procedure.
Identi ﬁcation of molecular signatures, such as gene-to-gene
interactions, regenerative signaling pathways, speci ﬁct o
each surgical procedures further our understanding of key
regulators of liver regeneration as well as patient popula-
tions that are likely to bene ﬁt from each procedure. Fund-
ing: This study is funded by KFSHRC Research Grants
(2110006 and 2180030 to DC).
D. Colak: None. O. Al-Harazi: None. I.H. Kaya: None.
O.M. Mustafa: None. F. Meng: None. A.M. Assiri: None.
D.K. Dhar: None. D.C. Broering: None.
P03.33A
Biallelic LZTR1 mutation in a patient with non-classical
Noonan phenotype
L. Tiberi
1, A. La Barbera2, A. Provenzano2, P. Reho2,
E. Bosi2, M. Bozzola3, S. Giglio2,4
1medical genetics unit Department of Experimental and
Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio" University ofFlorence, Florence, Italy,
2medical genetics unit
Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical
Sciences, Florence, Italy,3Pediatrics Unit University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy,4Medical Genetics Unit Meyer
Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy
Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant, multi-
systemic disorder caused by dysregulation of the RAS/Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1259mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Hetero-
zygous variants in 11 known genes account for approxi-
mately 80% of cases. Whole exome sequencing (WES)
studies recently identi ﬁed the existence of a recessive form
of Noonan syndrome caused by biallelic pathogenic LZTR1
variants, however information on the phenotypes of LZTR1
patients and functional properties of the mutations are
limited. We report a 15-year-old boy with typical facial
features of NS in the absence of congenital heart defects,cardiomyopathy, skin anomalies and intellectual disability.
The patient had been treated with growth hormone (GH)
between ages 11 and 15 without any effect on growth. WESrevealed compound heterozygosity for a missense LZTR1
variant c.2102C>G; p.Pro701Arg inherited from his healthy
father and a missense variant c.2062C>G: p.Arg688GlyNM_006767 inherited from his mother. We identi ﬁed the
variant inherited from his mother by exome reanalyses
modifying pipelines parameters. Both variants were in theBTB domain of LTZR1. Mutations in LZTR1 , already
known to be causal in familial schwannomatosis type 2,
have been recently involved in some patients withautosomal dominant and recessive Noonan syndrome in
which clinical manifestations include cardiomyopathy and
intellectual disability. This is the ﬁrst case in which only
facial features, short stature and no response to GH therapy
are reported. Recently LZTR1 was associated to sporadic
cerebral tumors so it is necessary a careful clinicalobservation in order to consider GH treatment in patients
carrying LZTR1 variants.
L. Tiberi: None. A. La Barbera: None. A. Provenzano:
None. P. Reho: None. E. Bosi: None. M. Bozzola: None.
S. Giglio: None.
P03.34B
Utility of MODY probability calculator among HNF1A-
and GCK-MODY Polish patients (a retrospectiveanalysis)
M. Szopa, D. Ucieklak, I. Solecka, I. Solecka,
S. Mrozinska, J. Hohendorff, M. Sani, M. Malecki
JUMC, Krakow, PolandIntroduction: The most common form of monogenic
diabetes is MODY. An easy-to-use MODY predictionmodel for identifying genetic-test indicated patient cases
was developed in 2012: www.diabetesgenes.org/content/
mody-probability-calculator . The aim of this study was to
validate the utility of this tool with MODY patients in the
Polish population.
Materials and Methods: Our MODY patient database
was established 18 years ago at the Department of Meta-
bolic Diseases, JUMC, Krakow, Poland and was based ontypical clinical inclusion criteria. Patients in the database
who provided all answers to the MODY calculator ques-
tionnaire --106 GCK-MODY and 92 HNF1A-MODY--
were included. The control group was established with 85
T1DM individuals and it does not include any T2DM
patients due to insuf ﬁcient number of sub-35-year-old
T2DM cases in our outpatient clinic --as required in the
calculator model.
Results: The mean predictive value using the calculator
was 63.1% for GCK-MODY and 44.92% for HNF1A-
MODY patients. This is in contrast with the mean calculator
predictive value of 4.82% for T1DM patients. Only twoT1DM patients out of 85 obtained a calculator predictive
value higher than 25% -- the minimum suggested criteria for
genetic testing referral. Only 11 GCK-MODY patients and33 HNF1A-MODY patients received a sub-25% score.
Sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for both types of MODY were
77.78% and 97.65% respectively. GCK-MODY whencompared to HNF1A-MODY obtained better sensitivity.
Conclusion: The model based on the Hattersley's group
calculator reliably indicated genetic testing for GCK-MODY patients among our sub-population of Polish
patients. The obtained results for HNF1A-MODY patients
were also satisfactory.
M. Szopa: None. D. Ucieklak: None. I. Solecka:
None.
I. Solecka: None. S. Mrozinska: None. J. Hohendorff:
None. M. Sani: None. M. Malecki: None.
P03.35C
Assessment of genes known to be associated with MODYby next-generation sequencing
O. Cilingir
1, B. Durak Aras1, E. Simsek2,D .C ınar1,
M. A. Temena1, S. Arslan1, H. Bas1, E. Erzurumluoglu1,
S. Artan1
1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics, Esk ısehır, Turkey,
2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Esk ısehır, Turkey
MODY (Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young) is a
autosomal dominant heterogeneous form of diabetes
mellitus which mainly affects children and young adults.
The defect in beta cell function is the cause of MODY.There are several known subtypes of MODY and each
subtype occurs by pathogenic variants of different genes.
Approximately 80% of MODY occurs by GCK andHNF1A pathogenic variants in European population, but
different ethnics may have different rates of subtypes. This
study aimed to explain the genetic architecture of MODY-suspected 132 Turkish patients. In this study, genes known
to be associated with MODY ( SLC161,KLF11,G6PC2,1260HADH,MOG,ZFP57,RFX6,GCK,PAX4,BLK,GLIS3,NEUR
OG3,GLUD1,INS,KCNJ11,ABCC8, HNF1A,PDX1,HNF1B,
INSR,NKX2-2,HNF4A,FOXP3 ) were sequenced by using
IonTorrent S5 and runs were then analyzed with bioinfor-matics pipeline. Of 132 patients, pathogencic, VUS(variant-
unknown-signi ﬁcance), and DAP(disease-associated poly-
morphism) were detected in 39 patients. Additionally, anew variant identi ﬁed in GCK is classi ﬁed as pathogenic
according to ACGM criteria and this variant was deter-
mined as de novo with the segragation analysis. The mostcommon pathogenic variants were seen in GCK and the
results are shown on the table. The novel variant detected in
GCK results in premature stop codon because of frame shiftmutation. The pathogenic variants detected in different
genes revealed that NGS method is suitable to test genetic
ethiology of multigenic diseases like MODY.
Table: Mutations and frequencies (%) in 39 patients.O. Cilingir: None. B. Durak Aras: None. E. Simsek:
None. D. C ınar: None. M.A. Temena: None. S. Arslan:
None. H. Bas: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. S.
Artan: None.
P03.36D
Molecular characterization of a cohort of MODY
patients from the North of Portugal
F. E. D. R. Laranjeira
1, I. Ribeiro1,2, A. Amado3,
E. Pinto1, J. Vilaverde3, A. R. Soares4, S. Rocha1,
A. Carvalho3, S. Teixeira3, J. Dores3,2, C. Amaral3,
I. Palma3, C. Reis4, M. T. Pereira3, C. Freitas3, C. Soares4,
M. J. Oliveira3, R. Almeida3, G. Soares4, A. Fortuna4,2,
D. Quelhas1,2, H. Cardoso3,2Genes Mutations Genotype Classi ﬁcation n Frequencies (%)
GCK p.Arg191Trp (c.571C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51
p.Gln38Pro (c.113A>C) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75
p.Arg191Gln (c.572G>A) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51
p.Thr228Met (c.683C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51
p.Asp364Glyfs)
(c.1090_1091insGCTGCGACCCTCGACCACCG) NovelHeterozygous VUS 1 0,75
p.Ala380Thr (c.1138G>A) Heterozygous VUS 2 1,51
p.Arg37Trp (c.109C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51
p.Val227Met (c.679G>A) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75
BLK p.Ala71Thr (c.211G>A) Heterozygous VUS 6 4,54
p.Asp166fs (c.497delA) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75
PDX1 p.Pro33Ala (c.97C>G) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51
RFX6 p.Glu75Gln (c.223G>C) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75
c.2393+8T>C Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75
G6PC2 p.Tyr207Ser (c.620A>C) Heterozygous DAP 2 1,51
HADH p.Phe92Cys (c.275T>G) Heterozygous VUS 5 3,78
HNF1A p.Ala15Thr (c.43G>A) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75
HNF1B p.His336Asp (c.1006C>G) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75
PDX1
HADHp.Pro33Thr (c.97C>A)
p.Gly34Ser (c.100G>A)Compound
HeterozygousPathogenic VUS 1 0,75
RFX6
HNF4Ap.Glu75Gln (c.223G>C)
p.Gln10Terp (c.28C>T)Compound
HeterozygousVUS
VUS1 0,75
G6PC2
HNF4Ap.Tyr207Ser (c.620A>C)
p.Gln10Terp (c.28C>T)Compound
HeterozygousDAP
VUS1 0,75
G6PC2
INSRp.Tyr207Ser (c.620A>C)
p.Val1012Met (c.3034G>A)Compound
HeterozygousDAP
VUS1 0,75
SLC16A1
GCKp.Tyr359Ser (c.1076A>C)
p.Thr229Met (c.686C>T)Compound
HeterozygousVUS
Pathogenic1 0,75
PAX4 HNF4A c.539-5C>T
p.Ile463Val (c.1387A>G)Compound
HeterozygousVUS
VUS1 0,75
WILD TYPE 93 70,45
TOTAL 132 100Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12611Unidade de Bioquímica Genética, Centro de Genética
Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalh ães, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal,2Unidade
Multidisciplinar de Investigaç ão Biomédica (UMIB),
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Serviço de
Endocrinologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Porto, Portugal,4Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro de
Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalh ães, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal
Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is a group of monogenic disorders of autosomal
dominant transmission resulting from a primary defect in
insulin secretion, associated with pancreatic β-cell dysfunc-
tion. It is the cause in approximately 2% of diabetic
patients, but it is frequently misdiagnosed as type 1 or type
2 diabetes. Although fourteen different genes have beenimplicated, mutations in the glucokinase gene, GCK , and
genes coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 α,1βand 4 α
(HNF1A ,HNF1B andHNF4A , respectively), are the most
common causes of MODY, accounting for up to 70% of
mutated alleles.
Methodology: 112 patients with criteria for MODY type
diabetes, from adults Endocrinology or Genetics consulta-
tion, underwent molecular genetics testing at UBG. Mole-
cular genetics studies were performed by Sanger sequencingof one or more of the following genes, according to clinical
suspicion: HNF1A ,GCK ,HNF4A andHNF1B .
Results: We present the molecular characterization of 24
patients where a de ﬁnite or probable causing mutation was
identi ﬁed, thus 21%. Fourteen (58%) are HNF1A-MODY,
eight (33%) are GCK-MODY and two (8%) are HNF1B-MODY. Eighteen different mutations were identi ﬁed - 10 in
HNF1A ,6o n GCK and 2 on HNF1B - including 3 novel
mutations: c.1146_1156del and c.1422_1424delGCCin-sCAG in HNF1A and c.863T>C on GCK .
Conclusions: The prevalence of HNF1A-MODY and
GCK-MODY in our cohort is much lower than the valuesdescribed. The MODY spectrum in Portugal is expected to
be different from the one reported in other populations and
will be revealed after the study of remainder MODY genes.
F.E.D.R. Laranjeira: None. I. Ribeiro: None. A.
Amado: None. E. Pinto: None. J. Vilaverde: None. A.R.
Soares: None. S. Rocha: None. A. Carvalho: None. S.
Teixeira: None. J. Dores: None. C. Amaral: None. I.
Palma: None.
C. Reis: None. M.T. Pereira: None. C.
Freitas: None. C. Soares: None. M.J. Oliveira: None. R.
Almeida: None. G. Soares: None. A. Fortuna: None. D.
Quelhas: None. H. Cardoso: None.
P03.37A
Mutations in the Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Alpha(HNF1A ), 4 Alpha ( HNF4A ) and 1 Beta ( HNF1B )i n
Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young in Croatia
D. Caban1,2, A. Merkler1, H. Ljubi ć1,A . Špehar Uroi ć1,
N. Krni ć1,M . Čavlovi ćNagli ć3, L. Smir čić-Duvnjak3,
D. Ka štelan1, J. Serti ć1,4
1University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia,
2University of Applied Health Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia,
3Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia,4University
of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes that is
characterized by an early onset (usually before 25 years),autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and a primary
defect in pancreatic β-cell function. MODY is a common
form of monogenic diabetes and it may account for 1% to2% of all diabetes cases in Europe. Many people with
MODY are misdiagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
Materials and Methods: All adult subjects with diabetes
onset under age of 45 years and currently older than 18
years. Other inclusion criteria are: evidence of endogenous
insulin secretion (fasting or random C-peptide ≥0.2 nmol/
L) and negative glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies
(GADA), islet cell autoantibodies (ICA) and islet tyrosine
phosphatase 2 (IA2). We analysed 44 patients for HNF1A-MODY, 14 patients for HNF4A-MODY and 8 patients for
HNF1B-MODY. For identi ﬁcation of mutations in the
coding and promoter region of analyzed genes, we used theSanger sequencing method.
Results: We identi ﬁed six different mutations in nine
patients for subtype HNF1A-MODY. These mutations arelocated in exons 2, 3, 4 and 6, but the greatest number are
found in exon 4, p.Gly292Argfs*25. For subtype HNF1B-
MODY we identi ﬁed one mutation, p.Val458Gly in exon 7.
No HNF4A-MODY gene mutations were identi ﬁed in any
of patients analyzed.
Conclusions: Correctly identifying MODY has important
implications for treatment, surveillance of complications
and associated extra-pancreatic disorders, and identi ﬁcation
of affected and at-risk family members.
D. Caban: None. A. Merkler: None. H. Ljubić:None.
A.Špehar Uroi ć:None. N. Krnić:None. M.Čavlović
Naglić:None. L. Smirčić-Duvnjak: None. D. Ka štelan:
None. J. Sertić:None.
P03.38B
MODY genes HNF1A, GCK andHNF4A pathogenic
variant spectrum in pediatric patients
M.Šukys, V. A šmonien ė, R. Traberg, D. Čere
škevičius1262Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences,
Kauno klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania
Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is a rare form of diabetes which is caused by
pathogenic variant in one of the thirteen known responsiblegenes, but mostly in 3 genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A .
Correct diagnosis might allow change treatment, especially
when it is mistaken for type 1 diabetes. Here we analyzedgenetic variants in Lithuanian pediatric patients with
suspected monogenic diabetes.
Materials and Methods: We performed GCK, HNF1A,
HNF4A genes Sanger sequencing for pediatric patients (0-
18 years old) for whom there was mild hyperglycemia or
were diagnosed type 1 diabetes with negative antibodymarkers (glutamic acid decarboxylase, insulin and
insulinoma-associated-2 antibodies) in the year 2017-2018.
Results: 32 patients were analyzed for all 3 genes, or one
of them depending on clinical situation. 50% of them had at
least second degree relative with anamnesis of diabetes or
hyperglycemia. For 8 of the patients we found GCK non-
synonymous heterozygous variants which were previously
reported as pathogenic. 2 patients had heterozygous variants
inHNF1A: one with frameshift variant c.872dupC and
another nonsynonymous variant c.809A>C which was not
reported earlier. This variant changes amino acid in DNA
binding region (p.Asn270Thr), cosegregates in patientsfamily as patients father and grandmother (father ‘s line)
were diagnosed with diabetes. Also, as multiple in silico
predictors showed as pathogenic variant, we ascertainedvariant as likely pathogenic.
Conclusion: In our study, only 1/3 of patients were
proven for carrying a disease causing allele of all suspectedMODY patients. One patient had novel variant with no
previous report.
M.Šukys: None. V. A šmonienė:None. R. Traberg:
None. D.Čereškevičius:None.
P03.39C
Functional characterization of HNF1A variants
identi ﬁed in the Norwegian MODY diabetes registry can
implement precision medicine in diabetes clinics
I. Aukrust
1,2, A. Kaci2,3, P. Svalastoga2, J. Molnes1,2,
L. Bjørkhaug4, P. R. Njølstad2,3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway,2Center for Diabetes Research,
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway,3Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescents, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,Norway,
4Department of Biomedical Laboratory Sciencesand Chemical Engineering, Western Norway University of
Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway
Introduction: Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-
1alpha gene ( HNF1A ) can cause Maturity-Onset Diabetes of
the Young (MODY3). MODY3 patients, who are oftenmisdiagnosed as type1/type2 diabetes, are important to
identify, since they can bene ﬁt from sulfonylurea treatment
rather than insulin. The aim of this study was to functionallyinvestigate possible pathogenic effects of 11 HNF1A
variants from the Norwegian MODY registry, in order to
provide a precise diagnosis and treatment.
Materials and Methods: The Norwegian MODY reg-
istry includes 2125 individuals with suspected MODY.
HNF1A variants (Sanger identi ﬁed) were investigated by
transactivation (luciferase assay), protein expression
(immunoblotting), DNA binding (electrophoretic mobility
shift assay) and nuclear localization assays.
Results: AllHNF1A variants investigated were classi ﬁed
as variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance. Variants p.
(Ala116Thr), p.(Lys222del) and p.(Asn266Ser) showed lowtranscriptional activity (15-36%). p.(Ala116Thr) and p.
(Lys222del) demonstrated low DNA binding (23% and
17%), and impaired nuclear localization. Moreover, p.(Lys222del) exhibited low protein expression (26%). Car-
riers of functionally impaired variants manifested with early
diabetes-onset (<25 years). The autoantibody status wasnegative or not tested. Carriers of p.(Ala116Thr) and p.
(Lys222del) had a family history of diabetes. The p.
(Ala116Thr)-carrier had earlier been treated with sulfony-lurea with no optimal effect. Her sister (also carrier), is
treated successfully with sulfonylurea. The p.(Lys222del)
and p.(Asn266Ser) patients are currently treated with insu-lin/metformin, and should be considered shifted to sulfo-
nylurea. The remaining variants were either functionally
normal or moderately impaired.
Conclusions: Functional investigation of HNF1A var-
iants should support precision medicine in MODY3
patients.
Grants: Helse Vest, Norwegian Diabetes Association,
foundation of K.G. Jebsen
I. Aukrust: None. A. Kaci: None. P. Svalastoga: None.
J. Molnes: None. L. Bjørkhaug: None. P.R.
Njølstad: None.
P03.40D
New generation sequencing as an effective method of
diagnosing patients with various form of monogenicdiabetes
M. Borowiec
1, K. Antosik1, P. Mludzik1, A. Zmyslowska2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12631Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of
Lodz, Lodz, Poland,2Department of Pediatrics,
Diabetology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
Introduction: Monogenic forms of diabetes represent 5-7%
of all diabetes types. They are a heterogeneous group of
disorders caused by mutations in single genes, most of
which regulate the pancreatic βcells function. The aim of
the study was to determine the genetic background in
patients referred to the Outpatient Genetics Clinic of the
Centre for Monogenic Diabetes in Lodz, Poland.
Materials and Methods: The study group consisted of
379 patients with suspected monogenic diabetes aged from
3 months to 38 years diagnosed from February 2017 toJanuary 2019. They were referred based on the age of
diagnosis, family history, autoantibodies status, preserved
insulin secretion, different clinical course of diabetes orcoexistence of other symptoms. The next generation
sequencing (NGS) method was performed using a designed
panel of 35 genes (SureSelect, Agilent) and the followingplatforms and programs: Variant Studio (Illumina ®), Phe-
nIX (Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin) and IGV (Broad
Institute).
Results: Various forms of monogenic diabetes were
conﬁrmed in 75/379 (19.8%) of patients. 40 pathogenic
variants of the GCK gene (MODY2), 8 variants of the
HNF1A gene (MODY3), 7 variants of the HNF4A gene
(MODY1), 7 variants of the BLK gene (MODY11), 7 var-
iants of the KCNJ11 gene (PNDM - permanent neonatal
diabetes mellitus), 5 variants of the HNF1B gene (RCAD -
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome) and 1 variant of the
ABCC8 gene (PNDM) were identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: The NGS method seems to be effective
diagnostic tool for patients with monogenic diabetes. Sup-
ported by the grants No 2015/19/B/NZ5/02243, 502-03/2-159-02/502-24-307 and 502-03/2-159-02/502-24-306.
M. Borowiec: None. K. Antosik: None. P. Mludzik:
None. A. Zmyslowska: None.
P03.41A
Analysis of genes associated with the development ofnephronophthisis
J. Indrakova
1, N. Havranova1, M. Dvorakova1,
I. Uhliarikova1, J. Rydlova1, M. Zelinova2, R. Kremlikova
Pourova2, J. Lastuvkova3, A. Boday1
1AGEL Laboratories, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic,2Charles
univerzity 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,3Masaryk's Hospital in
Usti nad Labem, Usti nad Labem, Czech RepublicObjectives: Nephronophthisis is an autosomal recessive
disease genetically very heterogenous. Currently is
described 25 genes responsible for up to 70% of the disease
from which 30-40% is caused by NPHP1 gene deletion.
The main symptoms are kidney degeneration and ﬁbrotic
tissue formation, leading in renal failure often in childhood.Other less common symptoms include growth retardation,
anemia and metabolic changes. The disease is caused by the
presence of two causal mutations from parents, formation ofdisease de novo is rare. We describe three families their
children have a de ﬁned clinical diagnosis of
nephronophtisis.
Methods: We tested DNA isolated from peripheral blood
and the molecular analysis of genes associated with
nephronophthisis was performed by MLPA and customdesigned NGS. Found causal mutations were veri ﬁed by
Sanger sequencing.
Results: By the analysis of 3 patients with clinical
diagnosis of nephronophtisis we found homozygous causal
mutations in two of them and two different heterozygous
causal mutations (compound heterozygote) in one of them.
Conclusion: Molecular genetic testing con ﬁrmed a clin-
ical diagnosis of nephronophtisis in all three patients.
Follow-up segregation of causal variants in the patients ’
families identi ﬁed healthy carriers of these variants and in
one family we con ﬁrmed the diagnosis in affected siblings.
The knowledge of causal mutations is important not onlyfor con ﬁrmation of the diagnosis, but also for healthy car-
riers in case of pregnancy planning and possible prenatal
testing.
J. Indrakova: None. N. Havranova: None. M. Dvor-
akova: None. I. Uhliarikova: None. J. Rydlova: None. M.
Zelinova: None. R. Kremlikova Pourova: None. J. Las-
tuvkova: None. A. Boday: None.
P03.43C
PEMT, PCYT1 A and B polymorphisms in children
with obesity
P. Tutac
1, N. Andreescu1, A. Mihailescu1, D. Tiugan1,
V. Sera ﬁm1, C. Zimbru1, C. Paul2, I. Velea2,
M. Niculescu1, M. Puiu1
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes,
Center of Genomic Medicine, Timisoara, Romania,
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes,
Pediatrics Discipline, Timisoara, Romania
Introduction: Variations in PCTY1A andBgenes associate
with alterations of PCTY1 expression and of phosphati-
dylcholine (PC) synthesis. PC, the major glyceropho-spholipid in eukaryotic cells, can be synthesized by three
pathways: the de-novo pathway, also known as Kennedy1264pathway, the Lands cycle and the phosphatidylethanolamine
methyl transferase (PEMT) pathway. PC biosynthesis is
required for normal very low-density lipoprotein secretion
from hepatocytes and generation of arachidonic acid
(ARA); its inhibition may lead to excess storage of lipids
within liver, contributing to the development of obesity-associated hepatosteatosis.
Aim: Whether PCTY1A, PCTY1A B and PEMT gene
polymorphisms in obese children associate with obesity-related somatometric and biochemical parameters.
Material and Method: 200 obese children, aged 7 to 18
years old; BMI> +2SD; abdominal circumference above the
90th percentile; +/- HTA and dyslipidemia or insulin
resistance. PCTY1A (rs 1580820) and PCTY1B (rs
4898190), PEMT(rs1109859, rs12103822, rs16961845,rs4244593, rs4479310, rs7214988, rs7946, rs8068641,
rs936108, rs13342397, rs6502603) were analysed using
next generation sequencing.
Results: PCTY1A, PCTY1B and PEMT rs1109859 var-
iations were positively correlated with glycemia, choles-
terol, HDLc, total LA, ARA, BMI, cardiac frequency, andarterial and systolic blood pressure. PCTY1A and PCTY1B
polymorphisms were correlated with plasma choline, and
possibly with plasma betaine and 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate.
Conclusion: Genetic variations involved in choline
metabolism were associated with alterations in choline,
folate, and cholesterol metabolism in obese children, andcould play important roles in the severity of associated
metabolic alterations. Acknowledgement: This work was
performed at The Center of Genomic Medicine, POSCCEProject, SMIS:48749, and funded by POC Project Nutri-
Gen, SMIS:104852.
P. Tutac: None. N. Andreescu: None. A. Mihailescu:
None. D. Tiugan: None. V. Sera ﬁm:None. C. Zimbru:
None. C. Paul: None. I. Velea: None. M. Niculescu: None.
M. Puiu: None.
P03.44D
Detection of adenoma derived circulating cell-free DNAof human pituitary adenoma using semiconductor
sequencing
H. Niedra
1, K. Megnis1, R. Peculis1, V. Rovite1,
I. Balcere2, I. Konrade2, J. Stukens3, V. Pirags1,3,4,
J. Klovins1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga,
Latvia,2Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,3Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,4University of Latvia Faculty of Medicine, Riga,
LatviaIntroduction: Circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) analy-
sis has been lately used as a minimally invasive method in
cancer diagnostics. Currently, there is a scarce amount of
information on adenoma derived ccfDNA. We examined
the possibility to detect pituitary adenoma (PA) derived
ccfDNA, by performing targeted NGS on ccfDNA usingsemiconductor sequencing.
Materials and Methods: Blood samples used were
obtained from ﬁve NFPA patients before PA surgery. Six-
teen tumor speci ﬁc mutations each in unique gene (dis-
covered in exome sequencing) were targeted in ccfDNA.
Results: Sequencing coverage was 6191X on average
(range 444 - 13026). In two mutation sites (two patients) the
alternate allele was in less than in 10% of reads: RYR1 (G/
A, 2.27%) , MPRIP (C/T, 3.65%). Five mutations (from two
patients) had the alternate allele close to 50% of reads:
VPS13D (C/T, 48%) , LDLRAD2 (C/T, 47%) , SPEN (A/G,
49%), GPATCH4 (C/T, 58%), G6PC2 (C/G, 46%). The
alternate allele was in less than in 0.1% of reads in nine
mutations, however, the estimated background alternate
allele rate in non-mutation sites also was below 0.1%.
Conclusions: Results indicate that while it is possible to
detect somatic mutations found in adenoma in ccfDNA
using semiconductor sequencing the source of mutatedccfDNA molecules should be further researched. Mutation
rate in 50% of reads could be due to somatic mosaicism or
due to increased tumor cell apoptosis/necrosis in thesepatients.
Research was supported by the European Regional
Development Fund project no.1.1.1.1/16/A/066: “Mole-
cular markers of pituitary tumor development, progression
and therapy response ”.
H. Niedra: None. K. Megnis: None. R. Peculis: None.
V. Rovite: None. I. Balcere: None. I. Konrade: None. J.
Stukens: None. V. Pirags: None. J. Klovins: None.
P03.45A
Exome sequencing of non-functioning pituitary
adenomas reveal tumors with high amount of somaticmutations and previously reported genes
R. Pe čulis
1, V. Rov īte1, H. Niedra1, I. Balcere2,
J. Nazarovs3, J. Stu ķēns3, I. Konr āde2,V .P īrāgs1,3,4,
J. Klovi ņš1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga,
Latvia,2Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,3Pauls Stradi ņšClinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,4University of Latvia, Faculty of Medicine, Riga,
Latvia
Introduction: The most common type of pituitary diseases
is pituitary adenomas (PA). Although not undergoingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1265metastasis, PAs are responsible for increased mortality and
morbidity. Genetic causes of PAs are known in a minority
of cases: several genes are implicated in familial PA.
Somatic mutations in GNAS and USP8 are cause in
subgroups of sporadic GH and ACTH secreting PA,
respectively. Exome and genome sequencing is used tostudy PA genetics nowadays, but is hampered by hetero-
geneity of PAs.
Materials and Methods: Exomes (TruSeq Rapid Exome
TargetedRegions v1.2) of normal - tumor DNA pairs of
seven non-functioning PA patients were sequenced using
Illumina NextSeq. Data were analysed using Isaac-Starlingpipeline. Somatic mutations were reviewed with IGV2.2.4.
Sanger sequencing validation was performed for a subset of
mutations covering all PA patients.
Results: Various somatic mutation rate was observed in
the exomes of sequenced tumors. Two PAs were hyper-
mutated with 272 and 671 somatic mutations. Other ﬁve PA
had a low somatic mutation rate between one to 12 somatic
mutation per exome. VPS13D in hypermutated tumor and
RYR1 had somatic mutations and had been reported con-
taining somatic mutation previously in GH secreting ade-
nomas. Somatic mutations in G6PC and SMARCAD1
previously have been detected in adenomas of differentlocation.
Conclusions: Some PAs contain a signi ﬁcantly higher
amount of somatic mutations than expected from non-metastasizing tumor. Somatic mutations in genes reported
previously in connection with PA provide research targets
for upcoming studies. The study was supported by ERDFgrant 1.1.1.1/16/A/066.
R. Pečulis: None. V. Rovīte:None. H. Niedra: None. I.
Balcere: None. J. Nazarovs: None. J. Stuķēns:None. I.
Konrāde:None. V. Pīrāgs:None. J. Kloviņš:None.
P03.46B
Tracing origin of cultured pituitary adenoma cells using
“omics" analysis
V. Rovite
1, R. Peculis1, I. Mandrika1, R. Petrovska1,
K. Megnis1, I. Balcere2, J. Stukens3, I. Konrade2,
A. Breiksa3, J. Nazarovs3, V. Pirags1,3,4, J. Klovins1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study centre, Riga,
Latvia,2Riga Eastern Clinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,3Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia,4University of Latvia Faculty of Medicine, Rigs,
Latvia
Introduction: Pituitary adenomas (PA) are benign tumours
of the anterior pituitary that cause increased mortality andmorbidity. Cell cultures derived from PA tissue can form
freeﬂoating aggregates called pituispheres (PS) or adherentmesenchymal stromal cells (MSC). We studied genetic
relationship between patients ’germline DNA, tumour tissue
somatic DNA, DNA of PS and MSC obtained from culture
to trace origin of each type of cultured cells.
Materials and Methods: PA patients were enrolled to
national biobank - Genome Database of Latvian Populationfrom Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital where
transsphenoidal surgery of PA was performed for all
patients. Exomes (Illumina TruSeq_Rapid_Ex-ome_TargetedRegions_v1.2) of germline, tumour somatic,
PS and MSC were sequenced using Illumina NextSeq with
75bp paired end reads. Sequencing data were analyzed withIllumina Basespace Enrichment App (v3.0.0) aligning to
human HG19 reference genome using Isaac Genome
Alignment Software, variants called with Starling algorithmand variants annotated with Illumina Annotation Engine.
Filtered variants were reviewed using IGV 2.3.14.
Results: PAs contain low amount of tissue speci ﬁc
mutations (median 4, range 2 - 6). Somatic mutations of the
primary tumour can be detected in the respective PS, but not
in the respective MSC. Genetic alterations of MSCs corre-sponded to mutations in PA patients ’germline DNA.
Conclusions: Using exome comparison we were able to
trace origin of PS and MSC cell cultures, showing thatgenome of PS represents genome of PA while MSC most
likely represent normal cells of pituitary or surrounding
tissues.
V. Rovite: None. R. Peculis: None. I. Mandrika: None.
R. Petrovska: None. K. Megnis: None. I. Balcere: None.
J. Stukens: None. I. Konrade: None. A. Breiksa: None. J.
Nazarovs: None. V. Pirags: None. J. Klovins: None.
P03.47C
Improved mapping quality and coverage in highly
homologous PKD1 gene enable high diagnostic yield in
ADPKD
S. Valo
1, J. Tallila1, M. Kaare1, H. Jalanko2, J. Sistonen1,
A. Korppoo1, K. Gall3, M. Muona1, P. Salmenperä1,
M. Gentile1, S. Myllykangas1, T. Alastalo3, J. Koskenvuo1
1Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland,2Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,3Blueprint Genetics,
San Francisco, CA, United States
Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease (ADPKD) is an adult-onset multisystem disorder
characterized by cysts in the kidneys and liver. It isestimated that PKD1 explains 85% and PKD2 15% of
ADPKD cases. Genetic testing has become an important
factor in the management of ADPKD. However, analysis ofPKD1 is technically challenging due to its large size, high
GC-content and duplication of the ﬁrst 33 exons with a high1266degree of homology to pseudogenes ( PKD1P1-P6 ). We
evaluated the diagnostic yield and performance of our In-
house panels for cystic kidney disease.
Materials and Methods: Next-generation sequencing
(NGS) was performed using the IDT xGEN Exome
Research Panel with added custom probes and the IlluminaNovaSeq 6000 platform. This assay provides improved
mapping quality and coverage of PKD1 compared to other
NGS methods assessed in our laboratory.
Results: PKD1 provided both high mean coverage (199x)
and excellent mapping quality with 99.5% of the target
nucleotides covered at least 20x. In the study cohort of 131index patients, a genetic diagnosis was established in 52%
of cases with disease causing variants detected in 7 different
genes. In 63% of the diagnostic cases the disease causingvariant was identi ﬁed in PKD1 . Interestingly, 84% (n =36)
of the variants were located in the duplicated region of
PKD1 .
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that our in-house
NGS platform is well-suited for clinical diagnostics with
comprehensive coverage in dif ﬁcult-to-sequence regions of
PKD1 . The method provides a cost-effective diagnostic tool
to simultaneously diagnose various types of mutations.
S. Valo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. J. Tallila: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Kaare: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. H. Jalanko: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. A.
Korppoo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Muona: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-
erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi
ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-
erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter-
est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop-erty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.P03.48D
Detection of DZIP1L mutations by whole exome
sequencing in two consanguineous families with
polycystic kidney disease
J. M. Hertz
1, P. Svenningsen2, H. Dimke3,
M. B. Engelund1, H. Norgaard4, A. Hansen5,
N. Marcussen6, H. C. Thiesson7, B. L. Jensen3,
M. J. Larsen1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark,2Department of
Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark,3Department of Cardiovascular and Renal
Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark,4Department of Pediatrics, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark,5Vestergade 21, Koge, Denmark,
6Department of Clinical Pathology, Odense University
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark,7Department of Nephrology,
Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is
an early onset cystic renal disease with an incidence of
about 1 per 20,000 live births. It is most frequently caused
by mutations in the PKHD1 gene, encoding ﬁbrocystin, but
mutations in other cilia-related disease genes may mimic the
phenotype. In 2017, Lu et al. reported homozygous
mutations in DZIP1L located at 3q22.1, encoding the basal
body protein DAZ interacting protein 1-like protein
(DZIP1L) in seven children with ARPKD from four
unrelated and consanguineous families. DZIP1L is locatedat the basal body of the primary cilium, and impaired
function of DZIP1L is associated with a defect in the ciliary
trafﬁcking of polycystin-1 and polycystin-2. So far, no other
DZIP1L mutations have been reported, and ARPKD caused
byDZIP1L mutations is a rare form of polycystic kidney
disease.We performed whole exome sequencing in twoconsanguineous families with three children with polycystic
kidney disease, and identi ﬁed two different and not
previously reported DZIP1L mutations in homozygous
form: c.193T>C; p.(Cys65Arg), and c.216C>G; p.
(Cys72Trp). All three children are phenotypically charac-
terized by enlarged echogenic kidneys with poor cortico-medullary differentiation. No liver cysts were detected.
Liver stiffness were evaluated in two of the children by
transient elastography, and with normal result. Functionalanalyses of the p.Cys72Trp mutation indicate that this
variant causes a disruption of a localization signaling or
interaction domain of DZIP1L.
J.M. Hertz: None. P. Svenningsen: None. H. Dimke:
None. M.B. Engelund: None. H. Norgaard: None. A.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1267Hansen: None. N. Marcussen: None. H.C. Thiesson:
None. B.L. Jensen: None. M.J. Larsen: None.
P03.49A
Genetic analysis in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Sicilian patients: preliminary results
I. Loddo, F. Barbera, M. Beretta, A. Callari, L. Martino,
D. Di Carlo, P. Conaldi, P. Vitulo
ISMETT Mediterranean Institute for Transplantation and
Advanced Specialized Therapies (ISMETT), Palermo, Italy
Background: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a
progressive and fatal disorder associated with highpulmonary artery pressure. Most heritable PAH (75%) is
caused by a pathogenic variant in BMPR2 , pathogenic
variants in other genes are considerably less common (1-3%).
Genetic testing enables early diagnosis and offers an
opportunity for family screening.
Materials and Methods: We designed a target sequen-
cing custom panel that includes 15 genes of interest.
Genetic counselling was offered to every patients.
To identify genetic mutations and help make a precise
diagnosis and family screening, we performed genetic
testing by NGS in six patients with PAH.
Results: In three patients we identi ﬁed variants classi ﬁed
according to ACMG Guidelines.
In a 47 years old female affected by familial PAH, we
identi ﬁed a heterozygous nonsense variant (c.2617C>T) p.
Arg873* in BMPR2 gene, classi ﬁed as pathogenic.
In a 31 years old female affected by PAH with Pulmonary
Capillary Hemangiomatosis, we identi ﬁed a homozygous
frameshift pathogenic variant (c.2666_2667insAATC) p.
Lys891Aspfs* in EIF2AK4 gene, classi ﬁed as pathogenic
and never described before.
In a 55 years old male affected by Pulmonary Arterial
Hypertension, we identi ﬁed a heterozygous missense var-
iant (c.1151T>A) p.Val384Asp in SMAD9 gene, classi ﬁed
as likely pathogenic and never described before. All var-
iants were con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Genetic counselling and molecular analysis was offered
to high-risk relatives.
Conclusions: Our study con ﬁrm that NGS Target rese-
quencing represents a valuable tool in PAH genetic testing.
Analyses of PAH casual genes have a great help to clinical
diagnosis and deep implications in patients managementand disease treatment.
I. Loddo: None. F. Barbera: None. M. Beretta: None.
A. Callari: None. L. Martino: None. D. Di Carlo: None.
P. Conaldi: None. P. Vitulo: None.P03.50B
Preparing for genomics: a retrospective audit of a
metropolitan renal genetics clinic
E. I. Krzesinski1,2, Y. B. Prawer1,2, M. J. P. Regan1,
A. Yeung1,2,3, M. F. Hunter1,2
1Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia,
2Department of Paediatrics, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia,3Victorian Clinical Genetics Service,
Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: Hereditary kidney conditions are rare but
account for a signi ﬁcant burden on hospitals in both adults
and children. Monash Health is a KidGen/ AustralianGenomics Health Alliance/Melbourne Genomics Health
Alliance ﬂagship recruitment site, aiming to assess the
impact of multidisciplinary renal-genetic clinics on patientcare while providing access to whole exome
sequencing (WES).
Materials and Method: This three year audit (2015-
2017) of renal patients referred to the Monash Health
genetics service provides a picture of the renal genetics
landscape at the outset of renal ﬂagship WES testing. The
electronic medical record was searched using renal key-
words; each ﬁle was manually assessed for inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Data collection included referrer speci-alty, condition, family history, inheritance pattern, type and
cost of genetic testing and impact of genetic testing on
management and reproductive options.
Results: Through keyword matching 676 patients were
identi ﬁed, 86 met inclusion criteria; 59 (69%) were pro-
bands with a primary renal condition and 35 (40.1%) werereferred by a nephrologist. Cystic renal disease was the
commonest reason for referral. Genetic testing was arranged
for 50 patients of whom 21 (42%) had informative results.Diagnosis rate improved from 2015 to 2017; cost per
informative patient diagnosis was $2499.
Conclusion: Audit provides a snapshot of the utility of
clinical genetics input in a renal genetics context at the
outset of improved WES access. Fourteen referred patients
were unaffected providing them with reproductive reassur-ance. Diagnosis rate improved from 2015 to 2017 as more
molecular diagnoses were obtained, thus improving patient
management.
E.I. Krzesinski: None. Y.B. Prawer: None. M.J.P.
Regan: None. A. Yeung: None. M.F. Hunter: None.
P03.51C
Molecular genetic analysis of Steroid Resistant
Nephrotic Syndrome: Detection of a novel mutation
A. Shojaei
1, N. Serajpour1, B. Karimi2, P. Khosravi212681Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2Medical Genetic
laboratory, Shahid Akbarabad hospital, Iran University of
Medical science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Background: Nephrotic syndrome is one of the most
common kidney diseases in childhood. About 20% of
children are steroid-resistant NS (SRNS) which progress toend-stage renal disease (ESRD). More than 53 genes are
associated with SRNS which represent the genetic hetero-
geneity of SRNS. This study was aimed to screen diseasecausing mutations within NPHS1 and NPHS2 and evaluate
new potential variants in other genes.
Method: Inﬁrst phase of study, 25 patients with SRNS
were analyzed for NPHS1 (exon 2, 26) and all exons of
NPHS2 genes by Sanger sequencing. In the second phase,
whole exome sequencing was performed on 10 patientswith no mutations in NPHS1 and NPHS2.
Result: WES analysis revealed a novel mutation in FAT1
(c.10570C>A; Q3524K). We identi ﬁed 4 pathogenic
mutations, located in exon 4 and 5 of NPHS2 gene in 20%
of patients (V180M, P118L, R168C and Leu156Phe). Also
our study has contributed to the descriptions of previouslyknown pathogenic mutations across WT1 (R205C) and
SMARCAL1 (R764Q) and a novel polymorphism
in CRB2.
Conclusion: Our study concludes that mutations of exon
4 and 5 NPHS2 gene are common in Iranian and some other
ethnic groups. We suggest conducting WES afterNPHS2 screening and further comprehensive studies to
identify the most common genes in the development of
SRNS, which might help in Clinical impact on managementin patients with SRNS.
A. Shojaei: None. N. Serajpour: None. B. Karimi:
None. P. Khosravi: None.
P03.52D
TNF-alpha gene polymorphisms in ﬂuence disease
phenotype in in ﬂammatory bowel disease
O. M. Popa
1, C. Tieranu2, M. Bojinca1, I. Tieranu1,
M. Diculescu1
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Carol Davila',
Bucharest, Romania,2Elias University Emergency
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is a
major proin ﬂammatory cytokine involved in the immune
response in in ﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD). IBD is
composed of two main subtypes, namely Crohn ’s disease
(CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC). There are multiplephenotypes of IBD in terms of disease extension, disease
severity and extraintestinal manifestations (EIM). EIM in
IBD are frequent and may signi ﬁcantly impact the quality of
patients life. Our aim was to investigate two TNF-alpha
gene SNPs for association with clinical manifestations in
IBD patients.
Materials and Methods: The study included 142 IBD
patients (78 CD, 43M/35F and 64 UC, 40M/24F), all of
Romanian origin. EIM were documented in 34 patients (20CD, 14 UC). The two SNPs of TNF-alpha gene rs361525
(-238G/A) and rs1800629 (-308G/A) were genotyped by
TaqMan Allelic Discrimination Assay (7300 Real-TimePCR System, Applied Biosystems by Thermo Fisher Sci-
entiﬁc, USA). Association tests for each polymorphism
were performed with DeFinetti online software ( http://ihg2.
helmholtzmuenchen.de/cgi-bin/hw/hwa1.pl ) and p values
≤0.05 were considered signi ﬁcant. Results. We found a
signiﬁcant association between -308A variant and the pre-
sence of EIM in both ulcerative colitis (p =0.0002, OR 8.51)
and Crohn ’s disease (p =0.002, OR 5.19). For UC, -238A
allele and the GA genotype were more frequent in patientswith EIM than in patients without EIM (p =0.01, OR 27.03
and p=0.0009, OR 30.13 respectively). No other associa-
tions with clinical phenotype were observed.
Conclusion: TNF- αpolymorphisms in ﬂuence clinical
manifestations of IBD in Romanian patients. These results
should be con ﬁrmed on larger patients cohorts. Grant sup-
port: IDEI 311/2007.
O.M. Popa: None. C. Tieranu: None. M. Bojinca:
None. I. Tieranu: None. M. Diculescu: None.
P04
Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin
disorders
P04.01A
Comprehensive re-assessment of causality of ABCC6
missense variants associated with pseudoxanthomaelasticum
S. Verschuere
1,2, P. Coucke1,2, O. M. Vanakker1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,2Department of Biomolecular
Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an
autosomal recessive ectopic mineralization disorder caused
byABCC6 mutations. Inconsistencies in variant interpreta-
tion raised the question whether all variants reported inliterature or variant databases are truly disease-causing.
Especially for missense substitutions it is challenging toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1269predict the impact on protein function. We therefore re-
evaluated pathogenicity of all ABCC6 missense variants.
Materials and Methods: The score-based variant clas-
siﬁcation system Sherloc was used to analyze 234 variants
from literature, ClinVar and in-house patient screenings.
Clinical and functional evidence were scored according tothe rules and guidelines of Nykamp et al. (2017).
Results: Comprehensive classi ﬁcation revealed 74%
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS), 12% likely
pathogenic, 10% pathogenic, 3% benign and 1% likely
benign variants. VUS classi ﬁcation was further re ﬁned into
truly uncertain variants (69% of VUS) and those leaningtowards likely benign (1% of VUS) or likely pathogenic
(30% of VUS). Taking the latter into account, 44% of
ABCC6 variants is (likely) pathogenic when considering all
available population, clinical, experimental and in silico
data. This is signi ﬁcantly different from ClinVar, where
87% of ABCC6 missense variants are allegedly pathogenic
and only 11% VUS.
Conclusions: Our results underline that variant classi ﬁ-
cation should be done systematically and with caution, as ithas important consequences for patients and heterozygous
carriers. The high number of VUS con ﬁrms the need for
functional testing to prove or refute their causality beforereturning them to patients.
S. Verschuere: None. P. Coucke: None. O.M.
Vanakker: None.
P04.02B
De novo pathogenic ABL1 variants cluster in amyristoyl-binding pocket
A. J. M. Blakes
1, E. Gaul2, W. Lam3, N. Shannon4,
A. Chase2, DDD Study, A. G. L. Douglas1,2
1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom,2Human Development and
Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,Southampton, UK, Southampton, United Kingdom,
3South
East of Scotland Clinical Genetics Service, Western
General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, UK,Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
4Clinical Genetics Service,
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Hucknall
Road, Nottingham, UK, Nottingham, United Kingdom
Introduction: ABL1 is a proto-oncogene encoding a
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase. It is best known in the somaticBCR-ABL fusion gene associated with chronic myeloid
leukaemia. Recently, Wang et al. described two germline
missense variants in ABL1 causing an autosomal dominant
developmental syndrome (OMIM 617602) with congenitalheart disease, skeletal malformations, and characteristic
facies.
Materials and Methods: Patients with de novo hetero-
zygous missense variants in ABL1 were identi ﬁed via trio
WES through the DDD Study with Sanger con ﬁrmation via
UK regional genetics laboratories. Clinical assessments ofpatients were carried out via regional clinical genetics ser-
vices. To investigate ABL1 kinase activity in vitro,
HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid constructsencoding wild-type or mutant ABL1 cDNA. Phosphoryla-
tion of ABL1 -speci ﬁc substrates was measured by immu-
noblotting and potential for reversal investigated bytreatment with imatinib. Bio-informatic analysis of gene-
wide conservation and germline/somatic variation was
performed.
Results: We identi ﬁed three unrelated patients with de
novo pathogenic missense variants in ABL1 , including two
novel variants. All variants cluster in the myristoyl-bindingpocket of ABL1 –a region critical for auto-inhibitory reg-
ulation of the kinase domain, which is subject to high
missense constraint and evolutionary conservation. Allpatients recapitulate the phenotype of the ABL1 develop-
mental syndrome. Functional studies of mutant ABL1 kinase
activity are ongoing and will be presented.
Conclusions: We describe three new cases with patho-
genic ABL1 missense variants causing skeletal malforma-
tions and congenital heart disease. Mutations cluster aroundthe myristoyl binding-pocket of ABL1 , suggesting a gain-of-
function mechanism due to loss of auto-inhibition.
A.J.M. Blakes: None. E. Gaul: None. W. Lam: None.
N. Shannon: None. A. Chase: None. A.G.L.
Douglas: None.
P04.03C
Rare loss-of-function variants in the Epidermal
Differentiation Complex predispose individuals toAtopic Dermatitis
S. P. Smieszek, C. Polymeropoulos, G. Birznieks,
M. Polymeropoulos
Vanda Pharmaceuticals, Washington, DC, United StatesThe epidermal differentiation complex (EDC) includes over
ﬁfty genes encoding proteins involved in keratinocyte
development. Of these genes, ﬁlaggrin (FLG) located on
chromosome 1 q21, is the most studied in the context of
skin barrier dysfunction. We investigated the frequency andeffect of rare loss-of-function (LOF) variants in patients of a
clinical study, VP-VLY-686-2102 (randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, in patients with chronic pruritusassociated with AD) with 117 whole genome sequencing
(WGS) samples. We have shown that 45/117 AD patients1270carry signi ﬁcantly more, rare loss-of-function (LOF)
mutations in the SFTP family of genes as compared to
55/316 in a control population (p-value =0.000004). This
group of EDC LOF (stopgain, frameshift) rare variants
(EDC-LR) consists of 20 variants observed in the 45 AD
patients resulting in a calculated Odds Ratio of 2.96 and aRelative Risk of 2.38. Among the detected LOF variants,
there are 25 cases of FLG LOF mutations as de ﬁned by
R501X (rs61816761), 2282del4 (rs558269137), other LOFsin FLG as well as LOFs in FLG2, HRNR, LCE4A, LCE5A,
TCHH, TCHHL1 and other members of the EDC. We
examine the regional accumulation of rare LOF variants inFLG region. For the entire EDC, we obtained a p-value of
4.7e-20, much lower than for FLG alone p-value of 4.5e-6,
indicative of an even greater effect when analyzed jointly(entire family vs. FLG alone) in the AD context. The
identi ﬁed LOF variants within the region can serve as
biomarkers as well as help delineate the genetic pro ﬁle in
AD patients.
S.P. Smieszek: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals. C. Polymeropoulos: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharma-
ceuticals. G. Birznieks: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals. M. Polymeropoulos: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda
Pharmaceuticals.
P04.04D
A balanced translocation t(2;7)(p21;p15) in three
generations: Genome sequencing offers an opportunityto understand molecular etiology of Saethre-Chotzen/
Robinow-Sarouf syndromes
B. Turkgenc
1, R. P. Aguilar2,3, B. Curral3,4, C. Lowther3,4,
E. Schields Wilch3, M. Talkowski3,4,5, C. Morton2,3,5,6,
S. G. Temel7
1Acibadem Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey,2Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,
3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,
4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States,5Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA, United States,6University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom,7University of Bursa, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey
Recent developments in genomic analyses have facilitated
the precise mapping of translocation breakpoints associatedwith Mendelian disorders to decipher if the rearrangement is
likely to contribute to the observed phenotype. We
evaluated the phenotypic consequences of an apparentlybalanced translocation in a family affected by craniosynos-
tosis and limb malformations presenting with a dominantinheritance pattern and variable expressivity. We applied
large-insert jumping libraries to localize the breakpoints and
conﬁrmed these results with Sanger sequencing to char-
acterize breakpoints of a t(2;7)(p21;p15), followed by gene
expression studies to explore the functional impact of the
rearrangement. Sequencing revealed ﬁve breakpoints, dis-
rupting two genes, HDAC9 and MACC1 . We discovered
altered expression of TWIST1 located downstream of
HDAC9 . Our results suggest that an inversion in the
HDAC9-TWIST region in 7p21.1 affects regulation of
TWIST , thereby producing a skeletal dysplasia with
intrafamilial variable expressivity. These analyses suggestthat the mechanism of this rearrangement might involve
alteration of regulatory sequences located at a distance in cis
that dysregulate TWIST and insinuate HDAC9 as a new
disease locus producing craniosynostosis.
B. Turkgenc: None. R.P. Aguilar: None. B. Curral:
None. C. Lowther: None. E. Schields Wilch: None. M.
Talkowski: None. C. Morton: None. S.G. Temel: None.
P04.05A
Novel variant in PRKAR1A associated with
brachydactyly type E without hormone resistance
A. Pereda
1, K. Heath2,3,4,J .W u5, I. Valenzuela-Palafoll6,
S. S. Taylor5,7, G. Perez de Nanclares1
1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National
Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain,2Institute of
Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), HospitalUniversitario La Paz, Universidad Autonóma de Madrid,
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,
3Skeletal dysplasia
Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), Hospital Universitario LaPaz, Madrid, Spain,
4CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,
5Department of Pharmacology, University of California at
San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States,6Area de
Genètica Clínica i Malalties Minoritàries. Hospital Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,7Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of California at San Diego, SanDiego, CA, United States
Introduction: Protein kinase A (PKA) is a tetramer
containing a regulatory (R) subunit dimer locking 2
catalytic (C) subunits. The most abundantly expressed R-
subunit is PRKAR1A, composed of a dimerization domain,an inhibitory site, and 2 cAMP-binding domains (CNB:A;
CNB:B), each containing a phosphate binding cassette
(PBC). Inactivating mutations in PRKAR1A cause acrody-
sostosis with hormonal resistance (ACRDYS1).
Patients and Methods: We present a case of a 15 year-
old girl with clinical suspicion of pseudopseudohypopar-athyroidism based on brachydactyly type E, severe sco-
liosis, and short stature without hormone resistance. HerAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1271mother presented a similar phenotype. After discarding
alterations in GNAS, PTHLH ,IHH and GDF5 (Sanger
sequencing, MS-MLPA/MLPA), a skeletal dysplasia NGS
panel was performed.
Results: A heterozygous novel variant in PRKAR1A
[NM_002734.4:c.592G>C; p.(Gly198Arg)], bioinformati-cally predicted as likely pathogenic, was identi ﬁed. Familial
studies con ﬁrmed cosegregation (mother harbored; healthy
grandparents did not harbor). Gly198 precedes the PBC ofCNB:A and its substitution to Arg is predicted to affect
function because: (1) it might affect cAMP binding to CNB:
A, as the long side-chain of arginine will crash with itsneighboring residues (inactivating mutation); (2) the intro-
duction of the longer side-chain into the tight PBC space
could change its conformation leading to an altered bindingbetween the C and the R (activating/inactivating mutation).
Conclusions: PRKAR1A variants can lead to phenotypes
milder than ACRDYS1 depending on the affected proteindomain. Incomplete or partial PKA inactivation could lead
to an isolated non-severe brachydactyly without hormone
resistance.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI16/00073);
Basque Department of Health (GV2016/111105).
A. Pereda: None. K. Heath: None. J. Wu: None. I.
Valenzuela-Palafoll: None. S.S. Taylor: None. G. Perez
de Nanclares: None.
P04.06B
KIAA0753 mutations in skeletal ciliopathies: unveiling
disease mechanisms
R. Vaz
1, A. Hammarsjö2, F. Taylan1, D. Chitayat3,
G. Grigelioniene2, A. Lindstrand2
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center
for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,Sweden,
2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet;
Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital,Stockholm, Sweden,
3Division of Clinical and Metabolic
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Skeletal ciliopathies are a heterogeneous group of disorders
caused by mutations in more than 25 genes, such asKIAA0753 . Mutations in KIAA0753 have been associated
with Joubert syndrome, orofaciodigital syndrome, and
moderate to fetal lethal skeletal dysplasia with narrowthorax and abnormal metaphyses.
We have previously reported patients with biallelic fra-
meshift and nonsense mutations in this gene. We have alsoshown that KIAA0753 is expressed in normal fetal human
growth plate and immunohistochemistry of the growth plateof an affected fetus revealed an abnormal proliferative zone
and a broad hypertrophic zone. To con ﬁrm the role of
Kiaa0753 in skeletal ciliopathies, we used the zebra ﬁsh
model. Phenotyping of zebra ﬁsh larvae carrying a nonsense
mutation in homozygosity showed that mutant larvae pre-
sented with curved body, a typical ciliopathy phenotype, aswell as abnormal cartilage patterning. kiaa0753 -null zeb-
raﬁsh do not survive beyond the ﬁrst week of development,
suggesting that loss-of-function (LoF) mutations inkiaa0753 are embryonic lethal. Interestingly, these
kiaa0753 -null larvae show loss of cilia and abnormal cell
rearrangements, helping us understand how LoF mutationsinkiaa0753 affect cell organisation and embryonic devel-
opment. In aggregate, our results show that Kiaa0753 is
important for the early embryo development in zebra ﬁsh, in
accordance with the phenotypes seen in patients. Future
plans involve using this disease model to develop treat-
ments for patients with KIAA0753 mutations.
R. Vaz: None. A. Hammarsjö: None. F. Taylan: None.
D. Chitayat: None. G. Grigelioniene: None. A.
Lindstrand: None.
P04.07C
p63 establishes epithelial enhancers at craniofacialdevelopment genes involved in orofacial clefting
E. Lin-Shiao
1,2, J. Welzenbach3, Y. Lan1,2,
K. A. Alexander1,2, Z. Zhang1,2, M. Knapp4, E. Mangold3,
M. Sammons1,2, S. L. Berger1,2, K. U. Ludwig3
1Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
2Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States,3Insitute of Human
Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,4Insitute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, School of Medicine, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany
Transcription factor p63 is a key mediator of epidermal
commitment, development, and differentiation. In humans,
point mutations in the p63 coding region lead to develop-mental defects, including syndromic orofacial clefting.
Notably, common risk variants located intronically in p63
contribute also to the risk of nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P), the most frequent isolated
form of orofacial clefting. To date, our knowledge is limited
about the role of p63 in human craniofacial development,due in part to a lack of tractable models. Here we
investigated the role of p63 in human craniofacial
development, and in the pathogenesis of nsCL/P. Usingan inducible trans-differentiation model and systematic
epigenomic sequencing (including ATAC-seq together with1272ChIP-seq of p63 and H3K27ac) we show that p63
establishes enhancers at craniofacial development genes to
modulate their transcription. Speci ﬁc substitution mutations
in the DNA binding or SAM protein interaction domain of
p63 respectively eliminate or reduce establishment of these
enhancers. Furthermore, using large-scale GWAS data weshow that enhancers established by p63 are highly enriched
for SNPs associated with nsCL/P. These orthogonal
approaches indicate a strong molecular link between p63enhancer function and nsCL/P, illuminating molecular
mechanisms underlying this developmental defect and
revealing vital regulatory elements and new candidatecausative genes.
E. Lin-Shiao: None. J. Welzenbach: None. Y. Lan:
None. K.A. Alexander: None. Z. Zhang: None. M.
Knapp: None. E. Mangold: None. M. Sammons: None. S.
L. Berger: None. K.U. Ludwig: None.
P04.08D
Cleidocranial dysplasia: natural history of bone
manifestations
A. LAVILLAUREIX
1,2, C. Michot2, G. Baujat2,
G. Maruani3, M. Polak4, M. De la Dure-Molla5,
J. Souberbielle6, E. Koumakis7, V. Cormier-Daire2
1Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de référence
"Maladies Rares" CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes - Université
Rennes 1, Rennes, France,2Service de Génétique Clinique,
Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles,APHP - Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades - Institut Imagine
- INSERM UMR 1163 - Université Paris Descartes
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France,
3Service d'explorations
fonctionnelles, AP-HP - Hôpital européen Georges-
Pompidou, Paris, France,4Service d'endocrinologie,
gynécologie et diabétologie pédiatrique, APHP - HôpitalNecker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,
5Service
d'Odontologie, AP-HP - Hôpital Rothschild, Paris, France,
6Laboratoire d'explorations fonctionnelles, APHP - Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,7Service de
Rhumatologie, APHP, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France
Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare autosomal dominant
skeletal dysplasia whose most characteristic signs are the
delayed closure of cranial sutures with wide fontanelle atbirth, hypoplastic or aplastic clavicles, a short height and
multiple dental anomalies. The natural history of CCD is
poorly known. Isolated cases of patients with multiplefractures or osteoporosis have been described, without
evaluating the other risk factors for bone fragility. The
purpose of this study is to evaluate bone mineralization andthe occurrence of fractures inpatients with CCD, children
and adults. In an observational study, we collected clinico-radiological and genetics data, phosphocalcic balance,
markers of bone remodeling and bone densitometry data
of 45 CCD patients aged 9 months to 60.8 years (median =
15.4 years). 7% of patients evaluated had at least one
fracture without trauma (3/45). 32% (13/41) patients have
secondary hyperparathyroidism, a recognized risk factor forosteopenia due to increased bone resorption induced by
parathyroid hormone and 20% (8/41) patients have vitamin
Dd eﬁciency (25-OH D <20ng / mL). The analysis of BMD
shows that the Z-score at the lumbar level of 38.7% of
patients (12/31) is less than -2DS. These results indicate the
need for active prevention of osteoporosis and fractures inpatients with CCD, ensuring at an early age of suf ﬁcient
intakes calcium and vitamin D, but also regular physical
activity to allow optimal / maximal bone mass acquisition inadulthood.
A. Lavillaureix: None. C. Michot: None. G. Baujat:
None. G. Maruani: None. M. Polak: None. M. De la
Dure-Molla: None. J. Souberbielle: None. E. Koumakis:
None. V. Cormier-Daire: None.
P04.09A
A novel mutation in COL2A1 leading to
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
Y. Kendir Demirkol
1, Ö. Akgün Do ğan1, M. Say2,
T. K ızılboğa Akgün3,4,L .D o ğanay4
1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Sciences
University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital,İstanbul, Turkey,
2Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era
Diagnostic, İstanbul, Turkey,3Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, İstanbul Technical University,
İstanbul, Turkey,4GLAB (Genomic Laboratory) Health
Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Research
Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
(SEDC, OMIM# 183900) is a rare autosomal dominantinherited chondrodysplasia. SEDC is characterised by
dwarﬁsm and skeletal abnormalities caused by mutations
of the COL2A1 gene, which prevent bone growth. The mostcommon features of SEDC are skeletal deformities such as
short-trunk dwar ﬁsm, odontoid hypoplasia, cervical spine
subluxation, scoliosis, kyphosis, lumbar lordosis, coxa vara,genu valgum, clubfoot, pes planus and metaphyseal
changes. Cervical cord compression is the most hazardous
skeletal deformity in patients with SEDC which requiresspecial attention and management. Here, we present a
mother and a son with SEDC due to a novel heterozygous
mutation in SEDC.
Material and Methods: The patient was the ﬁrst child of
non consanguineous parents, born at 33 gestation week aAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1273birth length of 39 cm (3-10th centile). Postnatal he was
hospitalized in intensive care unit due to respiratory insuf-
ﬁciency. Physical examination revealed facial dysmorphic
features and short neck. The mother has disproportionate
short stature, facial dysmorphic features and operation scar
due to hip dislocation. Her X ray showed platyspondyly,kyphosis, scoliosis, coxa vara and ﬂattened epiphyses.
Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on
Illumina MiSeq (v1.9) platform using the virtual panel forskeletal dysplasia consisting of 130 genes. The novel het-
erozygous variant in COL2A1 (c.2006G>C) was detected
both son and mother. Segregation within the mothers familyshowed the mutation was denova.
Conclusions: SEDC is a rare skeletal dysplasia. Targeted
exome analysis has great importance in the fast and accuratesetting in the diagnosis and avoid serious neurological
deﬁcits and or mortality.
Y. Kendir Demirkol: None. Ö. Akgün Do ğan:None.
M. Say: None. T. K ızılboğa Akgün: None. L.
Doğanay: None.
P04.10B
Novel variant in COL2A1 gene causing
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Strudwick type(SEMD-S)
M. Kero, A. Mea šić, A. Bobinec, I. Sansovi ć, I. Bari šić
Children´s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Collagenopathies type II are rare autosomal-
dominant conditions characterized by skeletal dysplasia,
short stature and sensorial defects. More than 400heterozygous mutations in type II collagen gene COL2A1
have been identi ﬁed, but only 5 of them are found in
patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Strudwicktype (SEMD-S), a rare phenotype of intermediate severity.
We present a female patient with SEMD-S phenotype and a
novel mutation in the COL2A1 gene.
Patients and Methods: The patient presented at birth
with severe short trunk-short limb dwar ﬁsm, short chest,
coxa vara, clubfoot, cleft palate, conductive hearing lossand mild external hydrocephalus. Metaphyseal irregularities
permitted clinical differentiation from SED congenita. Now,
at the age of 7 years, her stature is signi ﬁcantly reduced and
a waddling gait, genu valgum and lumbar lordosis devel-
oped. Hands and feet are normal. The genomic DNA from
blood leukocytes of the patient was isolated and NextGeneration Sequencing (NGS) analysis was done focusing
on about 200 genes associated with skeletal dysplasias.
Results: NGS revealed a novel heterozygous missense
variant (c.2177G>A, p.Gly726Asp) in exon 33 of the
COL2A1 gene, categorised as likely pathogenic accordingto ACMG/AMP classi ﬁcation. As glycine substitutions are
typical for SEMD-S patients, it is highly probable that the
identi ﬁed variant is causative of the SEMD-S phenotype.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this missense variant in
COL2A1 has not been reported before. It extends the
mutational spectrum allowing for better genotype/pheno-
type correlation in patients with SEMD-S. Molecular
genetic analysis is helpful for the diagnosis of skeletal
dysplasias with overlapping phenotypes.
M. Kero: None. A. Mea šić:None. A. Bobinec: None. I.
Sansović:None. I. Bari šić:None.
P04.12D
Deﬁning the clinical features associated with variants in
COL4A2: case report and review of the literature
A. Hanson-Kahn1, K. Vlessis1, E. J. Smith2, M. Manning1
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,
2Stanford Children's Health, Palo Alto, CA, United States
COL4A2 encodes the α2 chain of type IV collagen, which
assembles into heterotrimers with COL4A1 chains to form a
component of the basal membrane. Heterozygous variantsinCOL4A2 have been described in fewer than 20 families in
association with familial cerebrovascular disease manifest-
ing as porencephaly and intracerebral hemorrhage. Seizures,cortical malformations, lens opacities, hematuria and
elevated creatine kinase have been reported. We present a
4-1/2 year old male with ischemic stroke and deep veinthrombosis, intracranial hemorrhage, systemic arterial
involvement (tapering of the abdominal aorta, occlusion
of the left common iliac artery, small right iliac artery andcollaterals of the upper extremities) and mildly dilated aortic
root and ascending aorta. Whole exome sequencing
reported a maternally inherited variant in COL4A2
(c.1396G>A, p.G466S). This variant is not reported in
ClinVar but is reported in gnomAD with an allele frequency
of 5.0x10
-5. In silico models predict this variant to be
damaging. The patient ’s mother is asymptomatic; brain
MRI, echocardiogram and ophthalmology examinations are
being coordinated. While intracranial hemorrhage has alsobeen seen in other patients with COL4A2 variants, systemic
arteriopathy and mild enlargement of the aortic root have
not been previously described. We review the literature andfurther de ﬁne the clinical features associated with variants
inCOL4A2 to include arteriopathy and aortic root
dilatation.
A. Hanson-Kahn: None. K. Vlessis: None. E.J. Smith:
None. M. Manning: None.1274P04.13A
Next generation sequencing in neonates presenting with
collodion baby syndrome
A. Bobinec1, A. Mea šić1, M. Kero1, I. Sansovi ć1,S .O žanić
Bulić2, N. Pusti šek2, S. Murat-Su šić3, I. Bari šić1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Health,
Children's Hospital Zagreb, Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence
for Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine (CERRM),
University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,
2Division of Dermatology, Children's Hospital Zagreb,
University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,
3Department of Dermatology and Venerology, University
Hospital Centre Zagreb, University of Zagreb School ofMedicine, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Collodion baby (CB) is a rare condition
characterized by the presence of parchment or-cellophane-
like collodion membrane encompassing the whole body.
CB is a genetically heterogeneous disorder that usuallypresents with lamellar ichthyosis (LI) or congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE). Other less common
disorders as self-improving collodion ichthyosis, Nethertonsyndrome, Gaucher disease type 2, Chanarin-Dorfman
syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia or Sjögren Larsson syn-
drome may also be responsible for this phenotype.
Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing
(CES) was performed in 4 patients with referral diagnosis of
CB using Illumina TruSight One Kit.
Results: CES analysis revealed mutations in ALOX12B,
SPINK5, NIPAL4 andTGM1 genes. In patient 1 (P1), we
found a homozygous mutation in the ALOX12B gene,
known to cause self-improving collodion ichthyosis. This
was consistent with a rapid resolution of almost all skin
lesions. P2 and P3 developed Netherton syndrome. In P2compound heterozygous mutations in the SPINK5 gene
conﬁrmed the diagnosis. In P3 no causative genetic varia-
tions were found. In P4, presenting with CB evolving to LI,we detected two heterozygous variants, one in NIPAL4 gene
(likely pathogenic) and other in TGM1 (uncertain
signiﬁcance).
Conclusion: Clinical evolution of CB is hard to predict as
clinical presentation and severity may vary from mild to
life-threatening. CES provided a timely and precise diag-nosis in most of our patients which is important for treat-
ment planning, disease prognosis and genetic counselling of
affected families.
A. Bobinec: None. A. Mea šić:None. M. Kero: None. I.
Sansović:None. S. O žanićBulić:None. N. Pusti šek:
None. S. Murat-Su šić:None. I. Bari šić:None.P04.14B
IL11RA and pansynostosis
A. Topa
1,2, A. Rohlin2, L. Lovmar2, G. Stenman1,
L. Kölby3
1Department of Pathology and Genetics, University of
Gothenburg, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg,
Sweden,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden,3Department of
Plastic Surgery, University of Gothenburg, The
Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden
The genetic background of craniosynostosis is complex and
implicates multiple signaling pathways. The role ofinterleukin 11 receptor, alpha (IL11RA), a cell-derived
cytokine, has been evidenced in the pathogenesis of
multiple synostosis with autosomal recessive inheritancepattern (Craniosynostosis and dental anomalies,
OMIM#614188). A Crouzon-like appearance with different
types of craniosynostosis has been observed. Several causalmissense and truncating variants have been reported. We
present three additional cases with homozygous novel
pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in IL11RA
(NM_001142784.2: c.598C>A, p.Pro200Thr; c.696C>A,
p.Tyr232*; c.866A>G, p.His289Arg). All three patients
presented with high intracranial pressure, a Crouzon-likephenotype and early closure of all cranial sutures (pansy-
nostosis). Our cases, together with previous reports of
IL11RA -related pansynostosis, suggest a key regulator role
for IL11RA in the morphogenesis and maintenance of
patency of all cranial sutures.
A. Topa: None. A. Rohlin: None. L. Lovmar: None. G.
Stenman: None. L. Kölby: None.
P04.15C
Diagnostic value of targeted next-generation sequencing
in craniosynostosis
E. M. Olech
1, A. Sowi ńska-Seidler1, D. Popiel2,
G. Koczyk2,3, M. Socha1, J. Walczak-Sztulpa1,
A. Materna-Kiryluk1,2, A. Latos-Biele ńska1,2, R. Posmyk4,
R.Śmigiel5, A. Dawidziuk1, A. Jamsheer1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,2Centers for Medical
Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,3Institute of Plant
Genetics (PAS), Department of Biometry andBioinformatics, Poznan, Poland,
4Podlaskie Center of
Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland,5Department of
Pediatric Propedeutics and Rare Diseases, WroclawMedical University, Wroclaw, PolandAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1275Background: Craniosynostosis (CS), the premature fusion
of one or more cranial sutures, occurs either as an isolated
malformation or in a syndromic form, representing a
genetically heterogeneous and clinically variable group of
disorders. Routine diagnostic screening of common
craniosynostosis-associated genes enables to establishgenetic aetiology in 21% to 62% depending on the size of
the study, ethnicity of the population, and range of the
molecular analysis.
Materials and Methods: We performed targeted next-
generation sequencing in a group of 60 patients manifesting
CS with negative results of molecular screening. We havedesigned a custom hybridisation-based panel, encompassing
61 genes and 11 SNPs chosen based on current knowledge
about variants involved in craniofacial development usingonline databases. We sequenced captured and indexed
libraries on Ion Torrent S5 sequencing system.
Results: This approach revealed pathogenic variants or
probably pathogenic variants among patients presenting
with different forms of CS. We found pathogenic and
probably pathogenic variants or variants of unknown sig-niﬁcance within the ALX4 ,BMP4 ,CYP26B1 ,EDN3 ,
EFNB1 ,EFTUD2 ,FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, IFT122 ,
IFT140 ,IHH, MEGF8 ,RECQL4 ,RUNX2 ,SKI,
TCF12 genes.
Conclusion: We present an NGS targeted gene panel
approach as a valuable diagnostic tool in the genetic testingof patients presenting with craniosynostosis.
This work was supported by the grants from the Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poland 502-14-11261860-41259 and the Polish National Science Centre, Poland
UMO-2016/23/N/NZ5/02577 to Ewelina M. Olech, and
UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270 to Aleksander Jamsheer
E.M. Olech: None. A. Sowińska-Seidler: None. D.
Popiel: None. G. Koczyk: None. M. Socha: None. J.
Walczak-Sztulpa: None. A. Materna-Kiryluk: None. A.
Latos-Biele ńska: None. R. Posmyk: None. R.Śmigiel:
None. A. Dawidziuk: None. A. Jamsheer: None.
P04.16D
A genome-wide association study implicates BMP7 as a
risk factor for nonsyndromic metopic craniosynostosis
C. M. Justice
1, A. Cuellar2, K. Bala2, J. A. Sabourin1,
M. L. Cunningham3, A. O. M. Wilkie4, J. M. Phipps4,
Y. Zhou4, K. Crawford4, D. Cilliers5, J. E. V. Morton6,
A. Weber7, L. C. Wilson8, E. Simeonov9, R. Kaneva10,
N. Yaneva11, K. Georgiev12, A. Busarski12, C. Senders13,
M. Zwienenberg14, T. Roscioli15, M. Barba16,
W. Lattanzi16, K. Conway17, V. Shef ﬁeld18, L. Brody19,
J. Mills20, D. Kay21, R. Sicko21, R. Tittle22, A. F. Wilson1,
P. A. Romitti17, S. A. Boyadjiev2, the National Birth
Defects Prevention Study1Genometrics Section, Computational and Statistical
Genomics Branch, Division of Intramural Research,
NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States,2Department
of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento,
CA, United States,3Department of Pediatrics, Seattle
Children's Craniofacial Center, University of Washington,Seattle, WA, United States,
4MRC Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,5Clinical Genetics
Service, Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford,
United Kingdom,6West Midlands Regional Clinical
Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Partners,
Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,
7Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Women's NHS
Foundation Trust,, Liverpool, United Kingdom,8Clinical
Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,United Kingdom,
9National Institute of Pediatrics, So ﬁa
Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,10Molecular Medicine
Center, Department of Medical Chemistry andBiochemistry, Medical Faculty, Medical University of So ﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,
11National Genetic Laboratory, University
Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom ”,
Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,12Department
of Neurosurgery, University Hospital 'St. Ivan Rilski',
Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,13Department
of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
California Davis,, Sacramento, CA, United States,
14Department of Neurosurgery, University of California
Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States,15Neuroscience
Research Australia, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia,16Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
The Catholic University Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy,
17Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States,
18Department of Pediatrics, Stead Family Children ’s
Hospital, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United
States,19Gene and Environment Interaction Section,
NHGRI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
20Epidemiology Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD,
NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,21Division of Genetics,
Wadsworth Center, NYS Department of Health, Albany, NY,
United States,22Department of Nutritional Sciences,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States
Craniosynostosis (CS) arises from premature closure of one
or more cranial sutures. Previously, we observed that BMP2
(rs1884302) and BBS9 (rs10262453) were independently
associated with sagittal nonsyndromic CS (sNCS). In this
study, we conducted a genome-wide association study(GWAS) for metopic NCS (mNCS). In an international
sample of 228 non-Hispanic white case-parent trios, three1276variants were genome-wide signi ﬁcant: rs781712
(P=4.788x10-9; odds ratio (OR) =2.407) intronic to SPRY3 ;
rs6127972 ( P=5.611x10-9;O R=2.257) intronic to BMP7;
and rs62590971 ( P=4.046x10-8;O R=0.380) located ~155
kb upstream from TGIF2LX . The association for rs6127972
was replicated in an independent sample (194 unrelatedmNCS cases, 333 controls, P=0.0042, OR =1.45) and in a
meta-analysis, P=3.11x10
-9(OR=1.45). Rs1884302 and
rs10262453, identi ﬁed as risk factors from our previous
sNCS GWAS, were also genotyped in our mNCS samples.
Rs10262453 was borderline signi ﬁcant in the mNCS
discovery and replications cohorts ( P=9.216x10-5,
OR=1.716), ( P=0.0003, OR =1.62) respectively, and had
a meta-analysis P=1.330x10-7(OR=1.62). Notably, the C
allele for this variant was over-transmitted in mNCSprobands, whereas the A allele was over-transmitted in
sNCS probands. Functional assessment of rs6127972 using
western blot and ELISA showed no difference in BMP7
expression or protein levels in synostotic metopic versus
open sutures. Data from luciferase studies suggested that the
locus may act as a repressor element with the risk alleleexerting stronger repression. Zebra ﬁsh transgenic analysis
produced inconclusive results. Our ﬁndings implicate the
BMP/TGF βsignaling pathway in midline NCS and support
the role of BBS9 locus in the etiology of metopic
craniosynostosis. [Grants NIH X01HG008936 and
R01DE016886]
C.M. Justice: None. A. Cuellar: None. K. Bala: None.
J.A. Sabourin: None. M.L. Cunningham: None. A.O.M.
Wilkie: None. J.M. Phipps: None. Y. Zhou: None. K.
Crawford: None. D. Cilliers: None. J.E.V. Morton:
None. A. Weber: None. L.C. Wilson: None. E. Simeonov:
None. R. Kaneva: None. N. Yaneva: None. K. Georgiev:
None. A. Busarski: None. C. Senders: None. M. Zwie-
nenberg: None. T. Roscioli: None. M. Barba: None. W.
Lattanzi: None. K. Conway: None. V. Shef ﬁeld:None. L.
Brody: None. J. Mills: None. D. Kay: None. R. Sicko:
None. R. Tittle: None. A.F. Wilson: None. P.A. Romitti:
None. S.A. Boyadjiev: None.
P04.17A
BMP2 or not BMP2 ?A
SMAD6 -related question in
craniosynostosis
E. Calpena1, A. Cuellar2, K. Bala2,S .M .A .
Swagemakers3, N. Koelling1, S. J. McGowan1,
M. Balasubramanian4, J. E. V. Morton5, A. Weber6,
L. C. Wilson7, D. Johnson8, S. A. Wall8, S. R. F. Twigg1,
I. M. J. Mathijssen9, E. Simeonov10, W. Lattanzi11,
F. Boardman-Pretty12,13, S. A. Boyadjiev2,A .O .M .
Wilkie1,81MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,
2Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis,
Sacramento, CA, United States,3Departments of Pathology
and Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,4Shefﬁeld
Clinical Genetics Service, Shef ﬁeld Children's NHS
Foundation Trust, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,5West
Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service andBirmingham Health Partners, Birmingham Women ’s and
Children ’s Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham,
United Kingdom,
6Department of Clinical Genetics,
Liverpool Women's NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool,
United Kingdom,7Clinical Genetics Service, Great Ormond
Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom,8Craniofacial
Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,9Department
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC,University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,
10National Institute of Pediatrics, So ﬁa
Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,11Institute of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, The Catholic University Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy,12Genomics England, London, United
Kingdom,13William Harvey Research Institute, Queen
Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
Incomplete penetrance is a complicating factor in diagnosis
and makes genetic counselling very challenging. Usually
the mechanisms explaining the non-penetrance are not
understood, with few epistatically-interacting genetic fac-tors described in humans. One recent example of such a
“two-locus ”model is the proposal by Timberlake et al
(eLife , 2016) of an interaction of SMAD6 variants in midline
craniosynostosis (premature fusion of the metopic and/or
sagittal cranial sutures of the skull) with a common
polymorphism near BMP2 , to explain frequent non-
penetrance in the parent transmitting the SMAD6 variant.
We aimed (i) to validate the ﬁndings in an independent,
larger cohort, and (ii) to delineate the phenotype associatedwith SMAD6 variants. We performed NGS-based resequen-
cing of multiplexed PCR products of SMAD6 in 800
unsolved patients with any type of craniosynostosis, andgenotyped the rs1884302 BMP2 polymorphism in SMAD6 -
positive individuals. We identi ﬁed 18 different rare
damaging SMAD6 variants (2.25% overall), with the
highest prevalence in metopic synostosis (~6%) and a
~23-fold enrichment of loss-of-function variants compared
to gnomAD data (P<0.00001). This con ﬁrms that SMAD6
variants increase the risk of craniosynostosis (especially
metopic). Combining these data with a further 6 indepen-
dently identi ﬁed variants, 17/24 were transmitted from an
unaffected parent but the BMP2 genotype did not correlate
with presence/absence of craniosynostosis. Hence furtherAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1277work is needed to identify the factors accounting for
reduced penetrance of SMAD6 variants - both in craniosy-
nostosis, and in the panoply of other phenotypes (including
congenital heart disease, thoracic aortic aneurysm and
intellectual disability), with which SMAD6 variants have
been associated.
E. Calpena: None. A. Cuellar: None. K. Bala: None. S.
M.A. Swagemakers: None. N. Koelling: None. S.J.
McGowan: None. M. Balasubramanian: None. J.E.V.
Morton: None. A. Weber: None. L.C. Wilson: None. D.
Johnson: None. S.A. Wall: None. S.R.F. Twigg: None. I.
M.J. Mathijssen: None. E. Simeonov: None. W. Lat-
tanzi: None. F. Boardman-Pretty: None. S.A. Boyadjiev:
None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None.
P04.18B
Chromosomal rearrangements and CNVs identi ﬁed in
craniosynostosis cases
E. König1, E. Kunstmann2, A. Quattländer3,
T. Schweitzer4, E. Klopocki1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany,2Praxis
für Humangenetik, Würzburg, Germany,3Kinderarztpraxis
Volkach, Volkach, Germany,4Department of Neurosurgery,
Section of Pediatric Neurosurgery, University Hospital of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of cranial sutures, is
a common birth defect (~1:2500 newborns) occurring eitheras an isolated or syndromic form. Single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) in known craniosynostosis genes i.e. FGFR2,
FGFR3 and TWIST1 account for only 20% of cases.
Besides these SNVs, a signi ﬁcant subgroup (15%) of
patients with syndromic craniosynostosis show chromoso-
mal rearrangements. Due to the small number of patientswith identical chromosomal aberrations reported in the
literature, it is often dif ﬁcult to determine the critical region/
gene which contributes to the phenotype and perform aspeciﬁc diagnostic analysis. Thus, aCGH was chosen as
genome-wide CNV screening approach for identi ﬁcation of
CNVs in a cohort of 33 craniosynostosis patients.
In total we detected likely pathogenic CNVs in 18% of
our cohort. These CNVs encompass known craniosynos-
tosis genes like MSX2 andTCF12 and novel craniosynos-
tosis candidate genes, respectively. Three patients carried
unbalanced translocations and in additional three cases we
detected interstitial gains and losses. Clinically thesepatients presented with isolated as well as syndromic forms
of craniosynostosis.
Our results emphasize the importance of chromosomal
rearrangements and CNVs as a genetic cause of craniosy-
nostosis, particularly in case of unclear syndromeclassi ﬁcation due to clinical variability. Furthermore, genes
which reside in or are disrupted by rare CNVs represent
candidate genes for craniosynostosis.
In addition to sequencing approaches CNV screening
methods like aCGH should be included in the genetic
testing algorithm for craniosynostosis patients. This willenable diagnosis in a signi ﬁcant portion of yet unsolved
syndromic as well as non-syndromic cases.
E. König: None. E. Kunstmann: None. A. Quattlän-
der: None. T. Schweitzer: None. E. Klopocki: None.
P04.19C
Biallelic loss of function mutations in CSGALNACT1
cause a mild skeletal dysplasia with joint laxity
R. Meyer
1, M. Begemann1, A. Schulze2, A. Kochs3,
I. Kurth1, M. Elbracht1
1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany,2Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,3Praxis für
Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie, Aachen, Germany
Biallelic loss of function mutations in CSGALNACT1 were
recently proposed to cause a prenatal onset mild skeletal
dysplasia with joint laxity in a single 3.5 years old female
patient. The phenotype in this patient re ﬂects the skeletal
dysplasia of Csgalnact1 -/- mice and resembles the clinical
and radiographic picture of a milder spectrum of Desbuquois
dysplasia (Vodopiutz et al., 2017). CSGALNACT1 encodes
chondroitin sulfate N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-1
(CSGalNAcT-1, ChGn-1) which has a critical role in the
biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate.Here we report on a 12 years old boy born from
consanguineous parents with a mild skeletal dysplasia,
short stature (-3SD), and joint laxity. Psychomotor devel-opment was normal. Whole exome sequencing revealed a
homozygous 1bp-deletion in CSGALNACT1 (c.372del, p.
(His125Thrfs*9)). Segregation analysis con ﬁrmed both
parents as heterozygous carriers. The identi ﬁed variant is
neither reported in gnomAD and dbSNP nor in the
literature. It leads to a frameshift and premature stop codonand, thus, with high probability to loss of function of the
corresponding protein. This is the second report of a
patient with biallelic loss of function mutations inCSGALNACT1 which underlines its role in mild skeletal
dysplasia, short stature, and joint laxity without obvious
additional organ manifestations and normal psychomotordevelopment.
R. Meyer: None. M. Begemann: None. A. Schulze:
None. A. Kochs: None. I. Kurth: None. M.
Elbracht: None.1278P04.20D
Prenatal diagnosis of Desbuquois dysplasia by whole
exome sequencing before the occurrence of speci ﬁc
ultrasound signs
C. Houdayer1, F. Boussion2, A. Ziegler1, S. Blesson3,
C. Bris1, A. Toutain3, F. Biquard2, A. Guichet1,
D. Bonneau1,4, E. Colin1,4
1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers
University Hospital, ANGERS, France,2Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Angers University Hospital,ANGERS, France,
3Department of Genetics, Tours
University Hospital, TOURS, France,4MitovascLab, Team,
Institut MitoVasc, UMR CNRS 6015, INSERM U1083,Angers University, Angers, France
Osteochondrodysplasia is a group of hereditary disorders of
the connective tissue, bones or cartilage that impair skeletal
development with a prevalence of about 2 per 10 000 births.
The genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of this group ofdisorders is tremendous involving more than 300 genes that
are responsible for more than 450 distinct conditions. One
of them, Desbuquois syndrome dysplasia (DBQD) is a rareskeletal osteochondrodysplasia characterized by severe
micromelic dwar ﬁsm, joint laxity with multiple joint
dislocations, speci ﬁc radiographic ﬁndings features and
facial dysmorphism. DBQD is a very severe and often
sometime lethal form of micromelic dwar ﬁsm. We report
here a case for which whole exome sequencing allowed toperform an early prenatal diagnosis before the occurrence of
characteristic ultrasound signs. Indeed, at 21 WG, the
ultrasound scan con ﬁrmed that the fetus was very likely
affected with an osteochondrodysplasia because all bio-
metric parameters were below -4 SD associated with
bilateral vertical talus. However, it was impossible, at thattime, to pinpoint the exact diagnosis. Using exome
sequencing, we evidenced two variants in CANT1 , the gene
responsible for DBDQ. The parents were informed that thefetus was very likely affected with DBQD at a gestational
age of 24 weeks. The present case, is to our knowledge, the
ﬁrst one in whom a molecular prenatal diagnosis of DBQD
is performed in the absence of relevant family history and
before the appearance of evocative sonographic features. It
highlights the utility of prenatal exome sequencing inperforming a precocious diagnosis for severe fetal
conditions.
C. Houdayer: None. F. Boussion: None. A. Ziegler:
None. S. Blesson: None. C. Bris: None. A. Toutain: None.
F. Biquard: None. A. Guichet: None. D. Bonneau: None.
E. Colin: None.P04.21A
Vascular ehlers-danlos syndrome
N. Agaoglu
1, Y. Kendir Demirkol2, O. Akgun Dogan2,
M. Say3, T. Kizilboga Akgun1, H. Doganay1
1GLAB (Genomic Laboratory) Health Sciences University,
Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey,2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Sciences
University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey,3Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era
Diagnostic, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is an
autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder caused bymutations in COL3A1 andCOL1A1 . It is considered as the
most severe form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) due to
the high mortality rate associated with the fragility ofarteries and internal organs. Common symptoms include
thin, translucent skin; easy bruising; characteristic facial
appearance; and fragile arteries, muscles and internalorgans. Treatment and management options are limited
and focused on preventing serious complications. Here we
present a 5 years old female with vascular type EDS due toa novel heterozygous mutation COL3A1 .
Materials and Methods: The patient was the ﬁrst child
of non-consanguineous healthy parents, born at term with abirth weight of 2600gr (3-10th centile). Easly bruising even
with small traumas have been noticed from the infancy
period. She also had dif ﬁculty in wound healing. Physical
examination revealed wide forehead, deep-set eyes, thin
translucent skin with multiple bruising and atrophic scars,
joint laxity, and profound super ﬁcial veins.
Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on
Illumina MiSeq(v1.9) platform using the virtual panel for
collagenopathy consisting of 51 genes. The heterozygousvariant in COL3A1 (c.3563G>A) was detected. Segregation
within the family showed that the variant is de-novo.
Conclusions: Although vascular type EDS is a rare
genetic disease, it should be kept in mind in patients with
easy bruisable skin and atrophic scar. Accurate and early
diagnosis have great importance in preventing serious lifethreating complications.
N. Agaoglu: None. Y. Kendir demirkol: None. O.
Akgun dogan: None. M. Say: None. T. Kizilboga akgun:
None. H. Doganay: None.
P04.23C
Homozygous mutations of EGFR gene as a cause of
lethal syndrome with progeroid features in two Roma
familiesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1279J. La štuvková1, P. Hitka2, S. Mazurová3, M. Magner3,
M. Tesa řová3, V. Stránecký3,V .Čejnová1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Masaryk Hospital in Usti
nad Labem, Krajska zdravotni, a.s., Usti nad Labem, Czech
Republic,2Clinic of Neonatology Faculty of Health Care
Studies Jan Evangelista Purkyn ěUniversity in Usti nad
Labem and Krajska zdravotni, a.s., Masaryk Hospital in
Usti nad Labem, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic,
3Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine First
Medical Faculty, Charles University in Prague and General
University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic, Prague,Czech Republic
EGFR gene encodes an epidermal growth factor receptor
which is important in cell proliferation and differentiation.
So far, only rare reports of germline mutations in the EGFR
gene as a cause of monogenic disease in children areavailable. Our patient was a young pregnant woman of
Roma origin. Her previous pregnancy was complicated by
polyhydramnios and IUGR and her daughter was born inthe 31st week of pregnancy, birth weight 660g. Child had
no organ malformation but very fragile skin and died after
46 days because of multiorgan failure. The currentpregnancy was also complicated by severe polyhydramnios,
there were hyperechogenic kidneys and bowels and IUGR.
The boy was born in the 30th week with birth weight of760g. The boy had progeroid features with lack of
subcutaneous fat and very thin and fragile skin. He died
in 34 days because of metabolic dysbalance. Whole exomesequencing revealed presence of homozygous mutation
c.1283G>A (p.Gly428Asp) in the EGFR gene in both
deceased siblings, both parents are heterozygous carriers.Thirteen years ago, we examined Roma family in which 3
children died in early infancy with very similar clinical
features. The diagnosis of Netherton syndrome wasconsidered, but wasn't con ﬁrmed. With our new experience
we tested mutation of EGFR gene in one of these deceased
children. Homozygous mutation c.1283G>A was con ﬁrmed
by Sanger sequencing. Mutations of EGFR gene should be
considered in a differential diagnosis of progeroid syndrome
especially in Roma families. Our report describes featuresof these children. Dedication: RVO-VFN 64165/2012
J. La štuvková: None. P. Hitka: None. S. Mazurová:
None. M. Magner: None. M. Tesařová: None. V. Strá-
necký: None. V.Čejnová: None.
P04.24D
Tessier no. 4 facial cleft leading to the diagnosis of
familial vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
C. R. Fagerberg
1, R. M. Schmidt2, S. Farholt3,
K. P. Sørensen11Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University
Hospital, Odense C, Denmark,2H C Andersen Childrens
Hospital, Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark,
3Center for Rare Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus C, Denmark
The parents of a girl born with Tessier no. 4 facial clefting
sought genetic counselling concerning recurrence risk in the
next pregnancy. The pattern of the facial clefting and aconstriction ring on the right leg raised the suspicion of
amniotic band to be the cause. Trio exome analysis was
performed to best possible rule out other causes. Amaternally inherited substitution of glycin to serin in the
triple helix domaine (COL3A1:c.2689G>A;p.Gly897Ser)
was identi ﬁed in the COL3A1-gene, raising the suspicion of
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The family history was
without vascular catastrophes, but one affected had severe
bleeding after a gynecological surgery. Some carriers of thevariant had easy bruising, whereas others did not. It is well
known that substitutions of glycin to serin in the triple helix
domaine lead to a better prognosis and a milder phenotypethan other glycin substitutions in vascular Ehlers-Danlos
Syndrome, which most likely explains the mild vascular
phenotype in this family. This case reminds us that somecollagen diseases increase the risk of amniotic banding, the
risk being estimated to approximately 1 %. The other way
round, the risk of a collagen disease in case of amnioticbanding is to the best of our knowledge unknown. We
suggest that genetic analysis for selected collagen diseases
should be done in case of amniotic banding.
C.R. Fagerberg: None. R.M. Schmidt: None. S. Far-
holt: None. K.P. Sørensen: None.
P04.26B
Natural exon skipping reveals that antisense
oligonucleotide-mediated exon skipping should bedirected at the recessive type of dystrophic
epidermolysis bullosa
J. Bremer
1, E. H. van der Heijden1, D. S. Eichhorn2,
R. Meijer3, H. H. Lemmink1, H. Scheffer3, R. S. Sinke1,
M. F. Jonkman2, A. M. G. Pasmooij2, P. C. Van den
Akker1
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen,
Netherlands,2University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Department of Dermatology,Groningen, Netherlands,
3Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands1280Introduction: Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) is a
devastating genetic blistering disease affecting skin and
mucous membranes. DEB is caused by pathogenic variants
in the COL7A1 gene encoding type VII collagen, and can be
inherited dominantly or recessively. The structure of
COL7A1 makes it an attractive candidate for exon-
skipping therapy. Recently, we demonstrated promising
proof-of-principle for antisense oligonucleotide (AON)-
mediated exon-skipping as a systemic therapeutic approachfor DEB. However, it is unclear what phenotypic effect may
be expected from exon-skipping and which patient groups
may bene ﬁt the most.
Patients and Methods: To answer these questions, we
studied new clinical and molecular data on seven patients
from the Dutch EB registry and reviewed the literature onpathogenic COL7A1 variants inducing ‘natural exon-
skipping ’.
Results: We found that the natural skipping of certain
exons led to disease in a heterozygous state, while the
skipping of other exons only led to disease if combined with
a pathogenic variant on the other COL7A1 allele. The
dominant DEB phenotypes associated with heterozygous
exon-skipping could not be distinguished from dominant
phenotypes caused by heterozygous COL7A1 variants not
inducing exon-skipping. Phenotypes associated with reces-
sive exon-skipping mutations were, however, on average
relatively mild in the spectrum of recessive DEB.
Conclusions: For dominant DEB, AON-mediated exon-
skipping is unlikely to make a clinical difference. In con-
trast, we anticipate that exon-skipping has the potential toinduce a clinically relevant improvement of the devastating
recessive DEB phenotype, especially the types caused by
bi-allelic null variants.
Grants and Fellowships: Clinical Fellowship ZonMW
(90715614, PvdA)
J. Bremer: None. E.H. van der Heijden: None. D.S.
Eichhorn: None. R. Meijer: None. H.H. Lemmink: None.
H. Scheffer: None. R.S. Sinke: None. M.F. Jonkman:
None. A.M.G. Pasmooij: None. P.C. Van den
Akker: None.
P04.27C
Targeted next-generation sequencing in the diagnosis of
facial dysostoses
E. M. Olech
1, D. Popiel2, G. Koczyk1,3, A. Materna-
Kiryluk1,2, M. Badura-Stronka1,2,M .W i śniewska1,2,
A. Latos-Biele ńska1,2, A. Jamsheer1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,2Centers for Medical
Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,3Institute of PlantGenetics (PAS), Department of Biometry and
Bioinformatics, Poznan, Poland
Background: Facial dysostoses (FD) encompass rare and
heterogeneous congenital craniofacial anomalies subdivided
into mandibulofacial dysostoses (MFDs) and acrofacialdysostoses (AFDs). Both MFDs and AFDs result from
impaired migration of neural crest cells to the pharyngeal
arches and the face during embryogenesis. The mainclinical features observed in affected patients are maxillary,
malar and mandibular hypoplasia, cleft palate, and/or ear
defects. In AFDs, limb defects are present as an additionalfeature.
Materials and Methods: To determine the molecular
aetiology of FD, we performed a custom ampli ﬁcation-
based panel of 37 genes (145.5 kb, 761 amplicons) by next-
generation sequencing on Ion Torrent S5 sequencing sys-
tem. We analysed a group of 25 patients affected by vari-able forms of FD and validated clinically relevant variants
by conventional sequencing in both affected individuals and
their parents.
Results: Testing with targeted next-generation gene panel
revealed pathogenic or probably pathogenic variants in 14
out of 25 patients presenting with different forms of FDs.We found either novel or known variants within the
ALDH1A1 ,ALX1 ,DHODH ,EFNB1 ,EFTUD2 ,FGFR1 ,
SF3B4 ,SRCAP ,TCOF1 , and ZSWIM6 genes.
Conclusion: We proved the ef ﬁciency and clinical utility
of the designed gene panel. The targeted strategy presented
here is a suitable and helpful approach in the geneticdiagnostics of variable forms of FD.
This work was supported by the grant from the Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poland 502-14-11261860-41259 to Ewelina M. Olech. and grant from the Polish
National Science Centre, Poland UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/
00270 to Aleksander Jamsheer
E.M. Olech: None. D. Popiel: None. G. Koczyk: None.
A. Materna-Kiryluk: None. M. Badura-Stronka: None.
M. Wiśniewska: None. A. Latos-Biele ńska: None. A.
Jamsheer: None.
P04.29A
Novel mutations in autosomal dominant inherited
syndromes with cutaneous manifestations
E. Borràs, I. Hernan, M. A. Pol, F. Corella,
M. J. Gamundi, B. Mañé, M. Carballo
Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, Spain
Introduction: Molecular diagnosis provides useful infor-
mation for disease prognosis and genetic counseling,
especially when cutaneous changes are result from anAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1281underlying hereditary tumor syndrome. We present four
solved cases of autosomal dominant hereditary disorders
displaying skin manifestations.
Materials and Methods: The cases consist on a 28 yo
woman with multiple trichoepitheliomas (Brooke-Spiegler
syndrome); a 10 yo girl with connective tissue nevi and
osteopoikilosis (Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome); and two
patients with multiple cutaneous leiomyomas (Reed syn-
drome), a 31 yo woman with cutaneous/uterine leiomyomasand renal cancer and a 38 yo man with cutaneous leio-
myomas whose mother and sister had uterine lesions. All
had a family history of the condition compatible with anautosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Disease-associated
genes were analysed using PCR and direct sequencing and
deletions/duplications were detected by MLPA.
Results: Pathogenic mutations were identi ﬁed in all
cases, three of them being novel. Patients with Brooke-
Spiegler and Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome had non-sensemutations in respectively CYLD (p.Gly282Ter) and LEMD3
(p.Trp581Ter), while Reed syndrome patients carried
complete or partial FHdeletions. This novel partial deletion
extends 1.9 kb and its breakpoints are located within exon 2
and intron 2, disrupting the FHgene. Genetic counseling
was performed and relatives at risk were offered directmolecular testing. Positive cases were further examined by
imaging techniques to assess the presence of other lesions
or malignancies.
Conclusions: Molecular testing con ﬁrmed the hereditary
syndromes initially diagnosed and allowed to adopt ade-
quate prevention and treatment measures in those positivecases with an increased risk of internal cancer.
E. Borràs: None. I. Hernan: None. M.A. Pol: None. F.
Corella: None. M.J. Gamundi: None. B. Mañé: None. M.
Carballo: None.
P04.30B
Two cases Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliotic type,
2 caused by FKBP14 mutation
V. Rumyantseva
1, I. Girba1, N. Scherbakova1,
N. Samoilova1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1,2
1Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian Research Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: FKBP14 -related Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
(EDS) is an extremely rare recessive connective tissuedisorder. The poor prognosis is anticipated due to typical
features of the syndrome and possible potentially life-
threatening vascular complication in childhood and atlan-toaxial instability.Materials and Methods: We have observed clinical and
genealogical examination of two patients (14 month-old
boy and 11 month-old girl) with unusual phenotypes: the
evaluation con ﬁrmed following symptoms: generalized
muscle hypotonia, progressive kyphoscoliosis, and joint
hypermobility. Echocardiogram and hearing was normal.Boy’s ultrasound scan showed expansion of the axillary
vein and girl ’s one showed ectasia of the internal jugular
vein. Patients underwent genetic testing via high-throughputsequencing followed by capillary Sanger sequencing.
Results: In 2 patients from 2 unrelated Russian families
identi ﬁed homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion within a 5C-
nucleotide repeat in exon 3 (c.362dupC, NM_017946.2) of
theFKBP14 gene, causing a frameshift predicted to result in
a premature termination codon (Glu122ArgfsTer7). Theirunaffected parents were heterozygous of the mutation.
Conclusion: Clinicians should give more consideration to
rare genetic syndromes, especially in the case of symptomsfrom different clinical areas. Genotype/phenotype associa-
tion studies will be necessary to elucidate further the cause
of the variability of the disease severity. As it has earlyclinical manifestations, FKBP 14-related EDS is still a
challenge and the key issue for its effective follow-up that
includes cardiovascular monitoring that is cerebral, thoracic,abdominal MRA, and cervical dynamic radiograph. The
362dupC mutation was linked to the same haplotype in all
individuals despite their geographically diverse origins,suggesting a possible founder event
V. Rumyantseva: None. I. Girba: None. N. Scherba-
kova: None. N. Samoilova: None. E.
Zaklyazminskaya: None.
P04.31C
Bi-allelic mutations in LSS, encoding lanosterol
synthase, cause autosomal-recessive hypotrichosis
simplex
M. Romano
1, A. Tafazzoli1, M. Mattern1, S. Sivalingam1,
S. Wolf1, A. Rupp2, H. Thiele3, J. Altmüller4,
P. Nürnberg4, J. Ellwanger5, R. Gambon6, A. Baumer7,
N. Kohlschmidt8, D. Metze9, S. Holdenrieder2, R. Paus10,
D. Lütjohann11, J. Frank12, M. Geyer13, M. Bertolini14,
P. Kokordelis1, R. C. Betz1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany,2Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Technical University Munich,
Munich, Germany,3Cologne Center for Genomics,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,4Center for
Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,5Dermatological Practice, Munich,
Germany,6Pediatric Practice Feldstrasse, Thusis,
Switzerland,7Institute for Genetic Medicine, University of
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland,8Institute of Clinical Genetics,1282Bonn, Germany,9Department of Dermatology, University
of Münster, Münster, Germany,10Centre for Dermatology
Research, University of ManchesterInstitute of Human
Genetics, ManchesterInstitute, United Kingdom,11Institute
for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,12Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University
Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany,13Institute
of Innate Immunity, Department of Structural Immunology,University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
14Monasterium
Laboratory - Skin and Hair Research Solutions GmbH,
Münster, Germany
Hypotrichosis simplex (HS) is a rare form of hereditary
alopecia characterized by childhood-onset of diffuse andprogressive scalp and body hair loss. Although research has
identi ﬁed a number of causal genes, genetic etiology in
about 50% of HS cases remains unknown. The presentreport describes the identi ﬁcation via whole exome
sequencing of ﬁve different mutations in the gene LSS in
three unrelated families with unexplained, potentiallyautosomal recessive HS. Affected individuals showed
sparse to absent, lanugo-like scalp hair, sparse and brittle
eyebrows, sparse eyelashes and body hair. The LSS gene
encodes lanosterol synthase (LSS), which is a key enzyme
in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. This pathway plays
an important role in hair follicle biology. After localizingLSS protein expression in the hair shaft and bulb of the hair
follicle, the impact of the mutations on keratinocytes was
analyzed using immunoblotting and immuno ﬂuorescence.
Interestingly, wild-type LSS was localized in the endoplas-
mic reticulum (ER), whereas mutant LSS proteins were
localized in part outside of the ER. A plausible hypothesis isthat this mislocalization has potential deleterious implica-
tions for hair follicle cells. Immunoblotting revealed no
differences in the overall level of wild-type and mutantprotein. Analyses of blood cholesterol levels revealed no
decrease in cholesterol or cholesterol intermediates, thus
supporting the previously proposed hypothesis of analternative cholesterol pathway. The identi ﬁcation of LSS
as causal gene for autosomal recessive HS highlights the
importance of the cholesterol pathway in hair folliclebiology, and may facilitate novel therapeutic approaches for
hair loss disorders in general.
M. Romano: None. A. Tafazzoli: None. M. Mattern:
None. S. Sivalingam: None. S. Wolf: None. A. Rupp:
None. H. Thiele: None. J. Altmüller: None. P. Nürnberg:
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; ATLAS Biolabs GmbH. J.
Ellwanger: None. R. Gambon: None. A. Baumer: None.
N. Kohlschmidt: None. D. Metze: None. S. Holdenrieder:
None. R. Paus: None. D. Lütjohann: None. J. Frank:None. M. Geyer: None. M. Bertolini: None. P. Kokor-
delis: None. R.C. Betz: None.
P04.32D
Phenotypic presentations of Hajdu-Cheney syndrome
according to age - 5 distinct clinical presentations
L. Graversen
1, M. Handrup2, M. Irving3, H. Hove4,
B. Diness5, L. Risom5, D. Svaneby6, M. Aagaard6,
I. Vogel1, H. Gjørup7, M. Davidsen8, M. Hellfritzsch9,
P. Gregersen1
1Department of clinical genetics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,2Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus UniversityHospital, Aarhus, Denmark,
3Guy’s and St Thomas NHS
Trust, London, United Kingdom,4Centre for Rare Diseases,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,
5Department of clinical genetics, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,6Department of clinical
genetics, Hospital Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark,7Center for
Oral Health in Rare Diseases, Department of Maxillofacial
Surgery, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,
8Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,9Department of Radiology,
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark
We present ﬁve Danish individuals with Hajdu-Cheney
syndrome (HJCYS) (OMIM #102500), a rare multisystem
skeletal disorder with distinctive facies, generalised osteo-porosis and progressive focal bone destruction. In four cases
positive genetic screening of exon 34 of NOTCH2
supported the clinical diagnosis; in one of these cases,mosaicism was demonstrated, which, to our knowledge, has
not previously been reported. In one case no genetic testing
was performed since the phenotype was de ﬁnite, and the
diagnosis in the mother was genetically con ﬁrmed. The age
of the patients differs widely from seven to 56 years,
allowing a natural history description of the phenotypeassociated with this ultra-rare condition. The evolution of
the condition is most apparent in the incremental bone loss
leading to osteoporosis and the acro-osteolysis, both ofwhich contribute signi ﬁcantly to disease burden.
L. Graversen: None. M. Handrup: None. M. Irving:
None. H. Hove: None. B. Diness: None. L. Risom: None.
D. Svaneby: None. M. Aagaard: None. I. Vogel: None. H.
Gjørup: None. M. Davidsen: None. M. Hellfritzsch:
None. P. Gregersen: None.
P04.33A
Design of a candidate smMIPS sequencing study inpatients with hereditary angioedema of unknown cause
(U-HAE)Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1283C. Mathey1, C. Stieber1,2, K. U. Ludwig1, A. Maaser1,
S. Heilmann-Heimbach1, M. M. Nöthen1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Center for Rare Diseases Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare, potentially life-
threatening disease with an estimated prevalence of
1:50,000 characterized by recurrent episodes of subcuta-
neous or submucosal swellings. Transmitted as an auto-somal dominant trait, there are ﬁve types of HAE with
known genetic defects. While HAE with decreased C1-
Inhibitor can be explained by mutations in SERPING1 , only
about 20-25% of the cases of HAE with normal C1-
Inhibitor can be explained by mutations in FXII. But two
recently discovered mutations in ANGPT1 andPLG have
been linked to two further forms of HAE with normal C1-
Inhibitor. Despite these successes in identifying causes of
HAE, there still remains a signi ﬁcant fraction of patients
with the diagnosis of so called HAE with unknown cause
(U-HAE). Aiming to identify potential new disease-causing
genes that may play a role in the development or clinicalheterogeneity of HAE, we performed multiplex targeted
sequencing using the single-molecule molecular inversion
probes (smMIPs). Our smMIPs panel comprises 29 genesthat were prioritized by systematic literature research and
pathway analysis and are mainly related to known disease-
causing genes and pathways in HAE. The panel wasestablished on a MiSeq platform where we achieved a
coverage ≥100x for 95% of all exons in 27 out of
29 selected genes. Sequencing in our patient cohort of125 HAE patients with U-HAE is currently ongoing on a
Illumina HiSeq platform and results will be presented at the
upcoming conference.
C. Mathey: None. C. Stieber: None. K.U. Ludwig:
None. A. Maaser: None. S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None.
M.M. Nöthen: None.
P04.34B
Expanding the phenotype of Pseudoxanthoma elasticumwith hereditary spastic paraplegia
A. LEGRAND
1,2, A. Mesnil3, C. Durand4, C. Tesson5,
S. Zuily6, X. Jeunemaitre3,7,2, C. Goizet8, J. Albuisson3,7,2
1INSERM U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre,
PARIS, France,2Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, faculté de Médecine, Paris, France,3Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen GeorgesPompidou, Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires
Rares, PARIS, France,
4INSERM U1211, LaboratoireMaladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme, Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,5INSERM U1127, CNRS
UMR 7225, UPMC Université Paris 06 UMR S1127,
Sorbonne Université Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière, ICM F-75013, PARIS, France,6Université de
Lorraine, Inserm, DCAC, Vascular Medicine Division andRegional Competence Center for Rare Vascular and
Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, Centre Hospitalier
Regional Universitaire de Nancy, Nancy, France,
7INSERM
U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, Paris,
France,8Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de
Bordeaux et Laboratoire MRGM, INSERM U1211,Université de Bordeaux, Centre de Référence
Neurogénétique, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de
Bordeaux, France, Bordeaux, France
Background: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by ectopicmineralization and fragmentation of the elastic ﬁbers of
connective tissues. ABCC6 has been the only identi ﬁed
gene, but up to 18% of cases remain genetically unsolvedwith one or no pathogenic variant in ABCC6 (Legrand et al,
2017) . The corresponding negative French PXE cases were
genetically explored for new PXE gene(s).
Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in one
ABCC6 negative PXE family with additional features, to
search for pathogenic variants. We identi ﬁed a candidate
gene (CG) in a congruent metabolic pathway, and
sequenced 46 additional ABCC6 negative PXE index cases
(IC). An in vitro biochemical assay was carried out todetermine the pathogenicity of identi ﬁed missense variants
and a clinical description of positive cases was performed to
reﬁne their phenotypic spectrum.
Results: Out of 47 PXE IC, 3 harbored 2 pathogenic
variants in our CG. Histologically-con ﬁrmed skin lesions,
and diminished visual acuity due to maculopathy evokedthe diagnosis of PXE. The association with neurological
symptoms was strikingly present in the 3 cases, evoking a
phenotype of PXE “plus”neurological symptoms. Bio-
chemical analyses con ﬁrmed loss of activity of the corre-
sponding mutated enzyme.
Conclusion: Our CG is mutated in 6.4% of our unsolved
PXE cases and should be systematically sequenced in sus-
pected PXE cases with neurological ﬁndings: spastic para-
plegia, dystonia, cognitive impairment, peripheralneuropathy and brain MRI abnormalities. The mechanism
leading to overlapping phenotypes for these 2 genes
remains to be explored to explain their role and link inmineralization.
A. Legrand: None. A. Mesnil: None. C. Durand: None.
C. Tesson: None. S. Zuily: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None.
C. Goizet: None. J. Albuisson: None.1284P04.35C
Post-zygotic MTOR mutations and Ito hypomelanosis:
phenotypic spectrum and ultrastructural
characterization
V. Carmignac1,2, A. Sorlin3,2, V. E. R. Parker4,
E. Blanchard-Laumonnier5,6, C. Mignot7,8, M. Aubriot-
Lorton9, J. Courcet2, Y. Duffourd2, P. Kuentz10,
D. Rodriguez11, R. G. Knox12, A. Boland13, R. Olaso13,
V. Darmency14, C. Quelin15, S. Odent15, D. Amram16,
M. Chevarin2, c. Vincent-Delorme17, B. Catteau18,
L. Guibaud19, A. Arzimanoglou20, D. Bessis21,
D. Geneviève22, J. Deleuze13, R. Semple23, C. Philippe2,24,
L. Faivre2, J. Rivière25, P. Vabres1
1MAGEC-Mosaique Dijon, CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon,
France,2INSERM UMR1231-GAD team, Dijon, France,
3Genetic Department - CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon,
France,4University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories, Cambridge, United Kingdom,5Service
d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, UF de Biologie
Cellulaire et Microscopie Electronique, Tours, France,
6INSERM U1259 « Morphogenèse et Antigénicité du VIH et
des virus des hépatites », Tours, France,7Service de
neuropédiatrie et pathologie du développement, Hôpital
Trousseau,, Paris, France,8Département de Génétique et
Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes
Rares, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,
9Service de Pathologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,
10Genetic Department - CHU Besançon, Besançon, France,
11Service de neuropédiatrie et pathologie du
développement, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France,
12University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge,
France,13Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de
Génomique, CEA, Evry, France,14Pediatric and medical
genetics, Dijon, France,15clinical genetics, CHU Rennes,
Rennes, France,16clinical genetics, CH Créteil, Créteil,
France,17Medical genetics- CHU Lille, Lille, France,
18Dermatology departement-CHU Lille, Lille, France,
19pediatric and foetal imagery department, HCL lyon, Lyon,
France,20ESEFNP, HCL Lyon, Lyon, France,
21Dermatology departement-CHU Montpellier,
Montpellier, France,22Medical genetics department, CHU
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,23University of
Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
24UF6254-CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,25Mc Gill
University, Montréal, QC, Canada
Germline MTOR mutations are associated with Smith-
Kingsmore syndrome (SKS), whereas somatic mutations
are reported in patients with hemimegalencephaly/focalcortical dysplasia; only few presented with linear depig-
mentation. Here, we report clinical manifestations in
12 sporadic cases with Ito hypomelanosis and post-
zygotic mutation of MTOR .
We performed exome analysis or ultra-deep targeted
sequencing of MTOR gene on hypopigmented skin biopsy,
and performed precise clinical reappraisal. In two patients,
we analyzed the phenotype histologically and
ultrastructurally.
We identi ﬁed 9 MTOR post-zygotic mutations including
six novel. Two were recurrent. Clinically, patients had
blaschkolinear hypopigmentation (11/12), epilepsy (9/12),macrocephaly (8/12), hemi-hypertrophy (7/12), and severe
intellectual disability (7/12), 2 have iria heterochromia, and
one nephromegaly. Primary ﬁbroblasts (p.Glu2419Lys)
showed activation of PIK3K-AKT pathway. Skin biopsies
showed a decreased number of melanocytes melanosome
immaturity in melanocytes and a decreased number ofmelanosomes in keratinocytes in hypopigmented areas.
Although somatic MTOR mutations have already been
reported in Ito's hypomelanosis, this is the ﬁrst clinical-
genetic characterization of this association. Neurologically,
there are analogies with SKS and hemimegalencephaly.
Reduction of intrakeratinocyte melanosomes had alreadybeen reported in Ito's hypomelanosis, but without genetic
study results as well as in hypochromic spots of tuberous
sclerosis (TS), which is due to mutations of mTORrepressor TSC1/2. We found that tuberous sclerosis and
MTOR-related hypomelanosis shared common pathophy-
siology process, with a lack of maturation of melanosomes.Importantly, no renal involvement known in TS has been
identi ﬁed in cases with MTOR mutations. Therapeutic use
of rapamycin, a MTOR inhibitor, is therefore possible.
V. carmignac: None. A. Sorlin: None. V.E.R. Parker:
None. E. Blanchard-Laumonnier: None. C. Mignot:
None. M. Aubriot-Lorton: None. J. Courcet: None. Y.
Duffourd: None. P. Kuentz: None. D. Rodriguez: None.
R.G. Knox: None. A. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. V.
Darmency: None. C. Quelin: None. S. Odent: None. D.
Amram: None. M. Chevarin: None. C. Vincent-Delorme:
None. B. Catteau: None. L. Guibaud: None. A. Arzi-
manoglou: None. D. Bessis: None.
D. Geneviève: None. J.
Deleuze: None. R. Semple: None. C. Philippe: None. L.
Faivre: None. J. Rivière: None. P. Vabres: None.
P04.36D
Molecular analysis of ALPL gene in Russian cohort of
patients with suspected hypophosphatasia
M. Fedyakov1, Y. Eismont1, T. Ivaschenko2, I. Sosnina3,
E. Snegova3, A. Sarana1,4, S. Scherbak1,4, O. Glotov1,2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12851City Hospital 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,
2D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,
3Consultative and diagnostic center for children, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation,4Saint-Petersburg State
University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation
Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare heritable
metabolic disorder characterized by defective mineraliza-tion of bone and/or teeth in the presence of reduced activity
of unfractionated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The
overall prevalence of severe HPP is range from 1/100 000 to1/300 000. Mild forms of HPP are more frequent than
severe forms - expected prevalence can reach 1/6000 in
Western populations. Russian prevalence of mild and severeHPP is still unknown. Genetic analysis provides determin-
ing of diagnosis in cases with suspected HPP.
Materials and Methods: We analyzed genomic DNA
samples from 112 unrelated individuals with signs of HPP
(low and/or recurrent low levels of ALP, low growth,
recurrent fractures and others). Primers ’system for Sanger
sequencing was designed and validated for 2-12 exons of
ALPL gene. First exon of this gene was excluded because
it’s non-coding and GC-rich region.
Results: Studied group included 66 males and 46 females
(mean age 9yo, range from 1 month to 66yo). Low ALP
(age- and sex-dependent reference range) was founded in79% (89/112). We detected 15 pathogenic mutations (13%
detection rate): 13 in heterozygous and 2 in compound-
heterozygous. 3 novel missense variants were founded.Most frequent variant was p.E191K in exon 6. The pre-
valence of this mutation was 6,25% (7/112) in our study
whereas gnomAD prevalence is 0,25%.
Conclusions: We presented the data of prevalence mild
HPP in Russian cohort of patients with suspected HPP.
Mild HPP was founded in 87% positive cases (13/15).Variant p.E191K in ALPL is common for Russian
population.
M. Fedyakov: None. Y. Eismont: None. T. Ivaschenko:
None. I. Sosnina: None. E. Snegova: None. A. Sarana:
None. S. Scherbak: None. O. Glotov: None.
P04.37A
Recurrent somatic IDH1 mutation in an adult with
Maffucci syndrome
N. J. Brown
1,2,3,Z .Y e4, C. Stutterd2,3, A. Schneider4,
S. Mullen4,5, S. Mandelstam3,5,6, I. E. Scheffer3,4,7,
M. S. Hildebrand4
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, MCRI, Parkville,
Australia,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Austin Health,
Heidelberg, Australia,3Royal Children ’s HospitalDepartment of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia,4Department of Medicine, Austin
Hospital, University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Australia,
5Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health,
Heidelberg, Australia,6Department of Medical Imaging,
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia,7Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville,
Australia
Background: Maffucci Syndrome is a rare, highly variable,
somatic mosaic condition, caused by recurrent mutations in
either IDH1 orIDH2 . Features include benign enchondroma
and spindle cell haemangioma, with a recognized increased
risk of various malignancies. Fewer than 200 cases have
been reported, therefore accurate estimates of malignancyrisk are dif ﬁcult to quantify and recommended surveillance
guidelines are not available. IDH1 andIDH2 mutations are
also implicated in a variety of other benign and malignanttumours. Recently, the FDA approved speci ﬁcIDH1 and
IDH2 inhibitors for use in individuals with relapsed acute
myeloid leukaemia.
Methods: An adult male was assessed via the Austin
Health Clinical Genetics Unit, after he presented with soft
palpable lesions on the left upper limb. Imaging and his-topathology raised the possibility of Maffucci syndrome.
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes and
from surgically resected tissue. Sanger sequencing andDroplet-digital PCR analysis of the IDH1 gene was
performed.
Results: Imaging and histopathology results were vir-
tually pathognomonic of Maffucci syndrome. We identi ﬁed
a recurrent, somatic mosaic c.394C>T (p.R132C) mutation
in exon 5 of IDH1 , in DNA derived from haemangioma
tissue (~ 17% mutant allele frequency) that was absent in
DNA derived from blood. This mutation is a well-
established cause of Maffucci syndrome.
Conclusion: We present an instructive case of a rare
condition, and explore the potential therapeutic bene ﬁts and
risks of IDH1 andIDH2 inhibitors in this disorder.
Funding: NHMRC Program Grant (1091593):I.E.S.,
Project Grant (1079058):M.S.H., Practitioner Fellowship
(1006110):I.E.S., R.D Wright Career Development Fel-lowship (1063799):M.S.H.
N.J. Brown: None. Z. Ye: None. C. Stutterd: None. A.
Schneider: None. S. Mullen: None. S. Mandelstam:
None. I.E. Scheffer: None. M.S. Hildebrand: None.
P04.38B
FBN1 gene mutations in 26 Hungarian patients with
suspected Marfan syndrome or related ﬁbrillinopathies1286L. Madar1, K. Szakszon2,G .P ﬂiegler3, G. P. Szabó2,
B. Brúgós3, N. Ronen1, J. Papp4, K. Zahuczky4,
E. Szakos4, G. Fekete5, É. Oláh2, K. Koczok1, I. Balogh1
1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,Debrecen, Hungary,
2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,
3Division of Rare Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary,4Department of Pediatrics, Borsod-
Abaúj-Zemplén County University Hospital, Miskolc,Hungary,
52nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal
dominant connective tissue disorder with cardiovascular,
ocular and musculo-skeletal system involvement. FBN1
gene mutations lead to MFS and related ﬁbrillinopathies. In
this work we describe clinical and molecular data of 26
unrelated individuals with suspected MFS who werereferred to our laboratory for FBN1 gene mutation analysis.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA samples and in
one case RNA sample isolated from dermal ﬁbroblasts were
analyzed by next generation sequencing (NGS) and Sanger
sequencing methods.
Results: We identi ﬁed 23 causative or potentially cau-
sative (including variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance) FBN1
variants, seven of them was novel (~30%). About 30% of
the cases were sporadic. Missense mutations were detectedin 69.6% (16/23), the majority of them were located in one
of the cbEGF motifs and ~70% of them substituted con-
served cystein residues. Small deletions/duplicationsaccounted for 13% of the cases (3/23), while splice site
variants were identi ﬁed in 17.4% (4/23). In three unrelated
patients a low frequency (<1%) recurrent silent variant(c.3294C>T (p.Asp1098 =) was identi ﬁed.FBN1 mRNA
analysis showed that the mutation does not lead to aberrant
splicing, based on available data the variant was classi ﬁed
as benign.
Conclusions: FBN1 mutations were associated with MFS
in the majority of the patients, in two cases with severe andearly onset manifestation of the syndrome.
Funding: this study was supported by the Ministry of
National Economy, Hungary, Grant/Award Number:GINOP ‐2.3.2 ‐15‐2016 ‐00039.
L. Madar: None. K. Szakszon: None. G. P ﬂiegler:
None. G.P. Szabó: None. B. Brúgós: None. N. Ronen:
None. J. Papp: None. K. Zahuczky: None. E. Szakos:
None. G. Fekete: None. É. Oláh: None. K. Koczok: None.
I. Balogh: None.P04.39C
Identi ﬁcation of a novel two-exon deletion of FBN1 gene
in a patient with Marfan syndrome and homocystinuria
G. Buki
1,2, K. Hadzsiev1,2, L. Pinter1,2, B. Melegh1,2,
J. Bene1,2
1University of Pecs, Medical School, Clinical Center,
Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary,
2Szentagothai Research Center, University of Pecs, Pecs,
Hungary
Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal
dominant multi-system disorder of connective tissue with
high clinical heterogeneity. Some characteristic features ofthe syndrome, such as ectopia lentis, long-bone overgrowth,
a high arched palate, a crowded dentition, scoliosis,
kyphosis and arachnodactyly overlap with those seen inhomocystinuria. Co-occurrence of these disorders can be
observed in a number of patients. MFS is mainly caused by
mutations in the ﬁbrillin-1 gene ( FBN1) , mapped to
chromosome 15q21.1. Majority of classic MFS patients
bear small alterations, however, a smaller number of
patients have larger genomic rearrangements in FBN1 gene.
Materials and Methods: After negative results of sys-
tematic sequencing of FBN1 ,TGFBR1 andTGFBR2 genes,
an MLPA (P065-P066 MRC-Holland) analysis was per-formed in a 21 years old female patient suffering from
Marfan syndrome based on Ghent criteria and
homocystinuria.
Results: In contrast to the generally detected large dele-
tions, a novel two-exon deletion (exon 46-47) has been
observed in our patient. This results in the loss of 31-32
nd
calcium binding EGF-like domain which is responsible for
the development of classic Marfan phenotype.
Conclusions: Less than 10% of the disease causing
mutations are copy number alterations, in which single or
multiple exon deletions can be detected by MLPA in a cost-
effective manner even in the NGS era. Our case points outthe importance of testing the MFS patients for homo-
cystinuria, since an elevated level of homocysteine is
associated with the risk of severe cardiovascular manifes-tations, though at present only a few guidelines recommend
testing for homocystinuria.
G. Buki: None. K. Hadzsiev: None. L. Pinter: None. B.
Melegh: None. J. Bene: None.
P04.40D
Aﬁbrillinopathy the marfanoid-progeroid-
lipodystrophy syndrome - in mother and daughter
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak, M. Gos, E. ObersztynAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1287Department of Medical Genetic, Institute of the Mother and
Child, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Marfanoid-progeroid-lipodystrophy syn-
drome (MPLS) is a very rare genetic disorder with clinical
features overlapping those of congenital Marfan syndrome -ocular, cardiovascular and skeletal manifestations, proger-
oid syndromes - progeroid appearance of the face and body
not associated with other manifestation of early aging andlipodystrophy with the extreme congenital lack of sub-
cutaneous fat tissues not associated with metabolic
disturbances. To our knowledge only seven patients withthis syndrome were reported so far. In all patients mutation
in exon 64 of the FBN1 gene was detected.
Patients and Methods: We present clinical evaluation of
mother and daughter in whom the same mutation
Trp2756Ter in exon 64 of the FBN1 gene was detected
using next generation sequencing method (NimbleGenSeqCap Target Enrichment Roche) with panel of genes
associated with craniosynostosis genes (developed in the
Department of Medical Genetics of the Institute of theMother and Child in Warsaw, Poland).
Results: Both patients have marfanoid habitus with
overgrowth, myopia, archnodactyly, pectus excavatum,hyperextensible joints, scoliosis, dysmorphic features with
progeroid facial appearance associated with congenital
lipodystrophy. Scaphocephalic head ’s shape observed
especially in daughter was probably a result of wide fon-
tanelles and disturbances in cranial sutures fusion in
childhood. Mental and motor development in both werewithin normal limits.
Conclusions: This is the second report presenting the
patient with MPLS and cranial suture development dis-turbances. This syndrome should be included in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of Marfan syndrome and progeroid-
lipodystrophy syndromes coexisting with disturbances incranial suture development.
Supported from IM&Ch intramural grant no. OPK-510-
18-48
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak: None. M. Gos: None. E.
Obersztyn: None.
P04.41A
Identi ﬁcation and characterization of microRNA-149, a
candidate for orofacial clefting
R. Hollstein
1, L. G. Stüssel1, M. Laugsch2,3,
F. Haeberlein4, L. M. Hochfeld1, J. Welzenbach1,
J. Schröder1, F. Thieme1, A. Heimbach1, T. Hess1,5,
J. Gehlen1,5, S. Heilmann-Heimbach1, E. Mangold1,
A. Rada-Iglesias2,6, B. Odermatt4, K. U. Ludwig11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC),
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,3Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,4Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,5Institute of Human Genetics, Philipps University
Marburg, Marburg, Germany,6Cologne Excellence Cluster
for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases(CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft
palate (nsCL/P) is a common facial malformation with
multifactorial etiology. The majority of genetic risk loci
map to non-coding regions of the genome, suggesting thatthe underlying pathomechanisms act through regulatory
effects on gene expression. One potential mechanism might
be posttranscriptional gene regulation by micro RNAs(miRNA). For nsCL/P, a suitable cellular model are human
neural crest cells (hNCCs), the mesenchymal precursor cells
that give rise to the majority of cranial cartilage and bones.
Methods and Results: We combined array-based
miRNA pro ﬁling in hNCC with in-house GWAS data to
identify candidate miRNAs for nsCL/P. This analysisrevealed miR-149-3p as strong candidate for nsCL/P
involvement, based on consistent hNCC-expression across
replicates and the presence of associated risk variants withinits genomic region. Next, we aimed at characterizing the
molecular mechanisms of miR-149-3p in the context of
craniofacial development. In vitro , we modi ﬁed miRNA149
abundance levels in cultured hNCC by overexpression and
inhibition assays and monitored the migration behavior of
hNCC using scratch assays. We found that inhibition ofmiR-149-3p signi ﬁcantly increases cellular migration of
hNCC compared to untreated hNCCs. RNA-Seq data at
different time points revealed differential expression ofGPC1 and BMP7. To follow up these ﬁndings, in vivo
analyses are currently performed in the zebra ﬁsh.
Conclusion: Through integration of large-scale genetic
data and expression patterns in relevant cell types we here
identi ﬁed a novel regulatory mechanism that is involved in
craniofacial development and might be related to the etiol-ogy of nsCL/P.
R. Hollstein: None. L.G. Stüssel: None. M. Laugsch:
None. F. Haeberlein: None. L.M. Hochfeld: None. J.
Welzenbach: None. J. Schröder: None. F. Thieme: None.
A. Heimbach: None. T. Hess: None. J. Gehlen: None. S.
Heilmann-Heimbach: None. E. Mangold: None. A.
Rada-Iglesias: None. B. Odermatt: None. K.U.
Ludwig: None.
P04.43C
Detection of a new AluY insertion in the NF1 gene1288C. Schmidt1, W. Brechan1, K. Tveten2, T. I. Nordtveit3,
R. Østern1, O. Bojovic3
1Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway,2Department of Medical Genetics,
Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway,3Department of
Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis type I (OMIM# 162200)
is a common autosomal dominant disorder associated with
variants in the NF1 gene. The spectrum of pathogenic
variants is large, up to 30% affect splicing. Our diagnostic
procedure combines analysis of genomic DNA and cDNA.
By cDNA analysis we were able to detect a previouslyundescribed Aluinsertion that was not detected by next
generation sequencing (NGS).
Patient and Methods: A 44-year-old patient presented
with café-au-lait spots, multiple subcutaneous nodules,
vertebral neuro ﬁbroma, multiple iris hamartoma and chor-
oidal nevi. DNA was ﬁrst analyzed by a targeted capture-
based NGS-panel ( NF1,NF2 and SPRED1 ) and MLPA
analysis ( NF1 andNF2) with normal results. Heparin blood
was used for cDNA analysis. Genetic analysis was per-formed on RNA extracted from short term lymphocyte
culture; puromycine was used to prevent mRNA decay.
Result: cDNA sequencing revealed a deletion of exon 26
(r.3315_3496del, p.(Tyr1106Leufs*28);
NM_001042492.2). Extended DNA-analysis of exon 26
andﬂanking regions by Sanger sequencing showed inser-
tion of a truncated AluY transposable element in exon 26:
c.3337_3338insAluY,3327_3337dupATTTATGAACC.
The insertion leads to disruption of the 3 ’acceptor splice
site in exon 26, deletion of exon 26 results in reading frame
shift and premature stop codon. Retrospective analysis of
NGS data indicated a loss of coverage in this speci ﬁc
region.
Conclusion: While NGS is a powerful method it has
limitations in detection of more uncommon variants. In NF1
genetic diagnostics, cDNA sequencing remains the gold
standard for mutation detection, speci ﬁcally for variants
affecting splicing.
C. Schmidt: None. W. Brechan: None. K. Tveten:
None. T.I. Nordtveit: None. R. Østern: None. O.
Bojovic: None.
P04.46B
Whole-exome sequencing and large-scale re-sequencingin nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate
identify novel susceptibility genes
N. Ishorst
1, L. Henschel1, F. Thieme1, D. Drichel2,
S. Sivalingam3,4,5, S. L. Mehrem1, A. C. Fechtner1,J. Fazaal1, J. Welzenbach1, A. Heimbach1, C. Maj4,
J. Hausen3,4,5, R. Raff1, A. Hoischen6,7,8, M. Dixon9,
A. Rada-Iglesias10,11, M. Bartusel10,11, A. Rojas-
Martinez12, K. Aldhorae13, B. Braumann14, T. Kruse14,
C. Kirschneck15, H. Reutter16,1, S. Nowak1, L. Gölz17,18,
M. Knapp5, P. Krawitz4, M. M. Nöthen1, M. Nothnagel2,
T. Becker19, K. U. Ludwig1, E. Mangold1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany,3Core
Unit for Bioinformatics Analysis, University of Bonn, Bonn,Germany,
4Institute for Genomic Statistics and
Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,5Institute of
Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,6Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center,Nijmegen, Netherlands,
7Department of Internal Medicine,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,8Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,9Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom,
10Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
11Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses
in Aging ‐Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,12Tecnologico de Monterrey,
School of Medicine, and Universidad Autonoma de NuevoLeon, Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de
la Salud, Monterrey, Mexico,
13Orthodontic Department,
College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen,
14Department of Orthodontics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,15Department of Orthodontics,
University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany,
16Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,17Department of
Orthodontics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,
18Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,19Institute for Community Medicine, University
of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany
Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/
P) is a common congenital malformation and has amultifactorial etiology. To date, 40 genome-wide signi ﬁcant
risk loci for nsCL/P have been identi ﬁed, but these explain
less than 40% of the genetic liability. Epidemiologicalobservations suggest that a fraction of the unidenti ﬁed
heritability might be explained by rare dominant de novo
mutations (DNMs) in genes involved in craniofacialdevelopment. If highly penetrant, such DNMs may be of
relevance in a diagnostic setting and for genetic counselling.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1289We performed whole-exome sequencing in 50 trios
(discovery cohort) and identi ﬁed 33 rare protein-altering
DNMs in 33 “candidate genes ”, two of them previously
found associated with nsCL/P ( CDH1, TRMO ). Of note,
this is the ﬁrst study in nsCL/P trios using DNMs for can-
didate gene identi ﬁcation.
The “candidate genes ”were subjected to resequencing
with single molecule molecular inversion probes in 1,010
nsCL/P patients from European, Arabian, and Mexicanancestry and 1,574 population-matched controls (replication
cohort). Of the total callset of 2,956 variants, 373 were
absent from controls and showed CADD ≥15 and
MAF ≤0.1% in public reference datasets. As a ﬁrst step, we
performed segregation analysis in the European cohort.
Here, we could identify further DNMs in four of the genes(CSMD1 ,MDN1 ,ANK1 ,PAXIP1 ). In those genes we also
found co-segregating variants ( MDN1, CSMD1 ) and one
compound heterozygous index ( MDN1 ). RNA sequencing
datasets con ﬁrmed expression of MDN1 ,ANK1 and
PAXIP1 in relevant embryonic mouse tissues and human
neural crest cells, making those genes promising candidatesfor functional follow-up.
N. Ishorst: None. L. Henschel: None. F. Thieme: None.
D. Drichel: None. S. Sivalingam: None. S.L. Mehrem:
None. A.C. Fechtner: None. J. Fazaal: None. J. Wel-
zenbach: None. A. Heimbach: None. C. Maj: None. J.
Hausen: None. R. Raff: None. A. Hoischen: None. M.
Dixon: None. A. Rada-Iglesias: None. M. Bartusel: None.
A. Rojas-Martinez: None. K. Aldhorae: None.
B. Brau-
mann: None. T. Kruse: None. C. Kirschneck: None. H.
Reutter: None. S. Nowak: None. L. Gölz: None. M.
Knapp: None. P. Krawitz: None. M.M. Nöthen: None.
M. Nothnagel: None. T. Becker: None. K.U. Ludwig:
None. E. Mangold: None.
P04.47C
Genetic distribution of early onset osteoarthritis in a
series of 40 patients
V. Ruault1, D. Genevieve1, F. Blotman1, P. Blanchet1,
A. Fabre1, M. Fradin2, B. Isidor3, C. Jorgensen1,
D. Lacombe4, M. Le Merrer5, S. Moutton6, S. Odent2,
G. Plessis7, E. Sanchez1, S. Sigaudy8, F. Tran Mau
Them6, M. Willems1, I. Touitou1, M. Barat-Houari1
1CHU, Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France,2CHU,
Rennes, RENNES, France,3CHU, Nantes, NANTES,
France,4CHU, Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, BORDEAUX,
France,5CHU Paris - Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,
PARIS, France,6CHU, Dijon, DIJON, France,7CHU,
Caen, CAEN, France,8CHU, Marseille, MARSEILLE,
FranceIntroduction: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common
joint disease worldwide. OA is a highly heterogeneous
condition, with a wide range age of onset. Non-syndromic
early-onset OA (EO-OA) is very rare and mainly familial.
Strict inclusion criteria for EO-OA are based on: XRays
evidence, body mass index (BMI) ≤30, age of onset ≤40y,
≥1 joint site involved and positive familial history.
Although multifactorial mode of inheritance is common in
OA, EO-OA are mainly monogenic conditions. Based onthese data, we aimed to study the monogenic causes of non-
syndromic EO-OA in French patients.
Materials and Methods: From 2013 to 2018, clinician
experts in the ﬁeld of skeletal dysplasia referred EO-OA
patients to our Montpellier competence center, which
assessed the diagnostic and excluded chondrodysplasia,based on clinical and radiological data. For genetic analysis,
we used either Sanger sequencing or an NGS custom panel
approach.
Results: We recruited 40 EO-OA patients, with a mean
age of onset of articular pain at 23 years, ranging from 7 to
60 years. Pathogenic or a likely pathogenic heterozygousmutations were identi ﬁed in 14/40 cases (35%), with 11/14
COL2A1 mutation (78.6%). We also observed a genetic
heterogeneity involving COL11A2 ,COL9A3 , and surpris-
ingly a homozygous pathogenic variation in SLC26A2 .
Familial segregation of COL2A1 pathogenic variants was
observed for 6 cases.
Conclusions: We con ﬁrmed that COL2A1 is the most
common genetic cause of familial EO-OA. However, at
least three other genes are involve in EO-OA. Therefore, werecommend to screen genes involved in cartilage matrix and
homeostasis.
V. Ruault: None. D. Genevieve: None. F. Blotman:
None. P. Blanchet: None. A. Fabre: None. M. Fradin:
None. B. Isidor: None. C. Jorgensen: None. D. Lacombe:
None. M. Le Merrer: None. S. Moutton: None. S. Odent:
None. G. Plessis: None. E. Sanchez: None. S. Sigaudy:
None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. M. Willems: None. I.
Touitou: None. M. Barat-Houari: None.
P04.48D
Mutations in osteoarthritis susceptibility genes causejoint shape variation detectable during ontogeny in
zebra ﬁsh
E. Kague
1, F. Turci2, Y. Yang2, S. Cross3, E. Lawrence1,
L. McGowan1, J. Moss1, P. Royal2, C. L. Hammond1
1University of Bristol, The School of Physiology,
Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Biomedical Sciences,
Bristol, United Kingdom,2University of Bristol, School of
Physics, Bristol, United Kingdom,3University of Bristol,1290Wolfson Bioimaging Facility, Biomedical Sciences, Bristol,
United Kingdom
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a joint degenerative disease and
leading cause of pain and disability worldwide. Joint shape
is commonly used to predict OA. GWAs have rapidlyincreased the number of OA associated genes. Despite few
genes were linked to shape variation, evidence for causality
and functionality or their effect on joint shape are stilllacking. Therefore, there is an unmet need to develop rapid
and alternative screening platforms to test OA genes. We
use the zebra ﬁsh jaw joint (JJ) to investigate the impact of
OA genes and ageing on joint shape variation. 3D
morphometrics showed shape abnormalities in aged JJ,
accompanied by OA histopathological signs. Interestingly,such modi ﬁcations were prematurely found in OA mutants
(chsy1 ,col9a1 ,col11a2 , and wnt16 ). We investigated if
shape changes would be detected during JJ ontogeny bytesting a broader list of OA mutants ( chsy1 ,col9a1 ,
col11a2 ,gdf5,barx1 ,mcf2l ,dot1l ,wnt16 andncoa3 ) using
confocal imaging of larvae immunostained for collagen type2 followed by 2D and 3D analysis. Distinct classes of OA
proteins leaded to signi ﬁcant shape variation in larvae,
mostly explained by abnormal cell behaviour and collagendistribution. Dramatic shape variation caused joint move-
ment impairment. We tested whether the use of mosaics,
CRISPR G0s, could be suf ﬁcient to detect shape and cell
changes. Surprisingly, wnt16 mosaics and wnt16-/- dis-
played similar cellular and shape changes in larvae and
adults. By developing computational tools to facilitate 3Danalysis we delivered a powerful and rapid screening
platform to test OA genes. Versus Arthritis (grants
19497, 21161)
E. Kague: None. F. Turci: None. Y. Yang: None. S.
Cross: None. E. Lawrence: None. L. McGowan: None. J.
Moss: None. P. Royal: None. C.L. Hammond: None.
P04.49A
Genetic heterogeneity in Polish patients withOsteogenesis Imperfecta
K. Sa łacińska
1, L. Rutkowska1, I. Pinkier1, D. Salachna1,
A. Rusi ńska2, E. Jakubowska-Pietkiewicz2, A. Jamsheer3,
L. Jakubowski1, A. Gach1
1Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute,
Łódź, Poland,2Department of Propaedeutics of Paediatrics
and Metabolic Diseases, University Teaching Hospital,Łódź, Poland,
3Department of Medical Genetics, University
of Medical Science, Pozna ń, Poland
Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta is a rare genetic
disorder of connective tissue characterized by numerousfractures, blue sclera, tooth abnormalities, short stature and
skeletal deformity. The diversity of clinical features and its
severity varies between patients, even within a single
family, ranging from severe perinatal lethal to a mild form.
The aim of this project was to determine genetic hetero-
geneity versus clinical variability observed in patientsaffected by OI.
Materials and Methods: NGS using custom panel of 34
genes with con ﬁrmed and probable signi ﬁcance in OI
pathogenesis was performed. The study included 118
patients, aged 1-44 years, presenting a broad spectrum of
clinical manifestation. Based on bioinformatic analysis,selected variants were veri ﬁed with Sanger sequencing in a
group of 77 patients.
Results: We have identi ﬁedCOL1A1 mutations in 47
patients, COL1A2 in 24 patients and mutations in 3 non-
collagenous genes in 6 patients. A total of 41 different point
mutations in COL1A1 and 20 in COL1A2 were found.
Respectively 15 and 11 have not been reported in dedicated
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Variant Database. We also repor-
ted patient with a deletion spanning 25 exons in COL1A1
gene. Thus far expected lethality of particular domains in
collagen type I genes revealed to be dubious, as we iden-
tiﬁed 11 patients aged 1,5 to 38 years with pathogenic
mutations situated in these regions.
Conclusions: Inter- and intrafamilial phenotype varia-
bility in OI makes genetic counseling based on clinicalsymptoms challenging and proves panel targeted rese-
quencing is a powerful and useful diagnostic tool. Young
Scientist Grant 2016/IV/57-MN
K. Sa łacińska: None. L. Rutkowska: None. I. Pinkier:
None. D. Salachna: None. A. Rusińska: None. E. Jaku-
bowska-Pietkiewicz: None. A. Jamsheer: None. L.
Jakubowski: None. A. Gach: None.
P04.50B
Genotype and phenotype in 201 Portuguese patients
with osteogenesis imperfecta - unusual molecular results
challenge genetic counseling
A. M. Travessa
1, P. Dias1, M. Aza-Carmona2,
J. Rosmaninho-Salgado3, T. Saraiva4, A. Grangeia5,
M. Amorim6, M. Gonçalves-Rocha7, G. Araújo8,
H. Santos1, M. Rodrigues1, A. Medeira1, I. Cordeiro1,
J. Dupont1, O. Moldovan1, A. Beleza3,J .S á3,
J. M. Saraiva3, L. Ramos3, M. Venâncio3, S. Maia3,
S. Fernandes3, G. Soares4, J. P. Freixo6, F. Díaz2,
C. Barreiros9, C. de la Torre2, A. Bandeira10,
J. Campagnolo11, F. Godinho9, M. Cassiano-Neves12,
V. Tavares13, F. Teixeira8, T. Kay6, R. Oliveira5,
A. Fortuna4, S. B. Sousa3, K. E. Heath2, A. B. Sousa1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12911Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria,
Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário
Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa,
Lisbon, Portugal,2Institute of Medical & Molecular
Genetics (INGEMM) and Skeletal dysplasia
Multidisciplinary Unit, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario LaPaz, UAM, & CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,
3Medical
Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,4Centro de
Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalh ães, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Oporto, Portugal,
5Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar de S ão
João, Oporto, Portugal,6Unidade de Genética Médica,
Hospital Dona Estefânia, Cento Hospitalar Lisboa Central,
Lisbon, Portugal,7Unidade de Genética Médica, Hospital
de Braga, Braga, Portugal,8Serviço de Pediatria, Hospital
Dr. Nélio Mendonça, Funchal, Portugal,9Associaç ão
Portuguesa de Osteogénese Imperfeita, Sacavém, Portugal,
10Serviço de Pediatria and Centro de Referência para
Doenças Metabólicas, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto, Oporto, Portugal,11Serviço de Ortopedia Infantil,
Hospital Dona Estefânia, Cento Hospitalar Lisboa Central,
Lisbon, Portugal,12Serviço de Ortopedia Infantil, Hospital
CUF, Lisbon, Portugal,13Serviço de Reumatologia,
Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal
Introduction: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare
genetic bone fragility disorder. Although mutations in
COL1A1/2 account for 90% of cases, up to 17 different
genes were associated with OI. Our aim was to characterizethe clinical and mutational spectrum of OI in Portugal and
to correlate genotype and phenotype.
Materials and Methods: Clinical data of 201 OI indi-
viduals (135 adults, 58 children, and 8 fetuses) from 157
families were collected through clinical evaluation and/or
medical records analysis. Sanger and/or different NGSbased strategies and MLPA ( COL1A1/2 ) were used for
molecular analysis.
Results: One hundred thirty-seven individuals had mild,
31 moderate, 24 severe, and 9 extremely severe OI. A total
of 123 different variants (65 novel) were identi ﬁed. Variants
inCOL1A1 (n=91, including one multi-exonic deletion)
and COL1A2 (n=29, including one homozygous case)
account for 85.1% of all molecularly diagnosed families (66
with quantitative and 48 with qualitative variants), followedbySERPINF1 (n=4), LRP5 (n=4), IFITM5 (n=3),
FKBP10 (n=3),WNT1 (n=2),CRTAP (n=1),TMEM38B
(n=1),P3H1 (n=1),PPIB (n=1), and BMP1 (n=1).
Interestingly, heterozygous variants in severe autosomal
recessive OI genes were found in 3 patients with mild OI.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst large-scale study on OI in
Portugal. In accordance with other populations, quantitative
variants predominate in mild COL1A1/2 cases, and IFITM5and FKBP10 -related cases had recognizable phenotypes.
The identi ﬁcation of a homozygous variant in COL1A2 and
heterozygous variants in autosomal recessive genes com-
plicate genetic counselling. No variant was identi ﬁed in
6.5% of probands.
A.M. Travessa: None.
P. Dias: None. M. Aza-Car-
mona: None. J. Rosmaninho-Salgado: None. T. Saraiva:
None. A. Grangeia: None. M. Amorim: None. M. Gon-
çalves-Rocha: None. G. Araújo: None. H. Santos: None.
M. Rodrigues: None. A. Medeira: None. I. Cordeiro:
None. J. Dupont: None. O. Moldovan: None. A. Beleza:
None. J. Sá: None. J.M. Saraiva: None. L. Ramos: None.
M. Venâncio: None. S. Maia: None. S. Fernandes: None.
G. Soares: None. J.P. Freixo: None. F. Díaz: None. C.
Barreiros: None. C. de la Torre: None. A. Bandeira:
None. J. Campagnolo: None. F. Godinho: None. M.
Cassiano-Neves: None. V. Tavares: None. F. Teixeira:
None. T. Kay: None. R. Oliveira: None. A. Fortuna:
None. S.B. Sousa: None. K.E. Heath: None. A.B.
Sousa: None.
P04.51C
Next generation sequencing performance in osteogenesis
imperfecta
S. Monnot1,2, G. Baujat1,2, C. Michot1,2, J. Litzler1,
A. Tourre1, J. Bonnefont1,2, J. Steffann1,2, V. Cormier-
Daire1,2
1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France,
2INSERM UMR1163, Paris Descartes University, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a connective tissue disorder
characterized by bone fragility. An important clinical
heterogeneity exists ranging from severe antenatal letalform to mild postnatal affection. For now, 19 genes are
known to be responsible for OI: 3 dominant autosomal
forms (COL1A1, COL1A2 and IFITM5), 14 recessiveautosomal forms and 2 X-linked forms (PLS3, MBTPS2).
Importance of a proper molecular diagnosis for genetic
counseling led us to design a panel of targeted resequencingof the 19 gene coding regions, substituting for the former
Sanger analyses. Some genes implicated in differential
diagnoses like hypophosphatasia or overlapping phenotypeswere added, increasing to 39 the total number of genes. All
requests were submitted to the Reference Center for
Constitutional Bone Diseases with clinical and radiologicaldetails. Libraries were prepared using capture technology
(SureSelectXT Custom - Agilent) and medium throughput
sequencing on a NextSEq sequencer (Illumina). Since 2015,368 mutations were identi ﬁed in 517 patients (71%): 187 in
the COL1A1 gene (50%), 98 in the COL1A2 gene (26%),129215 in IFITM5 (4%), 48 in recessive genes responsible for OI
(13%), 3 in X-linked gene. All these mutations were
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. The results are discussed
during a feedback meeting with clinicians and biologists.
This panel allows ef ﬁcient screening for all OI genes,
leading to time and cost-savings. Using a panel strategyavoid incidental ﬁndings. The main limit is the occasional
difﬁculty to determine the pathogenicity of the identi ﬁed
variant. Whole exome sequencing analysis can be proposedfor patient without mutation.
S. Monnot: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Michot: None.
J. Litzler: None. A. Tourre: None. J. Bonnefont: None. J.
Steffann: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None.
P04.52D
Diagnostic yield of NGS analysis of a panel of
Osteogenesis imperfecta-related genes in 550 patients
with Osteogenesis imperfecta, (early-onset)nonsyndromic osteoporosis and related disorders
A. Maugeri
1, E. Voorhoeve1, N. M. Appelman-Dijkstra2,
A. T. H. van Dijk3, F. S. van Dijk4, E. M. W. Eekhoff5,
M. W. Elting1, A. van Haeringen6, A. Harsevoort7,
M. Isrie1, G. J. M. Janus7, R. T. de Jongh5, J. M. van de
Kamp1, M. C. van Maarle8, C. L. M. Marcelis9,M .E .H .
Simon10, S. Simsek11, C. T. R. M. Stumpel12,
P. A. Terhal10, H. E. Veenstra-Knol13, M. C. Zillikens14,
E. J. Meijers-Heijboer1,8, E. A. Sistermans1,
M. M. Weiss1,8, G. Pals1, D. Micha1
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
2Department of Endocrinology, Leiden Universitary
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3Dept. of Paediatrics,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
4London North West Thames Regional Genetics Service,
London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Harrow,
London, United Kingdom,5Dept. of Internal Medicine, sect.
Endocrinology, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije UniversiteitAmsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
6Dept. of Clinical
Genetics, Leiden Universitary Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands,7Dept. of Orthopaedics, Isala Clinics Zwolle,
Zwolle, Netherlands,8Dept. of Clinical Genetics,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,9Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,10Dept.
of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands,11Dept. of Internal Medicine, Noordwest
Ziekenhuisgroep, Alkmaar, Netherlands,12Dept. of Clinical
Genetics and GROW-School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University MedicalCenter, Maastricht, Netherlands,
13Dept. of Genetics,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,Netherlands,14Dept. of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Our Genomediagnostics laboratory in
Amsterdam UMC offers targeted NGS analysis of genes
involved in Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and otherconnective tissue disorders. OI is characterized by bone
fragility and fractures, bone deformities, short stature,
dentinogenesis imperfecta, hearing loss, and blue sclerae.The phenotype is highly variable, from mild to perinatal
lethal. Osteoporosis is a common, multifactorial disorder,
characterized by reduced bone-mass and fractures. A fewgenes have been associated with (early-onset) monogenetic
non-syndromic osteoporosis (OP). Here we present the
results of the analysis of a panel of 19 OI/OP-related genesin 550 patients referred with OI, OP or a related disorder.
Material and Methods: A solution-based enrichment kit
was designed to capture exons and splice sites of the targetgenes. Data were analysed using an in-house pipeline and
Cartagenia, and an NGS-based CNV analysis tool. 68% of
the patients (mean age 37y) had osteoporosis and/or frac-tures; no additional OI-related features were reported (OP-
cohort). 23% of the patients (mean age 22y) had at least one
other OI-related symptom reported (OI-cohort). Results
Diagnosis was molecularly con ﬁrmed in 67% of the patients
in the OI-cohort, versus 6% in the OP-cohort. In the OP-
cohort, a suspicious VUS was identi ﬁed in 12% of the
patients. Variant distribution among genes was different
between OI- and OP-cohorts.
Conclusions: As expected, the yield of genetic testing
was signi ﬁcantly higher in the OI-cohort versus the OP-
cohort. However, the proportion of patients with a (poten-
tial) genetic cause in the OP-cohort is relevant and warrantsfurther investigation of these patients.
A. Maugeri: None. E. Voorhoeve: None. N.M. Appel-
man-Dijkstra: None. A.T.H. van Dijk: None. F.S. van
Dijk: None. E.M.W. Eekhoff: None. M.W. Elting: None.
A. van Haeringen: None. A. Harsevoort: None. M. Isrie:
None. G.J.M. Janus: None. R.T. de Jongh: None. J.M.
van de Kamp: None. M.C. van Maarle: None. C.L.M.
Marcelis: None. M.E.H. Simon: None. S. Simsek: None.
C.T.R.M. Stumpel: None. P.A. Terhal: None. H.E.
Veenstra-Knol: None. M.C. Zillikens: None. E.J. Mei-
jers-Heijboer: None. E.A. Sistermans: None. M.M.
Weiss: None. G. Pals: None. D. Micha: None.
P04.53A
Between LSD and skeletal dysplasia - a rare case ofTouraine-Solente-Golé syndrome caused by new
mutation
H. M. Kathom
1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, T. Todorov2,
A. Todorova2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 12931Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics
Hospital, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory "Genica", So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Introduction: Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
(PHO), also known as pachydermoperiostosis (PDP) or
Touraine-Solente-Golé syndrome, is a rare genetic osteo-
arthro-dermopathic syndrome with familial and idiopathicforms differentiating it from secondary (pulmonary)
hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. Though the diagnosis can
be made on the basis of the classic clinical and radiologicalﬁndings, it is often missed due to variable presentations
PHO is characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis,
acroosteolysis, painful joint enlargement, and skin mani-festations that include thickened facial skin, a thickened
scalp, and coarse facial features. The disorder has estimated
prevalence of 0.16%, and usually manifests in adolescence,occurring almost exclusively in males, with a M: F ratio
of 7:1.
Materials and Methods: We present a 15 years old boy,
from Afghanistan, born to consanguine parents who pre-
sented for the ﬁrst time in our department with painful
swelling of hands, feet, and face, coarse facial features,hypertrichosis, short and broad palms, and soles. He reports
on elder brother with similar swelling, and alopecia. Radi-
ological examinations show wide and thick metacarpals,short distal phalanges, square-like vertebras.
Results: Many tests were performed to rule out lysosomal
storage disorders, and skeletal dysplasia. After performingan NGS-analysis (clinical exome sequencing), the patient
was found to carry, in homozygous state, a new mutation
(c.290G>A) in SLCO2A1 gene causing PHO type 2.
Conclusions: PDP type 2 has diverse radiological and
clinical features. It may remain undiagnosed for long time
and progress until there are signi ﬁcant facial, joint, and
digital deformities that ﬁnally make the patient seek medical
attention.
H.M. Kathom: None. D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. T.
Todorov: None. A. Todorova: None.
P04.54B
Dental Management Experience for Patients Suffering
from Papillon-Lefévre Syndrome
Y. M. Khalil
1, M. R. Abouzeid1, M. A. Abd Elkader1,2,
P. M. Abdelmassieh1
1national research center, giza, Egypt,2Misr International
University, Cairo, Egypt
Introduction: Papillon –Lefévre syndrome (PLS) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation of theCathepsin C gene. Patients mainly suffer from palmoplantar
keratosis, periodontitis, and early loss of teeth. The present
study is concerned with the dental management of PLS
patients through periodontal and prosthetic intervention.
Materials and Methods: Nine PLS patients were inclu-
ded in this study. The patients were referred to our Oro-dental Genetics Clinic complaining of early loss of the
deciduous dentition and were in different stages of perma-
nent teeth eruption. Our management protocol included;conventional scaling and root planning every 3 month,
diode laser curettage and pocket sterilization monthly ses-
sions and construction of a removable prosthesis to restorethe lost teeth. Pocket depth, bleeding index and mobility
was assessed every 6 month during the 2-year period of
the study.
Results: All patients showed good response to the laser
treatment. Gingival in ﬂammation was controlled with less
bleeding, decreased mobility of teeth and no teeth were lostover 2 years. However, panoramic radiographs showed
bone loss in the pocket areas.
Conclusion: Laser pocket disinfection was effective in
reducing gingival tissue in ﬂammation, yet the progressive
bone loss was a concerning outcome that needs further
investigations.
Y.M. Khalil: None. M.R. Abouzeid: None. M.A. Abd
Elkader: None. P.M. Abdelmassieh: None.
P04.55C
Abnormal activation of mutated complement 1 subunits
C1r/C1s in periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
R. Gröbner
1, E. Brunner1, R. Redol ﬁ1, A. Amberger1,
H. Stoiber1, N. Thielens2, C. Gaboriaud2, I. Kapferer-
Seebacher1, J. Zschocke1
1Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria,2Institut de
Biologie Structurale, Grenoble, France
Introduction: Periodontal Ehlers –Danlos syndrome
(pEDS) is a connective-tissue disorder characterized by
early severe periodontitis and various joint and skin
manifestations. Most EDS types are caused by mutationsin collagens or protein-modifying enzymes. In contrast,
periodontal type is caused by heterozygous missense or in-
frame insertion/deletion mutations in C1R orC1S, indicat-
ing a previously unknown connection between the in ﬂam-
matory complement pathway and connective tissue
homeostasis. pEDS is autosomal dominant and involvesgain-of-function effects; loss-of-function variants in C1R/
C1S are asymptomatic when heterozygous and can cause a
lupus-like phenotype when homozygous.
Methods and Results: In-vitro overexpression in
HEK293T cells demonstrated that all pathogenic C1R1294variants except a mutant in the C1q binding motif cause
abnormal intracellular processing and secretion of enzy-
matically active serine protease. Unlike C1r wild type,
mutations in the CUB1 and CCP1 domains of C1r show
intracellular retention of the N-terminal fragment. Mutations
in the CUB2 domain cause secretion of aggregated N-terminal fragments, whereas CCP2 domain mutations
induce a new cleavage site. Importantly, the C-terminal
catalytic fragment from all C1r mutants was secreted andenzymatically active in the supernatant. Western blot ana-
lysis of patient-derived skin and gingival ﬁbroblasts con-
ﬁrmed aberrant activation and secretion of mutated C1r
even in the presence of C1s and C1 inhibitor. C1s activation
was con ﬁrmed by in-vitro complement activation assays.
Conclusion: pEDS is caused by gain-of-function muta-
tions that cause abnormal activation of complement 1
independent of microbial triggers. We hypothesize that
secreted catalytic fragments cleave extracellular matrixproteins with adverse consequences on connective tissue
homeostasis.
Funded by FWF I-2909-B30.R. Gröbner: None. E. Brunner: None. R. Redol ﬁ:
None. A. Amberger: None. H. Stoiber: None. N. Thie-
lens: None. C. Gaboriaud: None. I. Kapferer-Seebacher:
None. J. Zschocke: None.
P04.57A
Genotype of Bruck syndrome with phenotype of
Osteogenesis Imperfecta, separate syndromes or
expansion of the spectrum
G. A. Otaify
1, V. Ruiz-Perez2, P. Lapunzina2,
S. Temtamy1, M. S. Aglan1
1Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and
Genome Research Division, National Research Centre,Cairo, Egypt,
2Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cienti ﬁcas,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is heteroge-
nous group of disorders with increased bone fragility. BruckSyndrome (BS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome
characterized by OI with congenital contractures due to
mutations in FKPB10 and PLOD2 genes (BS1 and BS2
respectively). FKPB10 mutations were found to cause
moderately severe OI type XI and PLOD2 was reported
before to cause fractures without contractures. Herein wepresent two patients from two Egyptian families with
recurrent fractures but without joint contractures having
PLOD2 mutations.
Materials and Methods: two unrelated Egyptian con-
sanguineous families with repeated fractures were studied.Mutation analysis was performed using NGS panel,
homozygosity mapping, then candidate gene approach.
Results: theﬁrst family included a 15 years male who
presented with repeated fractures around 10 times/year,
deformities and severe kyphoscoliosis (clinical severity
score; CSS 17). The second family had a 9 years old girlmilder in severity with 1-2 fractures/year (CSS 14). Both
patients had no joint contractures. They were short and had
Wormian bones in their skull x-rays and osteoporosis con-ﬁrmed by DEXA. Molecular testing for both patients
revealed homozygous donor splice site mutation in PLOD2
in intron 12(c.1358 +5G>A). The mutation was hetero-
zygous in the parents.
Conclusion: This study and previous reports from other
centers identi ﬁed different PLOD2 mutations with repeated
fractures and variable severity but without contractures and
this expands the phenotypic spectrum of PLOD2 associated
mutations. Accordingly, it ’s important to reconsider the
current classi ﬁcation to include BS as a variant of OI sub-
types rather than being a separate syndrome.
G.A. Otaify: None. V. Ruiz-Perez: None. P. Lapun-
zina: None. S. Temtamy: None. M.S. Aglan: None.
P04.58B
Clinical and molecular characteristics of GNAS
inactivation disorders observed in 18 Korean patients
J. Ko, S. Han, Y. Lee, C. Shin, S. Yang, B. Lim, T. Cho
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic
of
The GNAS gene on chromosome 20q13.3 is a complex,
imprinted locus regulated in a tissue-speci ﬁc manner. GNAS
inactivation disorders are a heterogeneous group of rare
disorders caused by mutations and methylation defects.These are divided into pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP)
types 1a and 1b, pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism
(PPHP), and progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH),depending on the presence or absence of hormone
resistance, Albright ’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO),
and ectopic ossi ﬁcation. This study analyzed the clinical
characteristics and molecular genetic backgrounds of 18
Korean patients from 16 families with a genetically
conﬁrmed GNAS defect. Auxological parameters, AHO
phenotypes, types of hormonal resistance, family history,
and molecular genetic disturbances were reviewed retro-
spectively. Nine (90%) patients with PHP1a showedresistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH) and all patients
showed elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
at diagnosis. Eight (80%) patients were managed withlevothyroxine supplementation. Three of six patients with
PHP1b had elevated TSH levels, but none of whom neededAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1295levothyroxine medication. AHO features were absent in
PHP1b. Patients with PPHP and POH did not show any
hormone resistance. Among the 11 families with PHP1a,
PPHP, and POH, eight different (three novel) mutations in
theGNAS gene were identi ﬁed. Among the six patients with
PHP1b, two were sporadic cases and four were familialcases. This, the largest single-center series study of GNAS
inactivation disorders in Korea, summarizes the detailed
clinical and molecular genetic characteristics of thesediseases. Identi ﬁcation of molecular genetic backgrounds,
along with clinical phenotypes, enables appropriate man-
agement and proper genetic counseling.
J. Ko: None. S. Han: None. Y. Lee: None. C. Shin:
None. S. Yang: None. B. Lim: None. T. Cho: None.
P04.59C
Compound screening for PXE using zebra ﬁshabcc6a
mutant models: a proof-of-concept study
M. Van Gils
1,2, A. Willaert1,2, P. J. Coucke1,2,
O. M. Vanakker1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,2Department of Biomolecular
Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an
ectopic mineralization disease due to biallelic ABCC6
mutations. As no curative therapy is available, we
characterized a zebra ﬁshabcc6a CRISPR/Cas9 knockout
model ( Cmg52 ) for drug screening purposes, identifying
spinal hypermineralization as an early, quanti ﬁable pheno-
type. As a proof-of-concept we tested our screeningworkﬂow on two compounds (80μM Vitamin K1 [VK1]
and 30μM Sodium Thiosulfate [STS]), both implicated
in PXE.
Materials and Methods: Following Cmg52
+/-incross,
Cmg52+/+,Cmg52+/-andCmg52-/-embryos were collected.
At 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), embryos are distributedper 20 in baskets. From 3-10dpf, 60 embryos are treated
with 8ml compound in 1x E3-medium and refreshed daily.
Following euthanasia at 10dpf, embryos are ﬁxed, bleached
and stained for mineralization. Photos are taken of embryos
under identical conditions and via ImageJ mineralization is
quanti ﬁed. DNA is extracted from embryos and miner-
alization values are linked to respective genotypes for sta-
tistical analysis.
Results: VK1 signi ﬁcantly reduced spinal mineralization
inCmg52
-/-([Mean ± SD] Controls: 19.371 ± 12.794; VK1:
10.322 ± 5.519; P<0.05). STS-treated larvae had no spinal
mineralization or higher mortality compared to controls.However, 33% of STS-treated animals had spottyabdominal mineralization regardless of genotype, indicating
putative toxicity.
Conclusions: We con ﬁrmed the Cmg52
-/-mineralization
phenotype to be a good read-out for compound screening.
Our data suggests a role for VK1 in PXE pathogenesis
though further validation is required. The STS data under-scores the importance of proper controls and that compound
screening data need to be interpreted cautiously.
M. Van Gils: None. A. Willaert: None. P.J. Coucke:
None. O.M. Vanakker: None.
P04.61A
Retinoic acid catabolism defects affecting skeletogenesis
and resembling craniosynostosis syndromes
I. Chacon Fonseca
1, R. Babul-Hirji1, E. Campos2,
P. Kannu1
1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Toronto, ON,
Canada,2The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Introduction: Homozygous missense mutations in the
CYP26B1 gene, have been described in very few indivi-
duals with phenotypes ranging from a lethal generalised
skeletal dysplasia characterised by severe skull defects and
craniosynostosis, radiohumeral fusions, oligodactyly andnarrow thorax to a milder presentation described in one
adult affected by multiple craniosynostosis, characteristic
facies, radiohumeral joint limitation, hearing loss andintellectual disability. The enzyme coded by CYP26B1 is
involved in retinoic acid catabolism and regulates its precise
temporo-spatial gradient during embryogenesis. Case pre-sentation: We describe a healthy non-consanguineous
couple with 2 children with distinctive craniofacial features
including turribrachycephaly, shallow orbits, malar hypo-plasia, low-set and protruding ears, small mouth, high palate
with crowding teeth and pointy chin. Both siblings have
bilateral conductive hearing loss, arachnodactyly, reducedmovement of the radio-ulnar joints and mild to moderate
learning disability. Their phenotype resembles that of the
reported adult.
Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed both sibs
inherited two missense mutations in trans affecting
CYP26B1 . Variant c.353C>T (p.P118L) was paternally
inherited, not previously described and not seen in large
population cohorts, and variant c.701G>A (p.R234Q), with
frequency of 0.06% in large databases, was maternallyinherited. Both variants were predicted to have a deleterious
impact on the protein structure.
Conclusion: Our patients add to the wide phenotypic
constellation seen with CYP26B1 pathogenic variants. We
infer that higher retained enzyme activity is non-lethal and1296mostly associated with skeletal and neurological features
including characteristic craniofacial features resembling
craniosynostosis, hearing loss and intellectual disability.
Funding source: Rare disease Foundation microgrant. Year
2018 #2803.
I. Chacon Fonseca: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Rare disease
Foundation. R. Babul-Hirji: None. E. Campos: None. P.
Kannu: None.
P04.62B
The splicing variant c.1815G>A in KIAA0586 is
associated with a phenotype overlapping short rib
polydactyly and oral facial digital syndrome
D. Cocciadiferro1, E. Agolini1, L. Sinibaldi2,
M. C. Digilio2, A. Dotta3, M. Castori4, A. Novelli1
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Rome, Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino
Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy,3Department of
Neonatal Surgery, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital,
Rome, Italy,4Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione
IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo (Foggia), Italy
Ciliopathies are a group of hereditary disorders caused by
abnormal structure/function of primary cilia, which are
ubiquitously expressed organelles characterized by a mothercentriole-derived basal body, a microtubule-based axoneme
and a specialized membrane harboring proteins required for
signal detection and ampli ﬁcation. Causative variants in
KIAA0586 , the human ortholog of chicken talpid3 essential
for primary ciliogenesis and hedgehog signaling, were ﬁrst
associated with Joubert syndrome, a multisystem disorderdisplaying pathognomonic hindbrain malformation as well
as variable skeletal, renal and ocular defects. KIAA0586 is
also associated with other ciliopathies such as the short rib-polydactyly, a lethal bone dysplasia with severely hypo-
plastic thorax. Here we describe two Roma Gypsy siblings
affected by a neonatal lethal short rib-thoracic dysplasia,harboring the KIAA0586 homozygous variant c.1815G>A
(p.Gln605Gln), identi ﬁed by targeted resequencing analy-
sis. Clinical features of this family are not limited to thetypical short rib-polydactyly syndrome but also include
tongue/oral hamartomas, multiple frenulae and cleft palate.
The same combination of intraoral ﬁndings have been
already identi ﬁed in patients with the esonic splice site
variant p.Gln605Gln; suggesting continuity between short-
rib-polydactyly and oral-facial-digital syndromes in thecontext of KIAA0586 clinical spectrum.D. Cocciadiferro: None. E. Agolini: None. L. Sinibaldi:
None. M.C. Digilio: None. A. Dotta: None. M. Castori:
None. A. Novelli: None.
P04.63C
Chipping away the challenges of diagnostic genomicsapplications for short stature
D. N. Azmanov
1,2, G. M. Arscott1, M. B. Abraham3,4,
J. Miller2, C. Connell2, G. Pathak5, S. Townshend5,
B. Kamien5, A. Siafarikas3,4, G. Baynam4,5,6, J. Beilby1,
C. S. Choong2,3,4
1Department of Diagnostic Genomics, PathWest, Nedlands,
Australia,2Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia,
3Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Perth
Children ’s Hospital, Nedlands, Australia,4Division of
Paediatrics, Medical School, University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Australia,5Genetic Services of Western
Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Subiaco,Australia,
6Western Australian Register of Developmental
Anomalies, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Subiaco,
Australia
Introduction: As for many common complex disorders,
diagnostic genomics applications for short stature (SS) facemany challenges. In the absence of consensus international
guidelines on genetic testing for SS, various clinical criteria
are used to inform appropriate testing. The extent of geneticheterogeneity and complexity of SS are still being
elucidated, challenging diagnostic approaches.
Materials and Methods: We employed a retrospective
analysis of diagnostic genomics yield for SS patients
receiving growth hormone therapy on the Western Aus-
tralian Paediatric Endocrine Database. In addition, a pro-spective systematic study using chromosomal microarray
and a clinical exome panel on cases with unknown genetic
aetiology was initiated in 2018.
Results: A major genetic aetiology was identi ﬁed in
~31% of cases prior to the systematic application of con-
temporary genomic technologies (35 out of 114 participantsborn since 2005 and receiving growth hormone for >2
years). Presence of composite genomic ﬁndings in some
patients challenged interpretation. Referral to a local inter-disciplinary undiagnosed disease program helped in resol-
ving the diagnostic odyssey for complex patients.
Conclusions: Diagnostic genomics applications for SS
are still evolving and some of the challenges can be over-
come by pre-test clinical selection, detailed phenotyping
and contribution of an inter-disciplinary team input. Thecurrent efforts focus on the detection of high penetrance
genetic causes, and the remaining challenge is to interpretAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1297moderate to low penetrance genetic risk factors for SS.
Acknowledgements: Merck Serono Australia, grant
201603.4701.POT; DNA is supported by a Raine clinical
research fellowship (CRF018, project “Diagnostic genomics
applications for short stature ”).
D.N. Azmanov: None. G.M. Arscott: None. M.B.
Abraham: None. J. Miller: None. C. Connell: None. G.
Pathak: None. S. Townshend: None. B. Kamien: None.
A. Siafarikas: None. G. Baynam: None. J. Beilby: None.
C.S. Choong: None.
P04.64D
Identi ﬁcations of novel variants affecting SHOX
expression in Short Stature patients
A. Fanelli1, D. Babu1, S. Mellone1, F. Prodam1,
S. Bellone1, G. Genoni1, S. Vannelli2, M. Giordano1
1Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Novara, Italy,
2Ospedale Regina Margherita, Divisione di Pediatria,
Torino, Italy
Haploinsuf ﬁciency of the pseudoautosomal SHOX gene
causes 70-90% of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and2-10% of idiopathic short stature (ISS). Deletions removing
the gene or enhancers and nonsense/frameshift mutations
represent a well-established cause of disease. Otherwise,rearrangements not encompassing any described enhancer
and 5 ’UTR variations are also identi ﬁed in patients but their
pathogenic role remains unclear. During diagnostic screen-ing performed on 934 patients by standard methods (MLPA
and sequencing) we identi ﬁedSHOX alterations in 82
patients (8.8%). Among these, 65 (78%) carried deletionswhile 17 (22%) point mutations. Besides these pathogenic
mutations we also identi ﬁed small deletions not encom-
passing any already described enhancer (n =11) and
variations within 5 ’UTR (n =5) in 24 LWD/ISS patients
whose pathogenic role was less clear that were classi ﬁed as
VOUS. The aim of this work was to investigate throughfunctional studies the pathogenic role of these variations. To
better characterize the deletions not encompassing the
enhancers we used a ﬁne-tiling custom aCGH and
performed in vitro functional assays to assess the potential
enhancer activity of conserved sequences within the deleted
areas. The variants within the 5 ’UTR were tested for their
ability to interfere with correct gene expression. Our results
showed that some of the VOUS might be responsible of
SHOX deﬁciency either by removing putative regulatory
elements or affecting the proximal promoter activity. In
conclusion, the present study allowed us to reclassify as
likely pathogenic some of the novel variants of uncertainsigniﬁcance, that we detected in the diagnostic screening,
thus reducing them of at least 10%.A. Fanelli: None. D. Babu: None. S. Mellone: None. F.
Prodam: None. S. Bellone: None. G. Genoni: None. S.
Vannelli: None. M. Giordano: None.
P04.66B
Report of a novel variant causing a schneckenbecken-like dysplasia
O. W. Quarrell
1, C. Rautengarten2, K. Stals3, R. Caswell4,
E. De Franco5, E. Baple6, N. Burgess7, R. Jokhi8,
J. L. Hazelwood9,A .C .O f ﬁah10, B. Ebert2, S. Ellard6
1Dept Clinical Genetics Shef ﬁeld Children's Hospital,
Shefﬁeld S10 2TH, United Kingdom,2School of
BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010,Australia,
3Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exteter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom,4College of Medicine
and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5DW, UnitedKingdom,
5Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom,6Royal Devon & Exeter
NHS Foundation Trust and College of Medicine andHealth, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5DW, United
Kingdom,
7Dept Histology, Shef ﬁeld Children ’s Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust., Shef ﬁeld S10 2TH, United
Kingdom,8Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Shef ﬁeld
teaching Hospitals, Shef ﬁeld S10 2SF, United Kingdom,
9School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne,,
Victoria 3010, Australia,10University of Shef ﬁeld,
Academic Unit of Child Health, Shef ﬁeld Children's
Hospital, Shef ﬁeld S10 2SF, United Kingdom
Introduction: A homozygous pathogenic variant in
SLC35D1 , an endoplasmic reticulum nucleotide sugar
transporter, was identi ﬁed as a cause of schneckenbecken
dysplasia in 2007. We report a case of a skeletal dysplasia
with inconclusive pathological and radiological features anda missense change in SLC35D1 .
Material and Methods: A consanguineous family had 4
pregnancies affected by a skeletal dysplasia. Insuf ﬁcient
DNA from the 4 pregnancies meant that exome couple
analysis was undertaken on the parents followed by in silico
protein modelling using Phyre2 web and I-TASSER ser-vers. Functional effects of variants were assessed using a
proteo-liposome assay (Rautengarten et al., 2014 PNAS
111: 11563-11568).
Results: Both parents were heterozygous for a missense
change in SLC35D1 c.398C>T p.(Pro133Leu). Reappraisal
of the radiographs was consistent with schneckenbecken-like dysplasia. Testing of one of the fetuses and 2 healthy
unaffected siblings was consistent with autosomal recessive
inheritance but not suf ﬁcient to con ﬁrm pathogenicity. In
silico protein modelling showed that p.Pro133 lies directly
opposite p.Thr65, the site of the only previously reported1298pathogenic missense variant, at the mouth of the solute
channel, implying pathogenicity. The prote-liposome assay
demonstrated 2-4% in transport activity compared to wild-
type but also showed SCLD231 is a general UDP-sugar
transporter with clear activity towards UDP-Xylose, sug-
gesting a mechanism by which the Golgi synthesized sub-strate can be imported into the endoplasmic reticulum for
essential xylosylation reactions.
Conclusion: An agnostic approach to molecular testing
together with protein modelling and a functional assay
demonstrated pathogenicity of an SLC35D1 variant and
increased the protein's biochemical characterization.
O.W. Quarrell: None. C. Rautengarten: None. K.
Stals: None. R. Caswell: None. E. De Franco: None. E.
Baple: None. N. Burgess: None. R. Jokhi: None. J.L.
Hazelwood: None. A.C. Of ﬁah:None. B. Ebert: None. S.
Ellard: None.
P04.67C
A novel POC1A variant in exon 2 causes classical SOFT
syndrome: Clinical presentations of seven patients
N. Grüning
1, M. Al-Shehhi2, A. Westenberger1,3, P. Scott4,
O. Brandau1, L. Abbasi-Moheb1, Z. Yüksel1, C. Beetz1,
P. Bauer1, A. Rolfs1, A. Al-Kindy4
1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany,2Royal Hospital,
Muscat, Oman,3University of Lübeck, Lübneck, Germany,
4Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman
Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic variants in POC1A
(centriolar protein A) cause either SOFT (Short-stature-
Onychodysplasia-Facial-dysmorphism-and-hypoTrichosis)syndrome or a milder and only partially overlapping
phenotype, i.e., variant POC1A -related syndrome –with
this pleiotropic effect depending on the respective exonaffected by mutation. Pathogenic changes in a total of only
22 patients had been described underlining the disease
rareness. Two large consanguineous families of Omaniorigin presented to the clinic with 7 individuals affected by
primordial dwar ﬁsm resembling SOFT syndrome, but of
unknown genetic cause and diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: Detailed clinical work-up to
deﬁne the symptoms and whole-exome sequencing (WES)
were performed in one of the index patients and two rela-tives, as well as subsequent Sanger sequencing for further
segregation studies.
Result: WES yielded the variant POC1A
(NM_015426.4): c.64G>T p.(Val22Phe) which showed
segregation within the tested individuals and further family
members. This variant affects the alternative exon 2, that ispresent only in two of three POC1A transcripts. Never-
theless, all of the investigated patients had comparabledisease histories with severe growth retardation of prenatal
onset, characteristic facial features and respiratory dif ﬁcul-
ties, the latter being most prominent in the index patient;
which con ﬁrmed the diagnosis of SOFT syndrome.
Conclusion: Theﬁnding i) considerably increases the
number of reported SOFT syndrome patients allowing forfurther clinical delineation of this rare disorder, and ii) add a
novel POC1A missense variant in exon 2, allowing to re ﬁne
the relevance of the functional domain affected by thischange and expand the genotype- phenotype correlation in
POC1A -related disorders.
N. Grüning: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Al-Shehhi: None. A. Wes-
tenberger: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. P. Scott: None. O. Brandau: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
L. Abbasi-Moheb: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. Z. Yüksel: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. C. Beetz: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. A. Al-Kindy: None.
P04.69A
Phenotypic overlap between spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia with joint laxity type 2 and Morquio syndrome
type A: case report
M. Mijovic1, A. Miletic1, H. Janeski1, B. Dimitrijevic1,
J. Ruml Stojanovic1, M. Lukic1, G. Cuturilo1,2
1University Children's Hospital, Department of Medical
Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia,2Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: We present ﬁfteen-year-old boy patient, with
complex skeletal phenotype highly susceptible to mucoply-
saccharidosis type IVA (Morquio syndrome). He has severe
skeletal dysplasia including disproportionate short staturewith short trunk, kyphoscoliosis with gibbus, joint hyper-
mobility, bilateral congenital hip dislocations, knock-knee
and ulnar deviation of the wrists. The patient is immobilesince his sixth year. He doesn ’t have hepatosplenomegaly,
respiratory complications, cardiac valve abnormalities and
dental abnormalities. No pathological ophthalmology ﬁnd-
ings, neither hearing loss.
Materials and Methods: We performed enzymes blood
testing for several types of mucopolysaccharidosis in ﬁrst
line testing, and exome sequencing which targeted genesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1299related to observed clinical presentation in second line
testing.
Results: Unexpectedly, enzyme level of N-acet-
ylgalatosamine-6-sulfate-sulphatease showed normal result
and excluded Morquio syndrome. Subsequently, exome
sequencing showed presence of heterozygous pathogenicmissense variant in KIF22 gene (c.443C>T, p.Pro148Leu).
Pathogenic variants in KIF22 gene represent an established
cause of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxitytype 2 (OMIM:603546). The clinical presentation of KIF22-
associated conditions includes skeletal abnormalities, joint
laxity, joint dislocations, spinal deformities and short sta-ture, which is compatible with the clinical presentation in
our patient.
Conclusion: Between Morquio syndrome and spondy-
loepimetaphyseal dysplasia may exist completely over-
lapping skeletal phenotype, which is con ﬁrmed literature
data (ref. Biswas SN et al., 2017). The distinction betweenthese diseases is very important because of available
enzyme replacement therapy for Morquio syndrome type A
and completely different pattern of inheritance and recur-rence risk. Exome sequencing should be ﬁrst genetic test in
patient with severe skeletal dysplasia with overlapping
phenotype.
M. Mijovic: None. A. Miletic: None. H. Janeski: None.
B. Dimitrijevic: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M.
Lukic: None. G. Cuturilo: None.
P04.70B
Further evidence for COL9A3 associated autosomalrecessive Stickler syndrome
A. Bohring, J. Horvath, P. WieackerInstitut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany
Heterozygous COL9A3 [MIM 120270] mutations were
reported to cause multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-3 [MIM
600969] which is mainly characterized by stiffness and/orpain in the knees, due to ﬂattened, irregular epiphyses, and
varus or valgus deformity, waddling gait, and mild short
stature in some patients. Here we report on the second casewith bi-allelic COL9A3 nonsense mutations. The boy was
born with club feet and moderate hearing loss to healthy
parents. Radiographs revealed ﬂat lumbar vertebrae, coxa
retrotorta, and broad femoral metaphyses. At examination at
age 2,5 years we saw a triangular face, bilaterally mild
epicanthus, a high arched palate, and short ﬁngers. In
addition, myopia was diagnosed recently. Height was 92
cm, weight 15 kg (50. and 75. centile, respectively).
Because of the phenotype, the provisional diagnosis ofStickler syndrome was made and molecular analyses
revealed compound-heterozygosity for COL9A3 mutationsc.268C>T; p.(Arg90*) and c.1739dup; p.(Gly581Trpfs*20).
Bi-allelic COL9A1 [MIM 120210] and COL9A2 [MIM
120260] mutations are already known to cause autosomal-
recessive inherited Stickler syndrome [MIM 614134;
614284]. However, as far as we know, only one family
with bi-allelic occurrence of a COL9A3 nonsense mutationand Stickler syndrome is published until now. As in our
patient, in this family the affected individuals showed a
comparatively mild phenotype with no vitreoretinal invol-vement or cataracts so far and no cleft palate/Pierre-Robin
sequence. Thus, the ﬁndings in our case further support the
assumption that bi-allelic COL9A3 mutations are verylikely suf ﬁcient to cause Stickler syndrome as well.
A. Bohring: None. J. Horvath: None. P.
Wieacker: None.
P04.71C
Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome: a rare clinical entity
O. Akgün Dogan
1, Y. Kendir Demirkol1, M. Say2,
T. Kizilboga Akgün3,4,L .D o ğanay4
1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Sciences
University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital,İstanbul, Turkey,
2Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era
Diagnostic, İstanbul, Turkey,3Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University,İstanbul, Turkey,
4GLAB (Genomic Laboratory), Health
Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Research
Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Stüve-Wiedemann syndr ome(SWS)(MIM601559)
is an autosomal recessive skelet al dysplasia characterized by
bowing of extremities, severe osteoporosis, joint contractures,
dysautonomia, frequent respiratory infections, and feeding
difﬁculty. Mutations in LIFR are responsible for the syndrome.
Although the majority of patients are lost due to complications in
infancy, patients who reach adoles cent period are reported rarely.
Here, we present a 9 years- old male with SWS with severe
skeletal ﬁndings due to a novel homozygous mutation in LIFR.
Materials and Methods: The patient was the third child
of healthy, consanguineous parents, born at term with abirth weight of 3600g(50-75th centile). Bowing in lower
extremities was remarkable at birth, and progressed gradu-
ally with age. He was hospitalized many times for respira-tory distress, feeding dif ﬁculties, and recurrent fever. Motor
developmental milestones were delayed however, mental
development was normal. Physical examination revealedfacial dysmorphic features, bending of the extremities,
laxity of the metacarpophalangeal joints, scoliosis, promi-
nent heels, and pes planus. X-ray of extremities showedbowing of the limbs, bilateral valgus deformity, and
widening of the femoral and tibial metaphysis.1300Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on
Illumina MiSeq(v1.9) platform using the virtual panel for
skeletal dysplasia consisting of 130 genes. The novel
homozygous variant in LIFR (c.274C>T) was detected.
Segregation within the family showed that parents were
heterozygous carriers.
Conclusions: Although SWS is a rare genetic disease, it
should be kept in mind in patients with congenital bowing
in extremities. Targeted exome analysis has great impor-tance in the fast and accurate setting in the diagnosis of
heterogeneous groups of syndromes such as bent bone
dysplasias.
O. Akgün Dogan: None. Y. Kendir Demirkol: None.
M. Say: None. T. Kizilboga Akgün: None. L.
Doğanay: None.
P04.73A
Novel VPS33B mutation in a patient with autosomalrecessive keratoderma-ichthyosis-deafness (ARKID)
syndrome
S. Alter
1, A. Hotz1, A. Jahn2, N. Di Donato2, E. Schröck2,
M. Smitka3, M. von der Hagen3, J. Schallner3,
M. Menschikowski4, C. Gillitzer3, M. W. Laass3,
J. Fischer1, A. Tzschach1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany,2Institute
of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany,3Children´s hospital, Medical Faculty
Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,Dresden, Germany,
4Institute of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Autosomal recessive keratoderma-ichthyosis-deafness
(ARKID) syndrome is a rare multisystem disorder causedby biallelic mutations in VPS33B ; only three patients have
been reported to date. ARKID syndrome is allelic to
arthrogryposis-renal dysfunction-cholestasis (ARC) syn-drome (MIM #208085), a severe disorder with early
lethality whose phenotypic characteristics also include
ichthyosis, hearing loss, severe failure to thrive, plateletdysfunction and osteopenia. We report on an 11-year-old
male patient with ARKID syndrome and compound
heterozygous VPS33B mutations, one of which
[c.1440delG; p.(Arg481Glyfs*11)] was novel. Clinical
features of this patient included ichthyosis, palmoplantar
keratosis, hearing loss, intellectual disability, unilateral hipdislocation, microcephaly and short stature. He also had
copper hepatopathy and exocrine pancreatic insuf ﬁciency,
features that have not been associated with neither ARKIDnor ARC syndrome so far. The patient broadens the clinical
and molecular spectrum of ARKID syndrome andcontributes to genotype-phenotype associations of this rare
disorder.
S. Alter: None. A. Hotz: None. A. Jahn: None. N. Di
Donato: None. E. Schröck: None. M. Smitka: None. M.
von der Hagen: None. J. Schallner: None. M. Menschi-
kowski: None. C. Gillitzer: None. M.W. Laass: None. J.
Fischer: None. A. Tzschach: None.
P04.74B
Analysis of a French cohort of patients with Werner
syndrome; clinical and molecular features
B. Dauriat
1, N. Uhrhammer2,3, H. Adamski4, C. Colson5,
P. D’Anella6, F. Demurger7, H. Dollfus8, V. Drouin-
Garraud9, C. Francannet10, M. Gerard5, F. Giuliano11,
B. Isidor12, H. Journel7, P. Lacroix13, H. Levesque14,
L. Mary8, C. Moraine1, X. Piguel15, M. Pistorius16,
G. Plessis5, I. Reingeard17, M. Rio18, M. Ruivard19,
G. Vera9, C. Vigouroux20, M. Vincent12, J. Bignon2,3,
C. Yardin1,21
1Department of Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics,
Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, France,
2Department of Oncogenetics, Centre Jean Perrin,
Clermont-Ferrand University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand,
France,3INSERM U1240, Imagerie Moléculaire et
Stratégies Théranostiques, Clermont-Ferrand, France,
4Department of Dermatology, Rennes University Hospital,
Rennes, France,5Department of Genetics, Caen University
Hospital, Caen, France,6Department of Endocrinology,
Avignon Hospital, Avignon, France,7Department of
Clinical Genetics, Rennes University Hospital, Rennes,
France,8Department of Genetics, Strasbourg University
Hospital, Strasbourg, France,9Department of Genetics,
Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France,10Department
of Genetics, Estaing University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France,
11Department of Genetics, Nice
University Hospital, Nice, France,12Department of
Genetics, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France,
13Department of Thoracic and Vascular Surgery-Vascular
Medicine, Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, France,
14Department of Internal Medicine, University of Rouen,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine,
Rouen, France,15Department of Endocrinology, Poitiers
University Hospital, Poitiers, France,16Department of
Internal Medicine, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes,
France,17Department of Endocrinology, Montpellier
University Hospital, Montpellier, France,18Department of
Pediatrics, Neurology and Genetics, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants-Malades, Paris, France,19Department of Internal
Medicine, Estaing University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand,France,
20AP-HP Saint-Antoine Hospital, Molecular
Biology and Genetics Laboratory, EndocrinologyAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1301Department, National Reference Center for Insulin
Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity Rare Diseases, Paris,
France,21Limoges University, CNRS, XLIM, UMR 7252,
Limoges, France
Introduction: Werner syndrome (WS) belongs to adult
onset progeroid diseases, leading to a premature ageing of
mesenchymal and epithelial tissues, affecting one person
per a million in the world. Its cardinal signs are shortstature, lipodystrophy and atrophic skin, premature cataract
and greying of hair; age-associated complications may
occur in WS such as osteoporosis, chronic skin ulcers ordiabetes mellitus, and patients usually die around 53 years
of age from cardiovascular or neoplastic causes. This
recessive genetic affection is linked to loss-of-functionmutations of WRN gene, coding for a helicase involved in
multiple DNA pathways. No recent clinical nor molecular
description were available for French WS patients.
Methods: Data from French laboratories found 36
genetically con ﬁrmed WS cases, whose 34 for which
molecular and clinical data were collected.
Results: 31 mutations including 14 newly described ones
were identi ﬁed, with some associated with a speci ﬁc French
region. The mean age for diagnosis was 40.5 years, thecardinal signs were found in all the patients, and under-
estimated features (deafness, hepatic, thyroid, valvular,
hypertensive or capillary impairments) were commonlydiagnosed. Death occurred at 53.6 years of age, mostly from
cancerous etiologies. Despite the homogeneity of the main
signs, it seems that phenotypes with less severe evolutionmay exist, without associated predictive or causal factors.
Conclusion: This cohort gives an exhaustive description
of French patients presenting genetically con ﬁrmed WS
since the beginning of WRN testing. It de ﬁnes accurate
frequencies for all the numerous symptoms and gives the
opportunity for prospective investigations.
B. Dauriat: None. N. Uhrhammer: None. H. Adamski:
None. C. Colson: None. P. D’Anella: None. F. Demurger:
None. H. Dollfus: None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. C.
Francannet: None. M. Gerard: None. F. Giuliano: None.
B. Isidor: None. H. Journel: None. P. Lacroix: None. H.
Levesque: None. L. Mary: None. C. Moraine: None. X.
Piguel: None. M. Pistorius: None. G. Plessis: None. I.
Reingeard: None. M. Rio: None. M. Ruivard: None. G.
Vera: None. C. Vigouroux:
None. M. Vincent: None. J.
Bignon: None. C. Yardin: None.
P04.75C
Genetic predisposition to systemic sclerosis
N. Limaye1, M. Vanthuyne2, F. Houssiau3, V. Smith4,
B. Lauwerys31de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium,2Cliniques
Universitaires St. Luc, Brussels, Belgium,3Cliniques
Universitaires St Luc & Institute of Experimental and
Clinical Research, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium,4Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multi-system disease of
unknown cause, characterized by vascular and immune
dysregulation that results in progressive ﬁbrosis of the skin
and other organs. While rare, it can be lethal, and there are
currently no treatments. SSc is typically sporadic; familial
forms are extremely rare. By applying genome-wide NextGeneration Sequencing (NGS) to such families, we aim to
identify genetic “drivers ”, i.e., disease-causative or
strongly-predisposing alleles. We hypothesize that thesegenes may also contribute to sporadic disease, when they
carry strong de novo mutations, weak inherited variants
(that cause disease only in combination with other geneticand environmental factors), or somatic mutations in affected
tissues. We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on
blood-DNA from two affected ﬁrst-degree relatives each
from ﬁve families, and ﬁltered for genes with missense or
nonsense variants that (i) co-segregate with disease, (ii) are
rare in public sequence databases and an in-house WESdatabase, and (iii) predicted to affect protein function in
silico . Between 18 and 40 such genes were identi ﬁed per
family. Candidate gene prioritization was performed usingliterature and database-mining, as well as intersection with
RNASeq data from sporadic SSc cutaneous tissue biopsies.
Variants in the two highest-ranked candidates (one a pro-ﬁbrotic growth factor, the other a cytokine receptor with
pro-ﬁbrotic, pro-in ﬂammatory effects) are currently being
tested for their effects on protein function. Proof of an effecton protein function will be followed by testing for a role in a
bleomycin-induced mouse model of SSc.
N. Limaye: None. M. Vanthuyne: None. F. Houssiau:
None. V. Smith: None. B. Lauwerys: None.
P04.76D
WNT10A mutations: re ﬁning genotype, phenotype,
penetrance, clinical variability and inheritance manner
O. Patat
1, I. Bailleul-Forestier2, J. Plaisancie1,
D. Bonneau3, E. Colin3, C. Colson4, M. Cordier5,
C. Coubes6, F. Demurger7, A. Dieux-Coeslier8,
M. Fradin7, M. Gerard4, A. Goldenberg9, B. Isidor10,
H. Journel10, D. Lacombe11, M. Lebrun12, D. Martin-
Coignard13, M. Nizon10, S. Odent7, F. Petit8, N. Philip14,
J. Piard15, J. Piard15, G. Plessis4, A. Putoux5, C. Quelin7,
J. Thevenon16, A. Toutain17, C. Vanleberghe8,
A. Verloes18, C. Vincent-Delorme8, Y. Capri18, F. Vaysse2,
P. Calvas1, N. Chassaing113021CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France,2Faculté de Chirurgie
Dentaire, Toulouse, France,3CHU Angers, Angers,
France,4CHU Caen, Caen, France,5CHU Lyon HCL,
Lyon, France,6CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
7CHU Rennes, Rennes, France,8CHRU Lille, Lille, France,
9CHU Rouen, Rouen, France,10CHU Nantes-Hôtel dieu,
Nantes, France,11CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,
12CHU Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France,13CHU Le
Mans, Le Mans, France,14CHU Marseille, Marseille,
France,15CHRU Besançon, Besançon, France,16CHU
Grenoble, Grenoble, France,17CHRU Tours, Tours,
France,18CHU Paris Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France
Introduction: The agenesis of several teeth is a prevalent
malformation in human. Hypodontia is de ﬁned by the
agenesis of six teeth or less, whereas oligodontia refers to
the agenesis of more than six teeth, excluding the third
molars. Hypodontia and oligodontia can be associated withdefects in the development of other ectodermal structures
such as hairs, sweat glands and nails, de ﬁning the spectrum
of ectodermal dysplasias. Mutations in WNT10A are known
as a major cause of oligodontia with or without associated
ectodermal dysplasia signs.
Patients and Methods: Based on the analysis of a large
series of 413 probands with hypo or oligodontia and 190 of
their relatives, we report 395 subjects with mutations in the
gene WNT10A .
Results: We found a mutation in WNT10A in 227 of the
413 probands, among which two recurrent mutations the
c.682T>A (p.Phe228Ile) and c.321C>A (p.Cys107Ter) arerespectively involved in 178 and 33 unrelated probands and
families. We show a pattern of tooth agenesis in patients
with WNT10A mutations and a broad phenotypic variability
despite a correlation between the number of mutations, the
number of tooth agenesis and the presence of ectodermal
signs. We con ﬁrm the incomplete penetrance of WNT10A
mutation with an estimate of the penetrance and report
several asymptomatic cases with biallelic mutations.
Discussion: Despite some degree of genotype-phenotype
correlation, we highlight the incomplete penetrance and
broad clinical variability associated with WNT10A
mutations.
O. Patat: None. I. Bailleul-forestier: None. J. Plai-
sancie: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Colin: None. C.
Colson: None. M. Cordier: None. C. Coubes: None. F.
Demurger: None. A. Dieux-coeslier: None. M. Fradin:
None. M. Gerard: None. A. Goldenberg: None. B. Isidor:
None. H. Journel: None. D. Lacombe: None. M. Lebrun:
None. D. Martin-coignard: None. M. Nizon: None. S.
Odent: None. F. Petit: None. N. Philip: None. J. Piard:
None. J. Piard: None. G. Plessis: None.
A. Putoux: None.
C. Quelin: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Toutain: None.
C. Vanleberghe: None. A. Verloes: None. C. Vincent-delorme: None. Y. Capri: None. F. Vaysse: None. P.
Calvas: None. N. Chassaing: None.
P05
Cardiovascular disorders
P05.01A
European Reference Network For RareVascularDiseases (VASCERN) consensus statement for the
screening and management of patients with pathogenic
ACTA2 variants
I. van de Laar
1, E. Arbustini2, B. Loeys3,4, E. Björck5,
M. Groenink6, M. Kempers4, J. Timmermans4, J. Roos-
Hesselink1, K. Benke7, G. Pepe8, B. Mulder6, Z. Szabolcs7,
G. Teixidó-Turà9, L. Robert10, Y. Emmanuel10,
A. Evangelista11, A. Pini12, Y. von Kodolitsch13,
G. Jondeau14, J. De Backer15
1Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,2IRCCS foundatoin Policlinico
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy,3University Hospital of Antwerp
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,4Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
5Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
6Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
7Semmelweis University, Heart and Vascular Center,
Budapest, Hungary,8Careggi Hospital, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy,9hospital universitari Vall
D'Hebron, CIBER-CV, Barcelona, Spain,10South East
Thames Regional Genetic Service, London, United
Kingdom,11hospital universitari Vall D'Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain,12Centro Malattie Rare Cardilogiche,
Milan, Italy,13University Heart Center Hamburg,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,Germany,
14Hopital Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, France,
15Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
The ACTA2 gene encodes for smooth muscle speci ﬁcα-
actin, a critical component of the contractile apparatus of the
vascular smooth muscle cell. Pathogenic variants in theACTA2 gene are the most frequently encountered genetic
cause of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection
(FTAAD). Although TAAD is the main clinical manifesta-tion, a variety of occlusive vascular disease and extra-
vascular manifestations occur in ACTA2 related
vasculopathy. Current data suggest possible mutation-speciﬁc manifestations of vascular and extra-aortic traits.
Despite its relatively high prevalence, comprehensive
recommendations on the care of patients and families withpathogenic variants in ACTA2 have not yet been estab-
lished. We aimed to develop a consensus document toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1303provide medical guidance for all health care professionals
involved in the recognition, diagnosis and treatment of
patients and relatives with pathogenic variants in ACTA2 .
The hereditary thoracic aortic disease (HTAD) Working
Group of the European Reference Network for Rare
Vascular Diseases (VASCERN) convened to review currentliterature and discuss expert opinions on clinical manage-
ment of ACTA2 related vasculopathy. This consensus
statement summarizes our recommendations on diagnosis,monitoring, treatment, genetic counselling and testing in
patients with ACTA2 related vasculopathy. However, there
is a clear need for additional prospective multicenter studiesto further de ﬁne proper guidelines.
I. van de Laar: None. E. Arbustini: None. B. Loeys:
None. E. Björck: None. M. Groenink: None. M. Kem-
pers: None. J. Timmermans: None. J. Roos-Hesselink:
None. K. Benke: None. G. Pepe: None. B. Mulder: None.
Z. Szabolcs: None. G. Teixidó-Turà: None. L. Robert:
None. Y. Emmanuel: None. A. Evangelista: None. A.
Pini: None. Y. von Kodolitsch: None. G. Jondeau: None.
J. De Backer: None.
P05.02B
Novel approach reveals celiprolol but not losartan asmedical therapy for vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
N. Dubacher
1, J. Münger1, M. C. Gorosabel1, J. Crabb2,
A. A. Ksiazek3,4, S. M. Caspar1, E. N. T. P. Bakker5,
E. van Bavel5, U. Ziegler6, T. Carrel7, B. Steinmann8,
S. Zeisberger3, J. Meienberg1, G. Matyas1
1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene
Diagnostics, Foundation for People with Rare Diseases,Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland,
2Institute of Mechanical
Systems, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland,3Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,4Clinic for Small
Animal Internal Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland,5Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Physics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,6Center for
Microscopy and Image Analysis, University of Zurich,Zurich, Switzerland,
7Department of Cardiovascular
Surgery, University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland,8Division
of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital, Zurich,Switzerland
Aims: Antihypertensive drugs are included in the medical
therapy of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS). The
β-blocker celiprolol has been suggested to prevent arterial
damage in vEDS, but the underlying mechanism remainsunclear. It is also unknown whether the widely-used
AGTR1-antagonist losartan has a therapeutic effect invEDS. We evaluated the impact of celiprolol and losartan
on the biomechanical integrity of the vEDS thoracic aorta.
Methods: We (re-)characterised a murine vEDS model at
molecular level using WGS and developed an objective
approach to measure the maximum tensile force at rupture
of uniaxially-stretched murine thoracic aortic rings. Toassess treatment effect, heterozygous mice at 4 weeks of age
underwent a 4-week treatment with celiprolol, losartan, and,
as a proof-of-concept drug, the MMP-inhibitor doxycycline.
Results: Heterozygous mice showed a signi ﬁcant reduc-
tion in the rupture force compared to wild-type mice.
Compared to age- and sex-matched untreated heterozygousmice, treatment with doxycycline or celiprolol resulted in a
signiﬁcant increase of rupture force, whereas no signi ﬁcant
change was detected upon losartan treatment.
Conclusions: Our novel read-out system is suitable for
the assessment of the biomechanical effect of candidate
drugs. In a vEDS model, celiprolol or doxycycline, but notlosartan, can improve the biomechanical integrity of the
aortic wall. As doxycycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic
with considerable side effects, celiprolol may be more sui-table for a long-term therapy and thus rather indicated for
the medication of patients with vEDS. This is the ﬁrst study
demonstrating that celiprolol improves the rupture force ofthe thoracic aorta.
N. Dubacher: None. J. Münger: None. M.C. Gor-
osabel: None. J. Crabb: None. A.A. Ksiazek: None. S.M.
Caspar: None. E.N.T.P. Bakker: None. E. van Bavel:
None. U. Ziegler: None. T. Carrel: None. B. Steinmann:
None. S. Zeisberger: None. J. Meienberg: None. G.
Matyas: None.
P05.03C
Next Generation Sequencing identi ﬁes novel variants in
TJP1 ,TP63 andPPP1R13L genes in Arrhythmogenic
Cardiomyopathy patients
M. Calore
1,2, G. Poloni2, A. V. Postma3, A. Lorenzon2,
G. Minervini4, G. Vazza2, I. E. A. Li Mura5, A. Telatin5,
I. Zara5, B. Simionati5, J. Ponti2, G. Occhi2, L. Vitiello2,
B. Bauce6, S. C. E. Tosatto4, P. J. van Tintelen3,
A. Rampazzo2, M. De Bortoli2,7
1Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht, Netherlands,2Department of
Biology, Padova University, Padova, Italy,3Department of
Medical Biology and Department of Clinical Genetics,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
4Department of Biomedical Sciences, Padova University,
Padova, Italy,5BMR Genomics, Padova, Italy,6Department
of Biology Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences,Padova University, Padova, Italy,
7Institute for1304Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, Af ﬁliated
Institute of the University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany
Among the most common inherited cardiomyopathies,
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is characterized
by progressive myocardial ﬁbro-fatty replacement, arrhyth-
mias and risk of sudden death. Mutations in genes encoding
proteins of cardiac intercalated discs account for about 60%
of ACM cases, but the remaining 40% is still geneticallyelusive.
Aim: We aim at identifying novel ACM genes by next
generation sequencing.
Methods and Results: The DNA of 40 ACM patients
was analyzed using a targeted gene panel consisting of 15
knownACM genes and 53 candidate genes. We found two novel
variants in TP63 (c.796C>T, p .R266*) and PPP1R13L
(c.1858G>C, p.A620P) candidate genes, encoding for theproteins p63 and iASPP, respectively. The TP63 variant is
scored as likely pathogenic and the PPP1R13L variant as of
uncertain signi ﬁcance and involves a conserved functional
domain.
Importantly, the mutant TP63 allele leads to nonsense-
mediated-mRNA decay, causinghaploinsuf ﬁciency.
Also, novel variants in TJP1 gene were detected by whole
exome sequencing in additional 4 ACM Italian and Dutch/German probands. Out of the 4 variants, p.Y669C in the
encoded protein ZO-1 promotes structural rearrangements
of the GUK domain, whereas the p.R265W, p.S329L, andp.D360V are predicted to impair the function of the
involved the disordered region between PDZ2 and PDZ3
domains. Furthermore, rare variants in TJP1 are sig-
niﬁcantly enriched in patients with ACM relative to
controls.
Conclusions: We provide the ﬁrst evidence linking TP63
andTJP1 variants to ACM, while the functional involve-
ment of PPP1R13L remains to be determined.
Grants: TRANSAC CPDA133979/13; Target Projects
331/12, RP 2014-00000394; (PRAT) CPDA133979;
CVON2012-10 PREDICT;CVON2015-12 eDETECT
M. Calore: None. G. Poloni: None. A.V. Postma: None.
A. Lorenzon: None. G. Minervini: None. G. Vazza:
None. I.E.A. Li Mura: None. A. Telatin: None. I. Zara:
None. B. Simionati: None. J. Ponti: None. G. Occhi:
None. L. Vitiello: None. B. Bauce: None. S.C.E. Tosatto:
None. P.J. van Tintelen: None. A. Rampazzo:
None. M.
De Bortoli: None.
P05.04D
Aortic dilatation in patients with Traboulsi syndromeL. Zahavich1,2, A. Ali3, R. Mendoza-Londono4,
N. Tehrani3, L. Grosse-Wortmann1, R. K. Jobling4,5
1Division of Cardiology Labatt Family Heart Centre and
Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,2Department
of Genetic Counseling, The Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Department
of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital forSick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada,
4Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto,ON, Canada,
5Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research,
Cardiac Genome Clinic, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Traboulsi syndrome (OMIM 601552) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder caused by mutations in ASPH (OMIM600582). It is characterized by ectopia lentis, spontaneous
ﬁltering blebs, other anterior segment anomalies and
craniofacial dysmorphism. Thirteen patients have beenreported, and aortic dilatation has not been noted, though
details regarding aortic measurements have not been
consistently provided. We report three paediatric patientsfrom two families affected with Traboulsi syndrome
presenting with mild-moderate aortic dilatation in addition
to the ocular phenotype. The two affected individuals inFamily 1 have dilation of the aortic root (Patient 1-I aortic
sinus 30.2 Boston z-score 2.2, Patient 1-II aortic sinus 28.2
mm, Boston z-score 4.1, and sinotubular junction 23.7 mm,Boston z-score 4.7). In addition Patient 1-I has a
myxomatous mitral valve with regurgitation, and Patient
1-II has a bicuspid aortic valve. Both patients harbor ahomozygous variant in ASPH (NM_004318.3 c.2204 G>A
(ep.Arg735Gln)). The substitution of tryptophan for
arginine at this residue has been reported previously inTraboulsi syndrome. The ocular ﬁndings in Family 1
included both microspherophakia and ectopia lentis. The
affected patient in Family 2 (Patient 2-I) has a dilated aorticroot (aortic sinus 27.4 mm, Boston z-score of 4.1 and
sinotubular junction at 20.9 mm, Boston z-score 3.2).
Patient 2-I has a homozygous nonsense variantc.2181_2183dupATG (p.W728X) in ASPH discovered on
whole exome sequencing. Comprehensive testing of FBN1
was negative in both families. The phenotype of thisextremely rare disorder is continues to evolve and affected
patients require a thorough cardiac assessment.
L. Zahavich: None. A. Ali: None. R. Mendoza-Lon-
dono: None. N. Tehrani: None. L. Grosse-Wortmann:
None. R.K. Jobling: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1305P05.06B
Metagenomic search for the protozoa in atherosclerotic
plaques
A. Zarubin1, A. Markov1, D. Sharysh2, V. Puzyrev1,2,
M. Nazarenko1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National
Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation,
2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian
Federation
Background: Several reports have shown the relevance of
infection in development of atherosclerosis. However, the
bacterial DNA of atherosclerotic plaques mainly wasinvestigated by metagenomic approaches. Objective: To
search for the protozoa by using genome-wide sequencing
data of human atherosclerotic plaques (AP).
Material and Methods: We used the results of whole
genome sequencing of DNA isolated from 12 athero-
sclerotic plaques (SRA149235) and 2 blood samples from1000 Genomes Project (HG00096, HG00099). Sequence
reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19)
using Bowtie2. The taxonomic classi ﬁcation of the reads
was performed with Kraken2 using a curated microbial
genome database containing archaea, bacteria, fungi, pro-
tozoa, viruses reference genome sequence. Results anddiscussion: Pre-alignment on the human genome, even with
“very-sensitive ”option of Bowtie2, cannot completely
clean up human gene sequences. Kraken2 determined 13%to 92% of the human gene sequences in unmatched reads of
different AP samples. We found sequences of Toxoplasma
gondii genome in 8 samples (about 1678 reads per sample).These sequences were shown to be mapped to contigs
(NW_017384310.1, NW_017384809.1). These contigs
were also found in samples from 1000 Genomes Project.
Conclusions: There were no protozoa in genome-wide
sequencing data of human atherosclerotic plaques. The
reads that mapped to the Toxoplasma genome are falsepositive. Some microbial reference genomes probably to
contain human DNA sequences not presented in the human
reference genome assembly.
A. Zarubin: None. A. Markov: None. D. Sharysh:
None. V. Puzyrev: None. M. Nazarenko: None.
P05.07C
Gain of function mutation in the cardiac Kv4.2
potassium channel underlies paroxysmal atrialﬁbrillation
M. Drabkin, N. Zilberberg, S. Menahem, W. Mulla,
D. Halperin, Y. Yogev, O. Wormser, Y. Perez, R. Kadir,
Y. Etzion, A. Katz, O. BirkBen-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Introduction: Three generations of a kindred presented
with autosomal dominant early-onset paroxysmal atrial
ﬁbrillation (pAF), with recurrent nocturnal self-terminating
palpitations.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing, linkage analysis,
electrophysiological assays in Xenopus oocytes.
Results: Through genetic studies we identi ﬁed a disease-
causing p.S447R mutation in KCND2 , encoding the pore-
forming ( α) subunit of the Kv4.2 cardiac potassium chan-
nel. Kv4.2, with Kv4.3, contributes to the cardiac fasttransient outward K +current, I
to.Itounderlies the early
repolarization phase in the cardiac action potential, setting
the initial potential of the plateau phase and governing itsduration and amplitude. In Xenopus oocytes, the p.S447R
mutation increased inactivation time constant of the channel
and affected its regulation: the mutation resides in a protein-kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation site, which normally
attenuates Kv4.2 membrane expression. Mutant Kv4.2
exhibited impaired response to PKC, resulting in augmentedKv4.2 membrane expression and enhanced potassium cur-
rents. Moreover, in a hybrid channel composed of Kv4.3
and Kv4.2, simulating the mature endogenous hetero-tetrameric channel underlying I
to, the Kv4.2 mutation
exerted gain-of-function effect on Kv4.3. Thus, the muta-
tion exerts gain-of-function effect on both Kv4.2 homo-tetramers and Kv4.2-Kv4.3 hetero-tetramers.
Conclusions: Gain-of-function mutation in Kv4.2 causes
nocturnal pAF. Interestingly, Kv4.2 expression was pre-viously shown to demonstrate circadian variation, with peak
expression at daytime in murine hearts (human nighttime),
with possible relevance to the nocturnal onset of parox-ysmal AF symptoms in our patients. The atrial-speci ﬁc
phenotype suggests that targeting Kv4.2 might be effective
in the treatment of nocturnal paroxysmal AF, avoidingadverse ventricular effects.
M. Drabkin: None. N. Zilberberg: None. S. Menahem:
None. W. Mulla: None. D. Halperin: None. Y. Yogev:
None. O. Wormser: None. Y. Perez: None. R. Kadir:
None. Y. Etzion: None. A. Katz: None. O. Birk: None.
P05.08D
Novel ABCC9 missense mutation in a Chinese infant
with Cantu syndrome without skeletal manifestations
R. Guo
1,2,3,4, C. Hao1,2,3,4, S. Qian1,W .L i1,2,3,4
1Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China,2Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetics of
Birth Defects, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Beijing,China,
3Genetics and Birth Defects Control Center,
National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China,13064MOE Key Laboratory of Major Diseases in Children,
Beijing, China
Background: Cantu syndrome (CS) is a congenital rare
disorder characterized by congenital hypertrichosis, neona-
tal macrosomia, a distinct osteochondrodysplasia, andcardiomegaly. It is a dominant condition caused by
heterozygous variants in ABCC9 orKCNJ8 . Here, we
report a baby boy patient who was referred to Cantusyndrome without skeletal manifestations.
Methods: Blood samples and clinical data were collected
after informed consent. Trio whole exome sequencing wasperformed in this patient and his parents. Public population
SNP databases (dbSNP147, gnomAD, ExAC and 1000
Genomes project) and in silico predictive algorithms were
used to identify the pathogenic variants.
Results: We detected a novel de novo heterozygous
missense, likely pathogenic variant (c.3203T>C) in ABCC9
gene. This mutation was located in transmembrane cyto-
plasmic domain 2 (TMD2) which may be gain-of-function
and increase K
ATPchannel activity.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of a Chinese baby
patient with pathogenic mutation in ABCC9 . Our descrip-
tion of the patient ’s phenotype would be a part of a spec-
trum of features associated with Cantu syndrome. The
unreported mutation extends the genetic spectra of ABCC9
and emphasizes the usefulness of WES for genetic diag-nosis in clinical context. Keywords: Cantu syndrome,
ABCC9 gene, whole exome sequencing, cardiovascular
abnormalities.
Grant references: This work was partially supported by
the Ministry of Science and Technology of China
(2016YFC1000306), and the Beijing Municipal Commis-sion of Health and Family Planning Foundation
(PXM2017_026274_000001).
R. Guo: None. C. Hao: None. S. Qian: None. W.
Li:None.
P05.09A
RASA1 mosaic mutations in patients with capillary
malformation - arteriovenous malformation
N. Revencu
1, E. Fastre1, M. Ravoet1, R. Helaers2,
P. Brouillard2, A. Bisdorff-Breson3, C. W. Chung4,
M. Gerard5, V. Dvoravoka6, A. D. Irvine6, L. Boon7,
M. Vikkula2
1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-
Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium,
2Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium,3Service de
Neuroradiologie, Hopital Lariboisière, Paris, France,
4Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital,Liverpool, Australia,5Service de Génétique, Centre
hospitalier universitaire de Caen –Hôpital Clémenceau,,
Caen, France,6Paediatric dermatology, Our Lady ’s
Children ’s Hospital Crumlin, National Children ’s Research
Centre and Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland,7Centre for
Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniquesuniversitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium
Background: Capillary malformation-arteriovenous mal-
formation is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterised
by capillary malformations and increased risk of fast- ﬂow
vascular malformations, caused by loss-of-function muta-
tions in the RASA1 orEPHB4 genes. Around 25% of the
patients do not seem to carry germline mutation in eitherone of these two genes. While some of those 25% of
patients may have mutations in as-yet-unidenti ﬁed genes,
mutations in RASA1 orEPHB4 that escape detection by less
sensitive techniques, such as post-zygotic mosaic mutations,
are also possible explanations.
Methods: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
lymphocytes, saliva or vascular malformation tissues from 4
patients. RASA1 and EPHB4 coding regions and exon/
intron boundaries were analysed by targeted custom genepanel sequencing. A second panel and/or Sanger sequen-
cing were used to con ﬁrm the mutations identi ﬁed.
Results: Four distinct mosaic RASA1 mutations, with an
allele frequency ranging from 3% to 25%, were identi ﬁed in
the 4 index patients with classical capillary malformation -
arteriovenous malformation phenotype. Three mutationswere known, one was novel. In one patient, a somatic
second-hit was also identi ﬁed. One index case had three
affected children, illustrating germline mosaicism.
Conclusion: This study shows that RASA1 mosaic
mutations can cause capillary malformation - arteriovenous
malformation. Thus, highly sensitive sequencing techniquesshould be considered as diagnostic tools, especially for
patients with no family history. Even low-level mosaicism
can cause the classical phenotype and increased risk foroffspring. In addition, our study further supports the
second-hit pathophysiological mechanism to explain the
multifocality of vascular lesions in this disorder.
N. Revencu: None. E. Fastre: None. M. Ravoet: None.
R. Helaers: None. P. Brouillard: None. A. Bisdorff-bre-
son: None. C.W. Chung: None. M. Gerard: None. V.
Dvoravoka: None. A.D. Irvine: None. L. Boon: None. M.
Vikkula: None.
P05.10B
Unique cardiogenetic clinic- our experience from 300
patients from Israeli diverse ethnic populationAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1307N. Ruhrman Shahar1,A .O z1, D. Monakier2, I. Maya1,
L. Salzer Sheelo1, L. Basel - Salmon1,3, Y. Goldberg1,
L. Bazak1
1Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah
Tikva, Israel,2Cardiology Dept. Beilinson Hospital, Rabin
Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,3Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv Universit, Tel Aviv, Israel
Introduction: Genetic heart diseases are a major public
health problem worldwide. Cardio-genetics is emerging as a
main discipline for deciphering multiple cardiac patholo-gies, with immediate clinical effects on diagnosis, treat-
ment, prevention and prognosis for patients and their family
members.
Methods: We have established the ﬁrst designated
cardio-genetics clinic in Israel as part of a tertiary hospital
two years ago. We retrospectively reviewed all our patient'sﬁles from the last 2 years.
Results: Three hundred patients from 200 families visited
our clinic and they represent variant population from allover Israel both from Jewish and non Jewish origins. The
patients were referred from both pediatric and adults car-
diologists, cardiovascular surgeons and primary carephysicians.
Most visits (90%) in our clinic were as outpatients and
only 10% were acutely hospitalized.
The patients were referred due to: congenital heart dis-
eases in 10%, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 52%, dilated
cardiomyopathy in 14%, arrhythmogenic right ventricledysplasia in 8%, left ventricular non- compaction in 4%,
channelopathies in 10% and 2% due to aborted
sudden death.
The patients underwent a genetic investigation in different
methods according to the clinical presentation: Sanger
sequencing for known familial/founder mutation, singlegene sequencing, NGS based gene panel sequencing,
Whole Exome Sequencing and chromosomal microarray.
We have identi ﬁed the underlying genetic cause in
approximately 40% of the families - the percentage varies
between the different cardiac pathologies.
Summary: Cardio-genetics clinic is a useful tool both for
the patient, families and the primary care physician in
various Genetic heart disease.
N. Ruhrman Shahar: None. A. Oz: None. D. Mon-
akier: None. I. Maya: None. L. Salzer Sheelo: None. L.
Basel - Salmon: None. Y. Goldberg: None. L.
Bazak: None.
P05.11C
Molecular diagnostic testing of inheritedcardiomyopathies by targeted Next-Generation
Sequencing in a public hospitalM. J. Gamundi, B. Mañé, A. I. Jaber, D. López,
M. D. Martínez, J. Martínez, C. Moure, A. Sánchez,
A. Vancells, J. M. Viguer, I. Hernan, E. Borràs,
M. Carballo
Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, SpainIntroduction: Inherited cardiomyopathies (CMs) are a
major cause of heart disease. They can be classi ﬁed in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), dilated cardiomyo-
pathy (DCM), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyo-
pathy (ARVC), restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) and leftventricular non-compaction (LVNC). Due to their clinical
and genetic heterogeneity, targeted-gene Next-Generation-
Sequencing (NGS) can be a helpful tool in their diagnosisand to early detect them in pre-symptomatic carriers.
Materials and Methods: 39 DNA samples of patients
affected with different CMs were analyzed by targeted-NGSusing Cardio-GeneSGKit ®(n=238 genes) or Cardio-Gen-
eSGKit ®MCP (n =90 genes). Results were ﬁltered and
analyzed with GeneSystems ®platform and informed to
patients. Co-segregation analysis and/or carrier testing were
performed when possible.
Results: 7 pathogenic/probably pathogenic variants were
detected in 5 HCM patients and 2 DCM patients. In HCM
patients, mutations were found in MYBPC3 (p.Arg495Gln,
p.Gly532Alafs*23 and p.Arg597Gln), CAV3 (p.Thr78Met),
TNNC1 (p.Ala8Val) and TNNI3 (p.Arg145Gln). In DCM
patients, mutations were detected in DSP (p.Leu1773-
Tyrfs*8) and TTN (p.Pro28946Leufs*6). Also, 17 variants
of unknown signi ﬁcance (VOUS) were detected in 14
patients affected with HCM (n =10), DCM (n =3) and
ARVC (n =1). These VOUS were mainly detected in
MYBPC3 (n=7) but also in other genes as DSC2 (n=1),
FHL1 (n=1),FLNC (n=1),LDB3 (n=1),LMNA (n=1),
MYH7 (n=2), PKP4 (n=1), SCN5A (n=1) and
TNNT2 (n=2).
Conclusions: 19 of the 39 analyzed patients (48.7%)
presented a clinically signi ﬁcant variant in one or two genes
associated with CMs. Detection of pathogenic/probably
pathogenic variants in probands can help to improve the
diagnostic, prognostic and treatment in them and in pre-symptomatic carriers.
M.J. Gamundi: None. B. Mañé: None. A.I. Jaber:
None. D. López: None. M.D. Martínez: None. J. Martí-
nez: None. C. Moure: None. A. Sánchez: None. A.
Vancells: None. J.M. Viguer: None. I. Hernan: None. E.
Borràs: None. M. Carballo: None.
P05.12D
Something old, something new: two syndromesassociated with pediatric-onset cardiomyopathy1308J. C. Herkert, A. J. van Essen, I. M. van Langen
University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
Introduction: Hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies
(HCM/DCM) are inherited heart muscle disorders. They are
isolated in the majority of patients, but are often
accompanied by extracardiac features in children. Distin-guishing children with one syndromic disorder from those
with two inherited conditions is important because this may
affect management options, cardiac surveillance in relativesand reproductive decision-making.
Methods and Results: We present two patients with
intellectual disability (ID) and cardiomyopathy. Patient 1presented with paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia at age
3 months. At age 5 she showed severe HCM, prolonged
QTc, severe ID, epilepsy and cerebral vision impairment.Exome sequencing (ES) revealed a damaging c.247C>T, p.
(Arg83Cys) variant in NAA10 , which encodes a ribosomal
protein involved in N-terminal acetylation. Several X-linkedNAA10 variants have been associated with genetic dis-
orders, but cardiomyopathy had not described until recently.
Patient 2 was diagnosed with severe DCM at age 4 months,mild ID, microcephaly (-6.2SDS), failure to thrive and
clinodactyly. ES revealed compound heterozygous variants
inCEP135 . Biallelic variants in CEP135 have also been
reported in two families with microcephaly. Interestingly,
most of Patient 2 ’s clinical features overlap with those of
ﬁve previously reported unrelated patients with autosomal
recessive inherited microcephaly-cardiomyopathy syn-
drome with unknown genetic etiology. Genematcher iden-
tiﬁed another patient with neonatal cardiomyopathy, failure
to thrive, microcephaly and biallelic variants in CEP135 .
CEP135 may thus have a role in cardiomyopathy.
Conclusions: These two cases illustrate that ES is a
valuable diagnostic tool for pediatric-onset cardiomyopathy
that can identify novel features in well-known syndromes or
novel genes associated with pediatric cardiomyopathy.
J.C. Herkert: None. A.J. van Essen: None. I.M. van
Langen: None.
P05.13A
Cardiomyopathy: genomic-diagnostic approach
L. Piherova
1, K. Hodanova1, H. Hartmannova1,
D. Musalkova1, M. Kubanek2, A. Krebsova2, S. Kmoch1
1RURD, Prague 2, Czech Republic,2Institute for Clinical
and Experimental Medicine (IKEM), Department of
Cardiology, Prague, Czech RepublicCardiomyopathy is a disease of the heart muscle associated
with a disorder of its function. This is a heterogeneous
group of diseases with various clinical signs that can
ultimately lead to heart failure. A signi ﬁcant proportion of
cardiomyopathies is genetically determined. In this group
can be found congenital heart defects, muscular dystrophyand congenital myopathy, hereditary disorders of metabo-
lism and genetic syndromes, (rasopathies). The use of the
whole exome sequencing is currently one of the mosteffective tools for elucidating the genotype of individual
patients. We have successfully used this method for
studying of genetic architecture of dilated cardiomyopathycohort where in about 80% of the 460 examined patients we
have found probably causal variant. Most frequently
affected genes were TTN (18%) , FLNC (4%) , MYBPC3
(4%) , MYH7 (4%), DSP (4%) , RBM20 (3%) , TNNT2 (3%),
DES (2%) ,L M N A (1%). We have also found CNV
variations in DMD ,LAMP2 ,FLNC, LMNA and MYH7
genes, which were predicted to cause major structural and
functional abnormalities of the affected genes. We are also
focusing on paediatric forms of cardiomyopathy which aremore complex and the clari ﬁcation is below 50%.
Successful molecular biology diagnostic helps to identify
the risk of occurrence of the disease in the family and toprovide prenatal diagnosis. In selected cases, the phenotype
can also be studied in cell models, which contribute to the
understanding of the molecular mechanism of the diseaseand allow a more accurate interpretation of extreme clinical
or laboratory ﬁndings. LM201509 NCLG, AZV 15-
27682A, AZV 15-28208A, SVV-260367
L. Piherova: None. K. Hodanova: None. H. Hart-
mannova: None. D. Musalkova: None. M. Kubanek:
None. A. Krebsova: None. S. Kmoch: None.
P05.14B
11 years of the Queensland Cardiac Genetics Service
R. Jonathan
1, J. McGaughran1, J. Atherton2,3
1Genetic Health Queensland, Brisbane, Australia,2Royal
Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Australia,
3University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Introduction: A dedicated conjoint cardiac genetics clinic
(CGC) was established through Genetic Health Queenslandand the Cardiology Department at the Royal Brisbane and
Women ’s Hospital in 2007. The aim of this study was to
characterize the patient cohort seen and assess the uptake ofgenetic testing and diagnostic rates achieved.
Methods: We explored the local databases and patient
charts to characterise the age, sex, referral phenotype andincidence of genetic testing for all patients who had atten-
ded the CGC. The outcomes of genetic testing, and numberAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1309of at risk relatives screened were also calculated. Unsolved
cases who would bene ﬁt from further testing with Whole
Genome Sequencing were identi ﬁed.
Preliminary Results: Over 1400 individuals were seen
for the ﬁrst time during the 11-year period and over 900
have been characterized to date. 488 were probands, themajority (265) of whom were referred for a cardiomyo-
pathy. 141 were referred for an arrhythmia syndrome, and
72 had had a cardiac arrest or were the relative of an indi-vidual with a sudden cardiac death. 385 probands were
tested, with a genetic diagnosis being achieved in 164
(43%). The highest diagnostic rate was achieved in patientswith cardiomyopathies (47%). Predictive testing was per-
formed in a further 415 patients.
Conclusions: We have reviewed the characteristics of a
large cohort of cardiac genetics patients and compared our
diagnostic rates to those in the literature. We have identi ﬁed
unsolved families who will bene ﬁt from further testing with
contemporary technologies.
R. Jonathan: None. J. McGaughran: None. J.
Atherton: None.
P05.15C
Structural variants in Alpha-actinin 2 are associatedwith cardiomyopathy and hypertrophy in human
cardiac tissue and iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes
M. E. Lindholm, H. Zhu, Y. Huang, E. A. Ashley,
M. Wheeler
Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States
Background: In striated muscle, alpha-actinin 2 is a critical
cytoskeletal protein that anchors actin ﬁlaments within the
sarcomere. Rare mutations in ACTN2 have been associated
with cardiac abnormalities, including arrhythmias and
cardiomyopathy. However, the mechanisms behind how
dysfunctional ACTN2 causes cardiac malfunction is notknown. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
effects of two novel ACTN2 variants on human cardiac
tissue and patient-speci ﬁc iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes.
Methods and Results: We identi ﬁed patients in the
Stanford Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease data-
base with novel ACTN2 variants using a custom mutation
pipeline optimized for rare variant discovery. We identi ﬁed
one patient homozygous for a stop-gain mutation (p.
Q860X) in ACTN2 and a family with an exon 8-10 deletion.
In heart transplant tissue of the homozygous patient, we
observed mild hypertrophy and interstitial ﬁbrosis. There
was no evidence of variation in ACTN2 protein expression,indicating absence of nonsense mediated decay. We used
siRNA to knock down ACTN2 in neonatal rat ventricularcardiomyocytes and a human myoblast cell line and
observed dramatic changes in cell size and morphology.
Patient-derived iPSC-cardiomyocytes were hypertrophic,
displayed sarcomeric structural disarray and had slower
contractile velocity compared to control iPSC-
cardiomyocytes. Using Co-Immunoprecipitation forACTN2, followed by mass-spectrometry, we identi ﬁed
missing protein-protein interactions in the patient with the
truncated ACTN2.
Conclusions: Here, we provide evidence that two struc-
tural genetic variants in ACTN2 are associated to contractile
dysfunction and lead to cardiac abnormalities, includinghypertrophy and arrhythmia.
No speci ﬁc grant funded this study.
M.E. Lindholm: None.
H. Zhu: None. Y. Huang: None.
E.A. Ashley: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Persona-
lis, DeepCell. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;SequenceBio, Genome Medical. M. Wheeler: None.
P05.16D
Genetic cardiomyopathies revisited: reevaluating
current gene panel testing
D. Dooijes, M. A. Siemelink, J. J. van der Smagt, R. L. E.
van Loon, J. G. Post, J. F. van der Heijden,
F. W. Asselbergs, A. F. Baas, J. P. van Tintelen
UMC Utrecht, The Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands
Introduction: There is an ongoing debate on the genes that
should be examined during genetic evaluation of idiopathic
cardiomyopathy patients. Although several genes havesufﬁcient evidence to be cardiomyopathy-related, for other
genes this remains unclear. These genes may however cause
a signi ﬁcant burden on variant evaluation. In order to make
an evidence-based estimation of the value of genes
examined, we assessed results of cardiomyopathy gene
panels after reevaluation and reclassi ﬁcation of variants
according to current criteria.
Materials and Methods: All results of a 64-gene NGS-
cardiomyopathy panel performed between 2014 and 2018 inthe UMC Utrecht, the Netherlands were retrieved. The
pathogenicity of all gene variants was reevaluated according
to current criteria by an experienced clinical laboratoryspecialist in cardiogenetics. Benign or likely benign variants
were excluded from analysis. Summary results were deter-
mined for all individual genes.
Results: 1264 cardiomyopathy panels performed showed
848 variants (657 unique) in 638 patients (overall yield
50.5%). Of the 848 variants, 124 variants were reclassi ﬁed
(15%), of which 117 were downgraded (94%). Reclassi ﬁ-
cation was mostly due to a high frequency in control1310populations or based on in-house clinical data (e.g. non-
segregation). 28 genes were determined to be of limited
value in regular pan-cardiomyopathy gene panel testing
because of the absence of relevant variants, published lit-
erature (including ClinGen gene adjudication).
Conclusions: Cardiomyopathy NGS-gene panels per-
formed on 1264 patients, identi ﬁed 28 genes of limited
value in regular genetic testing for cardiomyopathy. In
addition, state-of-art reevaluation of variants resulted in anotable downgrading of previously identi ﬁed variants.
D. Dooijes: None. M.A. Siemelink: None. J.J. van der
Smagt: None. R.L.E. van Loon: None. J.G. Post: None.
J.F. van der Heijden: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. A.F.
Baas: None. J.P. van Tintelen: None.
P05.17A
Circadian clock genes and myocardial infarction in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
I.Škrlec
1, J. Mili ć2, I. Cilen šek3, D. Petrovi č3, B. Peterlin4
1Department of Biology and Chemistry, Faculty of Dental
Medicine and Health, J. J. Strossmayer University of
Osijek, Osijek, Croatia,2Faculty of Medicine,
J. J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia,
3Institute of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of
Medicine, University Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
4Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Disruption of circadian clock may trigger the onset of
diabetes mellitus and myocardial infarction. Type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) is well-known risk factors for cardiovas-cular diseases and myocardial infarction. Several physiolo-
gical factors can stimulate the emergence of T2DM and
myocardial infarction, and some of these factors are knownto oscillate with circadian rhythms. This study aimed to
explore a possible association of the genetic variability in
the circadian clock genes ARNTL ,CLOCK , and PER2 with
myocardial infarction in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus as an additional risk factor for myocardial
infarction. The study group consisted of 231 patients withmyocardial infarction and T2DM and a control group of 426
T2DM patients. Altogether, 8 SNPs were tested, three in
ARNTL gene (rs3789327, rs4757144 and rs12363415),
three in CLOCK (rs11932595, rs6811520 and rs13124436),
and two in PER2 (rs35333999 and rs934945). The
signiﬁcance of association for individual SNP was calcu-
lated to compare the allelic frequency and genotype
distribution in patients and control participants using the
Chi-Square test. After using Bonferroni correction signi ﬁ-
cant difference in the distribution of ARNTL rs12363415
polymorphism genotypes were found in patients withmyocardial infarction and T2DM in comparison to controls,
with a p-value of 1.42x10
-4and odds ratio equal to 7.37
(95% CI: 4.15 to 13.08). Other SNPs in ARNTL ,CLOCK ,
andPER2 genes were not signi ﬁcant additional risk factors
for myocardial infarction in T2DM patients. We provide
evidence that genetic variation in ARNTL gene might be anadditional risk factor for myocardial infarction in T2DM
patients.
I.Škrlec: None. J. Milić:None. I. Cilen šek:None. D.
Petrovič:None. B. Peterlin: None.
P05.18B
Clinical Utility of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
Panel Testing in Patients with a Clinical Suspicion of
Catecholaminergic Polymorphic VentricularTachycardia (CPVT)
E. H. Seppälä, I. Saarinen, J. Tallila, J. Hathaway,
S. Tuupanen, H. Turpeinen, T. Kangas-Kontio, J. Schleit,
J. Tommiska, E. Salminen, P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen,
M. Gentile, S. Myllykangas, J. Paananen, T. Alastalo,J. Koskenvuo
Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, FinlandCatecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia
(CPVT) is a rare, but potentially fatal channelopathy.Genetic testing may be used to con ﬁrm a diagnosis in
unclear cases and therefore, is increasingly being performed
in a heterogeneous patient population. This is a retro-spective review of 134 patients with clinical suspicion of
CPVT referred for genetic testing at Blueprint Genetics over
a 5-year period (2013-2018). Genetic test results werecompiled. A sub-analysis of diagnostic RYR2 variants
(location, segregation) was performed. A pathogenic (P)
or likely pathogenic (LP) variant was identi ﬁed in 27
patients (20.1%). Twenty patients (14.9%) had a diagnostic
ﬁnding in a CPVT-associated gene: 62.9% in RYR2 , 7.4 %
inCALM1 , and 3.7% in CASQ2 (biallelic). Four patients
(14.8%) had a P or LP variant in KCNQ1 ,KCNJ2 or
SCN5A and three (11.1%) had a P or LP variant in a
cardiomyopathy-associated gene ( DSG2, DSP orPLN). All
P/LP RYR2 variants were missense, except a deletion
encompassing exon 3. Parental testing was performed in 11/
17 cases where P/LP RYR2 variants were found; 8 (72.7%)
variants were de novo . Enrichment of P/LP RYR2 variants in
the four described hotspots (OR 50, 95% CI 29-85,
P<0.0001) was observed. In conclusion, 37% of patientswith a diagnostic test result had a clinically signi ﬁcant
variant in a gene other than RYR2 . Interestingly, 26% of
these patients had genetic diagnosis of a cardiomyopathy ora channelopathy other than CPVT. This study supports theAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1311utilization of broad NGS panels for patients with a clinical
suspicion of CPVT.
E.H. Seppälä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Tal-
lila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blue-
print Genetics. J. Hathaway: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Tuupanen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. H. Turpeinen: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Kangas-Kontio:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Tommiska: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Salminen: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S.
Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Paananen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T.
Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁ
cant;
Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P05.19C
Mutations in genes involved in MAPK pathway cause
lymphatic anomalies
D. Li
Center for Applied Genomics, Philadelphia, PA, United
States
Complex lymphatic anomalies include a variety of diag-
noses: lymphangiectasia, central conducting lymphatic
anomaly (CCLA), generalized lymphatic anomaly, kaposi-
form lymphangiomatosis, and Gorham Stout disease. Theoverlapping of diagnostic criteria for these disorders
suggests that a common pathway rather than a commongene is responsible for the various clinical syndromes. Upon
sequencing 45 such patients, we identi ﬁed seven pathogenic
variants in ﬁve genes encoding components of RAS/MAPK
signaling ( BRAF ,KRAS ,SOS1 ,RASA1 , and PTPN11 )i n
seven unrelated patients. Additionally, we identi ﬁed a
recurrent somatic missense mutation in a candidate gene,ARAF (c.640T>C:p.S214P), as the basis for CCLA in two
unrelated patients. ARAF encodes for serine/threonine-
protein kinase A-Raf. Little is known about ARAF apartfrom the enzyme being involved in MAPK pathway with no
previous involvement in lymphatic disease report. Primary
endothelial cell studies showed the mutation altered actinskeleton and VE-cadherin organization, which were fully
reversed by inhibition of MEK signaling. Functional
relevance of the mutation was also validated by recreatinga lymphatic phenotype in a zebra ﬁsh model, with rescue of
the anomalous phenotype using a MEK inhibitor. Sub-
sequent therapy of the lead proband with a MEK inhibitorled to dramatic clinical improvement, with remodeling of
the patient ’s lymphatic system with resolution of the
lymphatic edema, marked improvement in his pulmonaryfunction tests, cessation of supplemental oxygen require-
ments, and near normalization of daily activities. Taken
together, our work demonstrates the realization of precisionmedicine approach enabled through a novel genetic
discovery in a patient with lymphatic anomaly of a
previously unknown etiology.
D. Li: None.
P05.21A
Copy number variants detection by microarray and
multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation in
congenital heart diseases
O. Nagy
1, K. Szakszon2, D. Nagy3, G. Mogyorósy2,
B. Biro4, B. Nagy5, I. Balogh1, A. Ujfalusi1
1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,Debrecen, Hungary,
2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,
3Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary,4First Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary,5Department of Human Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen,
Hungary
Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are the most common
birth defects among life births, which could be presented as
isolated or syndromic with other congenital malformations.The etiology of CHD largely unknown, genetic and
environmental factors contribute to the disease. Recurrent1312copy number variants (CNVs) have been reported in the
pathogenesis of CHD. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the clinical utility of multiplex ligation-dependent probe
ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) and microarray analyses on isolated
and syndromic CHD cases and to explore the relationship
between identi ﬁed CNVs and CHD.
Materials and Methods: Cytoscan 750K array (Affy-
metrix) and MLPA SALSA P250 and P311 kits (MRC-
Holland) were used in the study. The identi ﬁed CNVs were
conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization. Results.
Eighteen prenatal samples, 16 isolated and 33 syndromic
patients with mild to severe CHD phenotype were studied.Prenatal and isolated CHD cases did not show pathogenic
CNVs. Clinically signi ﬁcant CNVs were detected in 7/33
(21%) syndromic CHD patients: del 22q11.2 (n =2), 8p23.1
duplication (n =2), deletion 5p (n =1), deletion 6q21-q22
(n=1), unbalanced translocation causing partial deletion of
4q34.3 and duplication of 6q25.1 (n =1).
Conclusion: The identi ﬁed genomic imbalances contain
genes that has been associated with human CHD before.
The present study demonstrates that using microarray andMLPA analysis increases the detection rate of causal CNVs
in individuals with syndromic CHD. This study was sup-
ported by the Ministry of National Economy, Hungary(GINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00039).
O. Nagy: None. K. Szakszon: None. D. Nagy: None. G.
Mogyorósy: None. B. Biro: None. B. Nagy: None. I.
Balogh: None. A. Ujfalusi: None.
P05.24D
Adipokine pro ﬁle of adipocytes isolated from different
fat depots of coronary artery disease patients
M. Sinitsky
1,2, Y. Dyleva1, E. Uchasova1, E. Belik1,
O. Gruzdeva1,3, A. Ponasenko1
1Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular
Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation,2Federal
Research Center of Coal and Coal Chemistry of SB RAS,Kemerovo, Russian Federation,
3Kemerovo State Medical
Academy, Kemerovo, Russian Federation
Introduction: Adipose tissue is interesting in the context of
its role in pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. Human
adipokinome consists of hundreds of molecules many ofwhich have not yet been well characterized and have
variable expression in different adipose depots.
Materials and Methods: We compared DPP4 ,LCN2 ,
NAMPT ,ITLN1 ,APLN and ADIPOQ mRNA levels in
adipocytes isolated from the biopsies of subcutaneous
(SCAT), epicardial (EAT) and perivascular (PVAT) adiposetissue obtained from 25 patients with coronary arterydisease. Gene expression signature was determined by RT-
qPCR with hydrolysis probes.
Results: We found that DPP4 and APLN mRNA
expression was signi ﬁcantly ( P<0.05) increased only in
adipocytes isolated from epicardial adipose tissue compared
to the subcutaneous fat. The ITLN1 gene was overexpressed
in epicardial adipose tissue compared to both subcutaneous
and perivascular tissues and expression of ADIPOQ gene
was reduced both in EAT and PVAT compared to SCAT.Moreover, APLN mRNA expression was positively corre-
lated with total and LDL cholesterol plasma level, and
DPP4 mRNA expression - with VLDL cholesterol con-
centration. We found no signi ﬁcant changes in LCN2 and
NAMPT mRNA level between studied adipose depots.
Conclusions: Adipocytes isolated from different adipose
depots are characterized by differential gene expression of
adipokines. EAT is of particular interest in the context of its
function, molecular and genetic mechanisms of regulationof the cardiovascular system and as a therapeutic target for
correction of adipose tissue-induced effects on health. This
work was supported by RSF grant No. 17-75-20026.
M. Sinitsky: None. Y. Dyleva: None. E. Uchasova:
None. E. Belik: None. O. Gruzdeva: None. A.
Ponasenko: None.
P05.26B
Cardiac arrhythmias at baseline predict a clinicallyrelevant genetic yield in idiopathic non familial DCM
affecting long term outcome
J. Verdonschot
1, M. T. H. M. Henkens1, A. G. Raafs1,
P. Wang1, J. J. Merken1, G. R. F. Claes1, I. P. C. Krapels1,
E. K. Vanhoutte1, A. van den Wijngaard1,
H. G. Brunner1,2, M. R. Hazebroek1, S. R. B. Heymans1
1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
Netherlands,2Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
Background: Current guidelines recommend genetic
analysis only in familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
patients without acquired disease. The genetic yield in so-called acquired and/or non-familial DCM remains largely
unknown.
Methods: This study included 689 DCM patients who all
underwent genetic evaluation using a 47 cardiomyopathy-
associated gene panel and had complete cardiac diagnostic
work-up including echocardiography, cardiac MRI, endo-myocardial biopsies and holter monitoring. Environmental
triggers were prede ﬁned as viral, in ﬂammatory, toxic,
electrical and systemic auto-immune disease.
Results: At least one etiology (genetic and/or environ-
mental) was found in 530 patients (77%) after completeAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1313diagnostic workup, of which 159 (23%) had a genetic
mutation. One in ﬁve of the DCM patients (n =90; 20%) had
a combination of a genetic and acquired (environmental)
trigger. All of the acquired triggers had a genetic yield
around 20%. Although familial DCM had a signi ﬁcant
higher yield of genetic mutations compared to non-familialDCM (43% versus 16%, p<0.001), pathogenic mutations
were still present in 1 of 6. In non-familial DCM patients
with arrhythmias at baseline without environmental trigger,the genetic yield was even 39%, comparable to the yield in
familial DCM (43%; p =0,17). Also, genetic DCM has a
worse prognosis compared to non-genetic DCM (Log-Rank=0.008), irrespective of familial history (Log-
Rank=0.29).
Conclusions: One in ﬁve DCM patients with an acquired
trigger and/or absence of familial history has an underlying
genetic mutation. Non-familial DCM patients with
arrhythmias and no clear etiology have a comparablegenetic yield compared to familial DCM.
J. Verdonschot: None. M.T.H.M. Henkens: None. A.G.
Raafs: None. P. Wang: None. J.J. Merken: None. G.R.F.
Claes: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. E.K. Vanhoutte:
None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. H.G. Brunner:
None. M.R. Hazebroek: None. S.R.B. Heymans: None.
P05.27C
A novel truncating mutation in DSP (Desmoplakin)
causes autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy
with variable penetrance
L. Camerota
1, V. Ferradini2, R. Petroni3,4, R. Monetta4,1,
S. Romano3, G. Ussia5, F. Sangiuolo6, F. Brancati1,4
1Medical Genetics Division, Department of Life, Health and
Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila,
Italy,2Department of Biomedicine and Prevention,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy,3Department
of Cardiology, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy,
4Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto
Dermopatico dell'Immacolata IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
5Facoltà Dipartimentale di Medicina e Chirurgia,
University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy,6Department
of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, L'Aquila, Italy
Background: Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (AC) is
mainly determined by mutations in desmosomal genes.
Approximately 75% of AC patients show bi-ventricularinvolvement and left-dominant forms are not uncommon.
Loss-of-function mutations in Desmoplakin ( DSP) cause a
form of AC often manifesting with severe arrhythmias andsudden cardiac death (SCD). Less is known about DSPmutations in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) regarding
(endo)phenotype, penetrance, and management.
Materials and Methods: A family with DCM and SCD
was referred to our cardiogenetics outpatient clinic. Accu-
rate genetic and cardiologic assessments were performed.
DNA sequencing was initiated in the proband using NGS(cardiopanel).
Results: A novel variant in DSP c.4639dupC was iden-
tiﬁed, absent in gnomAD, locus-speci ﬁc databases and
predicted as deleterious by dedicated software, affecting
cardiac-speci ﬁc isoform and leading to frameshift p.
(Gln1547ProfsTer80). The 60-year-old proband and herthree nieces (aged 32-45) were diagnosed with DCM and
ICD implanted. Five siblings (aged 25-61) had SCD. Seg-
regation analysis in asymptomatic relatives identi ﬁed two
mutated siblings (31 and 47 years): one presented an epi-
sode of acute myocarditis. Despite detailed cardiologic
evaluation, they did not meet current diagnostic guidelinesfor AC/DCM.
Conclusions: Loss-of-function DSP mutations cause
different phenotypes including AC and DCM. A diagnosticgrey zone between left-dominant AC and arrhythmogenic
DCM exists, indicating the need for updating current clas-
siﬁcation. Moreover, genotype-based de ﬁnition is warranted
to develop personalized management in patients/asympto-
matic-mutated subjects. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability
and lack of penetrance demand modi ﬁer variants in addi-
tional, yet unknown, genes or epigenetic factors.
Funding: Fondi Ricerca Premiale from University of
L’Aquila, Italy
L. Camerota: None. V. Ferradini: None. R. Petroni:
None. R. Monetta: None. S. Romano: None. G. Ussia:
None. F. Sangiuolo: None. F. Brancati: None.
P05.28D
Double heterozygosity in a group of patients with rarecardiovascular diseases
S. Josifovska
1,2, R. Vazharova3, L. Balabanski2,
M. Malinov2, A. Kaneva4, S. Panov1, M. Ganev5,
D. Toncheva5
1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics, Ss. Cyril and Methodius
University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former YugoslavRepublic of,
2Genome Centre, GARH Malinov, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,3Department of Biology, Medical Genetics and
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, So ﬁa University St.
Kliment Ohridski, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, National Heart Hospital, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria1314Introduction: Rare cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are
heterogeneous and this complicates their diagnosis. The
more complex forms of rare CVD tend to result from the
integrated effect of multiple genetic variants that create a
background of susceptibility requiring sometimes additional
factors for the disease to manifest. Whole exome, wholegenome and target sequencing offer new possibilities to
discover the complex etiology of such diseases. The aim of
this study was to identify genetic variants associated withthe rare CVD using next generation sequencing (NGS).
Materials and Methods: NGS with TruSight panels
(Illumina) was used to analyze DNA samples from 24patients with rare CVD: Long QT Syndrome, Tetralogy of
Fallot, Familial Hypercholesterolemia, suspected Marfan
Syndrome, Pathology of great vessels, Cardiomyopathiesand other.
Results: In 14 (58%) of the 24 patients, at least one
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant was found. Ofthose, in 8 patients we detected only one variant, in 3
patients there was a combination of two or more only
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants, and in 3 patients thecombination was of pathogenic/likely pathogenic and VUS.
Of the remaining 10 patients, in 5 (21%) patients, only VUS
were detected (3 with two VUS and 2 with one VUS) and in5 (21%) patients, we did not detect signi ﬁcant mutations.
Overall, in 9 (47%) of the patients with detected variants,
more than one variant was found indicating multiple het-erozygosity. In conclusion, NGS has a potential to detect
multiple heterozygosity in complex rare cardiovascular
diseases.
S. Josifovska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Bala-
banski: None. M. Malinov: None. A. Kaneva: None. S.
Panov: None. M. Ganev: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P05.29A
The causal relationship between dyslipidemia andcardiovascular disease using Mendelian randomization
E. Wan
1,T .W u2,W .W u1, S. Chen3, A. Yen3, Y. Lee4,
C. Tse5, T. Liu6, H. Chen7, M. Lin1
1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan,2Department of Public Health, Chung-Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan,3School of Oral
Hygiene, College of Oral Medicine, Taipei MedicalUniversity, Taipei, Taiwan,
4Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan,5Bureau of Health and Welfare, Lienchiang
County Government, Matsu, Taiwan,6Lienchiang County
Government, Matsu, Taiwan,7Institute of Epidemiology
and Preventative Medicine, College of Public Health,National Taiwan University, Taipei, TaiwanBackground: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is ranked as
the second leading causes of death in Taiwan. Dyslipidemia
is one of the risk factors for CVD. The LPL and APOE
genes were found to be involved in lipid metabolism. Many
studies uncovered the association between dyslipidemia and
CVD, however, conventional epidemiological studies maysuffer from un-measured confounders and reverse causality.
We aimed to elucidate the causal relationship between
dyslipidemia and CVD using Mendelian randomizationdesign.
Methods: A total of 1951 Chinese adults were recruited
from the Matsu community-based integrated healthscreening project during 2015-2017. Two SNPs ( LPL rs328
and APOE rs157580) were selected as the instrumental
variables. Both logistic regression and two-stage least-square instrumental variable (IV) regression were applied to
estimate the relationship between the lipid pro ﬁles
and CVD.
Results: We found rs328 was signi ﬁcantly associated
with decreased triglyceride levels ( β=-9.105, p =0.012) and
increased HDL-C levels ( β=1.317, p =0.037), but not with
LDL-C levels. The rs157580 was marginally associated
with increased LDL-C levels. We further found a sig-
niﬁcantly protective effect of LDL-C levels on cardiovas-
cular disease (OR =0.987, 95% CI =0.980-0.994), but not
with triglycerides, HDL-C and CVD. The IV analysis
revealed an increasing risk of LDL-C levels on cardiovas-cular disease by using rs157580 and allele score as the IVs
(rs157580: OR =1.028, 95% CI =1.018-1.038; allele score:
OR=1.028, 95% CI =1.019-1.038). Triglyceride and HDL-
C were also associated with cardiovascular disease.
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed the causal relationships
between dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease by usingAPOE rs157580 and allele score as the instrumental vari-
ables. Grant No: MOST 106-2314-B-010-020-MY3
E. Wan: None. T. Wu: None. W. Wu: None. S. Chen:
None. A. Yen: None. Y. Lee: None. C. Tse: None. T. Liu:
None. H. Chen: None. M. Lin: None.
P05.30B
Common atrium, atrioventricular canal defect/postaxial
polydactyly: a mild clinical subtype of Ellis-van Creveldsyndrome caused by compound heterozygosity for loss
of function and hypomorphic EVC mutations
F. Piceci Sparascio
1, M. C. Digilio2, A. Palencia-
Campos3,4, I. Torrente1, V. Guida1, J. Rosati5, A. D'Anzi5,
S. Briuglia6, P. Versacci7, B. Dallapiccola8, V. Ruiz-
Perez3,4, B. Marino7, A. De Luca1
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Ospedale Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,2Medical
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale PediatricoAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1315Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,3CIBER de
enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Insitituto de Salud Carlos
III, Madrid, Spain,4Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
de Madrid, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientí ﬁcas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain,5Cellular Reprogramming Unit, Ospedale Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo,
Italy,6Department of Human Pathology of Adult and
Childhood "Gaetano Barresi", Unit of EmergencyPediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy,
7Department of Pediatrics, Università Sapienza, Rome,
Italy,8Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division,
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy
Clinical expression of Ellis van Creveld syndrome (EvCS)
is variable with a classic form associated with homo-
zygous/compound heterozygous mutations in EVC and
EVC2 genes, and the milder Weyers acrodental dysostosis
linked to speci ﬁc heterozygous mutations in the last
coding exon of EVC2 . Additional transitional phenotypes
have been described, including patients with prevalentlycardiac and limb involvement, presenting with atrioven-
tricular canal defect with common atrium (AVCD-CA)
and postaxial polydactyly. We report on the results ofmolecular analysis of a family with vertical transmission
in father and daughter of AVCD-CA and postaxial
polydactyly. The father was compound heterozygous forthe known recessive p.Arg622* nonsense variant and the
novel p.Arg663Pro missense change in the EVC gene. His
affected daughter was compound heterozygous for thesame nonsense variant and the novel splice-site c.1316-
7A>G variant. Two additional unaffected sisters were also
examined. One was heterozygous carrier of the p.Arg622*variant, while the other was compound heterozygous for
both the p.Arg663Pro change and the c.1316-7A>G
variant. mRNA sequencing in the affected daughter ’s
ﬁbroblast showed that c.1316-7A>G resulted in the in-
frame insertion of 6 nucleotides between EVC exon 9 and
10, and that the expression of the p.Arg622* correspond-ing allele was greatly decreased. Consistently, western
blot analysis showed a residual amount of EVC protein in
the father's and daughter's ﬁbroblasts. Present results
suggest that p.Arg663Pro and c.1316-7A>G are hypo-
morphic EVC alleles that act as genetic modi ﬁers together
with a loss of function mutation to cause a milder clinicalsubtype of EvCS characterized by AVCD-CA and
postaxial polydactyly.
F. Piceci Sparascio: None. M.C. Digilio: None. A.
Palencia-Campos: None. I. Torrente: None. V. Guida:
None. J. Rosati: None. A. D'Anzi: None. S. Briuglia:
None. P. Versacci: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. V. Ruiz-
Perez: None. B. Marino: None. A. De Luca: None.P05.31C
Heritability and family-based GWAS analyses of the
circulating ceramide, endocannabinoid, and N-acyl
ethanolamide lipidome
K. McGurk, A. Nicolaou, B. KeavneyUniversity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Lipids of the endocannabinoid (EC), N-acyl
ethanolamine (NAEA), and ceramide (CER) classes are
potential novel biomarkers of coronary artery disease andtype-2 diabetes. Major-gene effects have been discovered
for certain lipid species, notably lipoprotein(a). We sought
to establish the heritability of EC, NAEA, and CER species,and identify DNA variants in ﬂuencing their concentrations
in plasma.
Materials and Methods: We undertook heritability
(QTDT, GCTA) and GWAS analyses (FaST-LMM) of 11
ECs and NAEAs, and 37 CERs in 1,016 plasma samples
from 196 British Caucasian families ascertained through ahypertensive proband, using targeted mass spectrometry
and Illumina 660W-Quad genotyping.
Results: NAEAs are more heritable than well-studied EC
anandamide (AEA) (h
2AEA=32-35%; P<5.80x10-11). 24-
46% of the variation in potential biomarker CER is due to
genetic factors (P<1.00x10-7). GWAS identi ﬁed associa-
tions with eQTLs of proteins in their metabolism (e.g.
FAAH; P NAEA DHEA <6.33x10-12, SPTLC3; P CERN(24)S
(18) <8.99x10-19) and novel loci implicated in cancer risk
and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (e.g. FBXO28; P CERN
(24)S(19)ratio <1.95x10-8, SULT1C4; P CERN(24)S(19)
<8.99x10-19). Two-sample Mendelian randomisation sug-
gests that a variant in FAAH (rs324420) in ﬂuencing the
level of plasma NAEAs (beta NAEA DHEA =0.39;
P<6.33x10-12) is causally associated with both obesity and
drug addiction.
Conclusions: We demonstrate for the ﬁrst time estimates
of heritability for this extended array of bioactive lipids,identify GWAS-signi ﬁcant SNPs associating with their
levels in circulation, and implicate the lipid species studied
here in cardiovascular disease, cancer, and drug addition.
K.M. is supported by a MRC Doctoral Award (MR/
K501311/1) and Travel Grant from The Company of
Biologists.
K. McGurk: None. A. Nicolaou: None. B.
Keavney: None.
P05.32D
A new zebra ﬁsh model for in vivo optical mapping of
cardiac action potentials1316D. Schepers1, E. Sieliwonczyk1, A. Schlaeppi2,
B. Vandendriessche1, E. Simons1, M. Alaerts1,
D. Knapen3, J. Huisken2, B. Loeys1
1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and
Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium,
2Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI, United
States,3Zebra ﬁshlab, Veterinary Physiology and
Biochemistry, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVI) allow
optical mapping of voltage changes and offer an alternativemethod for measuring alterations in cell membrane
potentials. Initially driven by the neuroscience ﬁeld, the
development of GEVIs has now found applications in thecardiovascular sciences as well. Thanks to these GEVIs, it
has become possible to image cardiac voltage dynamics at
the cellular level in vivo in translucent organisms such as
zebra ﬁsh. Unfortunately, up to now, the ﬂuorescent signal
of the cardiac voltage sensors used in zebra ﬁsh has been
very dim. For this reason, we developed a new stabletransgenic zebra ﬁsh model, expressing Ace2N-mNeon, a
next generation voltage sensor with brighter ﬂuorescence,
under the control of the myocardial speci ﬁc promoter myl7 .
Using Selective Plane lllumination Microscopy (SPIM), the
conduction of individual action potentials in the heart of 3
dpf zebra ﬁsh larvae can be visualized in vivo , allowing the
measurements of action potential duration and conduction
speed. Next, we will apply this new transgenic zebra ﬁsh
model to evaluate the pathogenicity of genetic variants ofunknown signi ﬁcance identi ﬁed in arrhythmia genes of
patients with inherited primary electrical diseases.
D. Schepers: None. E. Sieliwonczyk: None. A.
Schlaeppi: None. B. Vandendriessche: None. E. Simons:
None. M. Alaerts: None. D. Knapen: None. J. Huisken:
None. B. Loeys: None.
P05.33A
Diagnostic Yield of Genetic Testing in an UnselectedCohort of 1,376 HCM Patients
J. Koskenvuo, J. Hathaway, I. Saarinen, J. Tallila,
E. H. Seppälä, S. Tuupanen, H. Turpeinen, T. Kangas-
Kontio, J. Schleit, J. Tommiska, E. Salminen,
P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen, M. Muona, M. Gentile,V. Kytölä, S. Myllykangas, J. Paananen, T. Alastalo
Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, FinlandIntroduction: Genetic testing in Hypertrophic Cardiomyo-
pathy (HCM) is recommended by published guidelines.Genetic testing by NGS panels offers practical differential
diagnostic solution.Objective: Diagnostic yield in a heterogeneous cohort of
patients with a suspicion of HCM
Methods: A retrospective review of patients with a sus-
pected clinical diagnosis of HCM referred for genetic test-
ing at Blueprint Genetics between 2013 and 2018 was
undertaken. Variants classi ﬁed as pathogenic (P) or likely
pathogenic (LP) at the time of reporting were considered
diagnostic.
Results: Diagnostic yield was 26.2% (361/1,376). In
total, 373 P/LP variants were identi ﬁed including 363 var-
iants diagnostic for HCM whereas only 10 were diagnostic
for another type of cardiomyopathy based on clinical andgenetic interpretation ( DES, DSP, LMNA, TTN ). Approxi-
mately 86% (n
=320) of diagnostic variants (23.3% of all
tests) involved genes encoding the sarcomere. Seventeen Por LP variants (4.6% of variants and 1.2% of all tests) were
in RASopathy genes and thirteen P or LP variants (3.5% of
0.9% of all tests) were in metabolic/in ﬁltrative disease
genes. In addition, three patients with non-diagnostic ﬁnd-
ings for cardiomyopathy had P or LP variants in genes
linked to a channelopathy (RYR2, SCN5A) or neuro ﬁ-
bromatosis ( NF1).
Conclusions: The diagnostic yield of genetic testing in a
heterogeneous cohort of patients with a suspected diagnosisof HCM analyzed is lower than what has been reported in
well characterized patient cohorts. Importantly, 8% of all
diagnostic ﬁndings were in metabolic and RASopathy genes
which have signi ﬁcant systemic medical management
implications.
J. Koskenvuo: None. J. Hathaway: None. I. Saarinen:
None. J. Tallila: None. E.H. Seppälä: None. S. Tuupa-
nen: None. H. Turpeinen: None. T. Kangas-Kontio:
None. J. Schleit: None. J. Tommiska: None. E. Salminen:
None. P. Salmenperä: None. J. Sistonen: None. M.
Muona: None. M. Gentile: None. V. Kytölä: None. S.
Myllykangas: None. J. Paananen: None. T.
Alastalo: None.
P05.34B
Psycho-social impact of predictive genetic testing in
hereditary heart diseases (PREDICT Study)
C. Bordet
1, S. Brice2, C. Maupain1, E. Gandjbakhch1,3,
B. Isidor4, A. Palmyre5, A. Moerman6, A. Toutain7,
S. Odent8, A. Brehin9, L. Olivier Faivre10, C. Rooryck
Thambo11, E. Schaefer12, K. Nguyen13, D. Dupin
Deguine14, C. Rouzier15, P. Jouk16, M. Port Lys17,
I. Denjoy18, S. Staraci1, R. Mansouri1, M. Hebert1,
A. Bekhechi1, I. Raji1, V. Fressart19, F. Ader19,
P. Richard19, S. Tezenas du Montcel20,21, M. Gargiulo22,23,
P. Charron1,24Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 13171Referral Center for hereditary heart disease, Department
of Genetics, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,, Paris,
France,2INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Institut Pierre
Louis d ’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, F75013,
Paris, France,3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université
Paris 6, AssistancePublique-Hôpitaux de Paris, HôpitalPitié-Salpêtrière, ICAN, Département de Cardiologie,,
Parsi, France,
4Department of Genetics, Nantes University
Hospital,, Nantes, France,5Department of Genetics,
Ambroise Paré University Hospital,, Paris, France,
6Department of Genetics, Lille University Hospital, Jeanne
de Flandre Hospital,, Lille, France,7Department of
Medical Genetics, Tours University Hospital, Tours,
France,8Department of Medical Genetics, Rennes
University Hospital, Rennes, France,9Department of
Genetics, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized
Medicine, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France,
10Medical Genetics Unit, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon,
France,11Department of Medical Genetics, Bordeaux
University Hospital, Bordeaux, France,12Department of
Genetics, Strasbourg University Hospital, HautepierreHospital, Strasbourg, France,
13Department of Medical
Genetics, APHM, GMGF, Timone Hospital, Aix Marseille
University,, Marseille, France,14Department of Medical
Genetics, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France,
15Department of Medical Genetics, Université Côte d'Azur,
CHU, Inserm, CNRS, IRCAN, Nice, France,16Department
of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire
Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France,17Clinical Genetics
Unit, University Hospital, Pointe-à-Pitre UniversityHospital, Guadalupe Island,, Pointe à Pitre Guadeloupe,
France,
18Department of cardiology, Referral Center for
hereditary heart disease, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France,
19UF cardiogenetics, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,
Paris, France,20Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut
Pierre Louis d ’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, AP-HP,
Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Salpêtrière - Charles Foix,
Département de Santé Publique, F75013,, Paris, France,
21INSERM UMR-1136, Paris, France,22Institut of
Myologie, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,, Paris,
France,23Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre
Louis de Santé Publique, Medical Information Unit, PitiéSalpêtrière University Hospital,, Paris, France,
24Sorbonne
Université, INSERM, UMR_S 1166 and ICAN Institute for
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition,, Paris, France
Introduction: Hereditary heart diseases are most often
characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance anddelayed cardiac expression. Predictive genetic testing is
offered to asymptomatic relatives to allow targeted medical
care with early therapeutics in order to reduce the risk ofcomplications. The aim of this study was to evaluate thepsychological and socio-professional impact of predictive
genetic testing in hereditary heart diseases.
Patients and Methods: This multicentric French study
involved 20 expert centers in hereditary heart diseases. We
included 517 adult relatives (42.3±16.7 years, 60.6%
females) who performed predictive genetic testing (pro-spective study: N =264, retrospective study: N =253). The
opinion and experience were collected via auto-ques-
tionnaires, at various moments in the prospective study,with different items and validated scales (STAI and IES).
Results: In the prospective study, the main motivations
for performing the test were: “to remove doubt ”(65.3%),
“for children ”(64.0%), “to bene ﬁt from medical super-
vision ”(34.9%). A mutation was present in 39.4% of
relatives. No regret was expressed after testing (only 2.3%regrets). The result did not lead to a socio-professional
change or family relationship change in 60.7%. Among
those who had a change, it was perceived as unfavorable foronly 3%. The level of anxiety (STAI scale) increases before
the test result and decreased to return to baseline. Subjects
with depression history were more likely to develop anxietyat long term (p =0.004).
Conclusions: Our results show no or marginal adverse
psychological and socio-professional impact of genetictesting when performed by a team expert in predictive
testing.
C. Bordet: None. S. Brice: None. C. Maupain: None. E.
Gandjbakhch: None. B. Isidor: None. A. Palmyre: None.
A. Moerman: None. A. Toutain: None. S. Odent: None.
A. Brehin: None. L. Olivier Faivre: None. C. Rooryck
Thambo: None. E. Schaefer: None. K. Nguyen: None. D.
Dupin Deguine: None. C. Rouzier: None. P. Jouk: None.
M. Port Lys: None. I. Denjoy: None. S. Staraci: None. R.
Mansouri: None. M. Hebert: None. A. Bekhechi: None. I.
Raji: None. V. Fressart: None. F. Ader: None. P.
Richard: None. S. Tezenas du Montcel: None. M. Gar-
giulo: None. P. Charron: None.
P05.35C
Development of a fast and cost effective genetic
diagnostic method for familial hypercholesterolemia in
Sweden
K. Duvefelt1, E. Hagström2, E. Bachus3, V. Hamrefors3,
M. Rehnberg4, S. Romeo5, M. Linde1, P. Kiviluoma1,
B. Angelin1, P. Benedek1, J. Kere1, M. Eriksson1
1Karolinska University hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,3Skånes University
hospital, Malmö, Sweden,4Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden,5Gothenburg University, Gothenburg,
Sweden1318Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal
dominant disease causing elevated levels of low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol, carrying a high risk of premature
coronary heart disease such as myocardial infarction. The
prevalence of FH is approximately 1/250. There is an
obvious need for improving early detection and treatment ofFH, which is currently an underdiagnosed condition.
We aimed to characterize the disease-causing mutation
spectrum in Sweden, and to develop a cost-effective diag-nostics. This was done through iterative improvement of the
analytical strategy, consisting of (i) targeted mutation ana-
lysis using a panel based on Agena mass spectrometry-based genotyping; (ii) sequencing of samples failing to
show mutations; and (iii) redesign of the panel to include
new, recurrently found mutations.
To date, we have included 1,143 patients from 14 hos-
pitals across Sweden in a nationwide collaboration using a
panel of 113 pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutations in theLDLR ,PCSK9 andAPOB genes.
Dutch Lipid Clinical Network (DLCN) score was avail-
able for 482 patients in whom mutations were detected in27%. If restricted to patients with probable or de ﬁnite FH
(score ≥6; n=309) pathogenic mutations were detected in
35%. The two most prevalent mutations wereNM_000384.2(APOB):c.10580G>A(p.Arg3527Gln) and
NM_000527.4(LDLR):c.259T>G(p.Trp87Gly). In total, 38
different mutations were detected by the panel. 142 panelnegative samples were sequenced with the SEQPPRO-LIPO
method, yielding 15 additional mutations in 16 patients.
In conclusion, our FH-panel detected mutations in
approximately one fourth of Swedish patients with sus-
pected FH. The number was increased if analyses were
restricted to patients with high DLCN score.
Vinnova 2016-02972
K. Duvefelt: None. E. Hagström: None. E. Bachus:
None. V. Hamrefors: None. M. Rehnberg: None. S.
Romeo: None. M. Linde: None. P. Kiviluoma: None. B.
Angelin: None. P. Benedek: None. J. Kere: None. M.
Eriksson: None.
P05.36D
A novel candidate gene of familial hypertrophiccardiomyopathy with therapeutic potential
P. Phowthongkum, S. Tongkobpetch, K. Suphapeetiporn,
V. Shotelersuk
Faculty of Medicine, Bangkok, ThailandTNNI3K encodes cardiac troponin I-interacting kinase
(TNNI3K), forming homo-dimers or homo-oligomers andinvolving in the cardiac contractility regulation. Loss-of-
function mutations in TNNI3K can lead to dilatedcardiomyopathy (MIM616117). No TNNI3K mutations
have been found to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in
(HCM: MIM192600). We performed a 178 gene-panel
enriched and next-generation sequencing in 8 Thai families
with HCM. 8 pathogenic (P)/likely pathogenic (LP) variants
were found in 7 families ( MHY7(4) ,TPM1(2),TNNI2(1),
TTR(1)). One family harbored two variants in MYH7 and
TPM1 . The remaining family without identi ﬁed P/LP
variants was sent for whole-exome sequencing. Weidenti ﬁed a rare spliced TNNI3K (c.1178-2A>G) variant
in the 41-year-old male with severe eccentric HCM who
presented with syncope from ventricular arrhythmia. Hisasymptomatic 60-year-old father with apical HCM also
harbored this variant. The variant was observed once in the
ExAC database and once in our in-house Thai-exome
database (>2,000 cases). RNA analysis revealed an altered
splicing mRNA predicted to create a protein with only N-
terminal Ankyrin repeats without the kinase and the C-terminal serine-rich domain. Since the C-terminal serine
rich domain is an inhibitory domain, the identi ﬁed mutation
may represent a gain-of-function variant by diminishinginhibitory signal of the kinase domain. A previous study
expressing wild-type human TNNI3K in transgenic-mice
found that the mice had cardiac hypertrophy. TNNI3Kinhibitor which has undergone preclinical testing can serve
as a potential therapy for patients with HCM. In summary,
we report a family with a probably gain-of-functionmutation in TNNI3K , suggesting that TNNI3K is a new
disease gene for HCM.
P. Phowthongkum: None. S. Tongkobpetch: None. K.
Suphapeetiporn: None. V. Shotelersuk: None.
P05.37A
Circulating miRNAs pro ﬁling in diabetic patients with
ischemic heart disease
A. Bielska
1, M. Niemira1, A. Szalkowska1,
J. Raczkowska1, D. Ostrowski1, W. Bauer1,
P. Prokopczuk2, S. Dobrzycki2, A. Kretowski1,3
1Clinical Research Centre, Medical University of Bialystok,
Białystok, Poland,2Department of Invasive Cardiology,
Medical University of Bialystok, Bia łystok, Poland,
3Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok,Poland
Introduction: Due to a global increase of morbidity and
mortality with ischemic heart disease (IHD) in type 2
diabetic patients, there is an urgent need to identify of early
biomarkers, which would help to predict an individual riskof development of IHD. MiRNAs are small noncoding
RNAs which regulate gene expression and the last fewAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1319years appear as a key tool for understanding the
pathophysiology of IHD. Here, we postulate that circulating
serum-derived miRNA may serve as potential biomarkers
for early IHD diagnosis and help to identify diabetic
individuals with a predisposition to develop ischemic heart
disease.
Materials and Methods: We obtained serum samples
from 39 T2DM patients (22 with IHD and 17 free of
complications). The levels of 798 miRNAs were analysedusing NanoString nCounter Technology Platform. The
miRNA regulatory network analysis was performed using
the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software.
Results: Our data showed that 28 miRNAs (including
miR-615-3p, miR-1303, miRR-122-5p, miR-217) were
signiﬁcantly upregulated and 1 miRNA (miR-451a) was
downregulated in T2DM IHD patients compared to T2DM
patients without IHD (adj
p < 0.05). Based on the above all
miRNAs were classi ﬁed into four interactive signalling
networks. Targeted genes by the identi ﬁed miRNAs were
enriched in pathways associated with metabolic and cardi-
ovascular diseases, cardiac dysfunction and cardiovascularsystem development.
Conclusions: Taken together, our ﬁndings suggest that
circulating miRNAs might have a crucial role in thedevelopment of IHD in diabetic patients and may be used as
a potential for early diagnosis.
A. Bielska: None. M. Niemira: None. A. Szalkowska:
None. J. Raczkowska: None. D. Ostrowski: None. W.
Bauer: None. P. Prokopczuk: None. S. Dobrzycki: None.
A. Kretowski: None.
P05.38B
Association of polymorphisms in PDE4D, ACE andGP1BA genes with clinical characteristics in patients
with ischemic stroke and chronic cerebral ischemia
A. Ikonnikova
1, A. Gunchenko2, S. Galkin2,
A. Anisimova2, T. Nasedkina1
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2N.I. Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Ministry of Health of theRussian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: A large data has been accumulated about the
role of genetic factors in the development of cerebrovas-
cular diseases, but the identi ﬁed associations are often not
reproducible in replication studies and meta-analyses. Thismay be due to the multifactorial nature of this group of
diseases, the heterogeneity of pathogenic mechanisms, and
the ethnicity of patients. The work was aimed to investigatethe association of genetic polymorphisms with patient ’s
characteristics in well-de ﬁned clinical groups.Patients and Methods: The study included 81 patients
with chronic cerebral ischemia (without a history of stroke)
and 69 patients with ischemic stroke (IS). Genotyping was
performed using microarray to determine 21 SNPs in the
АСЕ , SERPINE1, FGB, F5, F7, F12, GP1BA, GPIIIa,
MTHFR, CYP11B2, PON1, PON2, NOS2, NOS3, PDE4D,HIFla, LTA, ALOX5AP genes. Stroke subtypes were
deﬁned according to TOAST criteria.
Results: In patients with chronic cerebral ischemia, the
TT genotype of the PDE4D (rs966221, SNP83C>T) was
associated with rapidly progressive arterial hypertension
(OR=6.22; 95%CI =1.9-20.8; p =0.0036). In patients with
IS the D allele of the ACE gene (rs1799752, I>D) and the
DD genotype were associated with cardioembolic subtype
of stroke (OR =2.67, 95%CI =1.23-5.8, p =0.02 and
OR=7.14, 95%CI =1.7-29.7, p =0.0057). In patients with IS
the C allele of the GP1BA gene (rs2243093, -5T>C) and
TC genotype were associated with large-artery athero-sclerosis subtype of stroke (brachiocephalic artery stenosis
>75% and large-artery occlusion) (OR =3.39, 95%CI =1.1-
10.2, p=0.03 and OR =4.44, 95% CI =1.3-15.5, p =0.023).
Conclusions: Detailed genetic analysis in the context of
clinical features of cerebrovascular disease will allow the
identi ﬁcation of signi ﬁcant associations.
A. Ikonnikova: None. A. Gunchenko: None. S. Galkin:
None. A. Anisimova: None. T. Nasedkina: None.
P05.39C
Apolipoprotein E e4 associates to age of ischemic stroke
onset but not to stroke outcome
C. Lagging
1,2, E. Lorentzen3, A. Pedersen1,2,
T. M. Stanne1, M. Söderholm4,5, J. M. Maguire6,7,
A. Lindgren4,5, C. Jern1,2
1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,2Department of Clinical
Genetics and Genomics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,Gothenburg, Sweden,
3Bioinformatics Core Facility,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,
4Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Neurology, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden,5Department of Neurology and
Rehabilitation Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden,6Faculty of Health, University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, Australia,7Hunter Medical Research
Centre, Newcastle, Australia
Introduction: APOE genotype is a candidate predictor for
stroke outcomes. We evaluated whether common APOE
alleles associate with ischemic stroke outcome, severity andage at onset, within the large multicenter Genetics of
Ischaemic Stroke Functional Outcome (GISCOME) study.1320Methods: This study comprises 6,165 ischemic stroke
cases with genotype data from SNP arrays. Baseline stroke
severity was scored according to the NIH Stroke Scale
(NIHSS). Functional outcome at 3 months was scored
according to the modi ﬁed Rankin Scale (mRS). We derived
common APOE allele status ( ε2,ε3,ε4) by combining
information from SNPs rs7412 and rs429358. Effects of
minor allele count ( ε4,ε2) on age at stroke, stroke severity
and outcome were estimated separately in comparison to themost common ε3/ε3 genotype.
Results: We found no evidence of a direct effect of ε4o n
outcome. There was, however, an inverse associationbetween ε4 allele count and age at stroke ( β-1.8,
P=0.00017). This association was signi ﬁcant in both sexes.
The ε2 allele was independently associated with poor
functional outcome (mRS>2) in men (odds ratio[OR]1.47,
P=0.008), but not in women (OR 0.87, P=0.44).
Conclusion: This is the largest meta-analysis on APOE
genotype and ischemic stroke outcome to our knowledge.
We found a lower age at stroke onset in ε4 carriers and a
worse functional outcome in male ε2 carriers. Even larger
studies are warranted to further investigate the effects of
APOE alleles on ischemic stroke outcome in different age
and sex strata.
Study funding: The Swedish Research Council, Swedish
Heart and Lung Foundation, Swedish State; ALF-
agreement.
C. Lagging: None. E. Lorentzen: None. A. Pedersen:
None. T.M. Stanne: None. M. Söderholm: None. J.M.
Maguire: None. A. Lindgren: D. Speakers Bureau/Hon-
oraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Bayer, BMS P ﬁzer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Bayer, Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMSPﬁzer, Reneuron. C. Jern: None.
P05.40D
Functional characterization of new missense and
intronic variants in LDLR
C. Rodríguez-Jiménez
1, N. Agra2, L. Reinares-garcía3,
C. Guijarro4, A. Carazo-Álvarez1, B. Gil Fournier5,
F. García-Iglesias6, C. Alonso-Cerezo7, J. Mostaza8,
S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa1
1Department of Genetics of metabolics diseases. Institute of
Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédicaen Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain,
2Vascular Malformations Section. Institute of Medical &
Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario LaPaz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid,
Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red deEnfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain,
3Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clínico San
Carlos, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,4Hospital
Universitario Fundacion Alcorcon, Madrid, Spain, Madrid,
Spain,5Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de
Getafe, (Madrid), Spain, Madrid, Spain,6Department of
Internal Medicine, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,
Madrid, Spain,7Department of Genetics, Hospital de La
Princesa, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain,8Lipid and
Vascular Unit, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, Madrid,
Spain
Introduction: About 70% of human plasma cholesterol
circulates as a component of low-density-lipoproteins
(LDL). Most LDL is cleared from the circulation throughthe hepatic LDL-receptor
(1). Reduction in activity or
number of LDLR gives rise to Familial hypercholester-
olemia (FH; MIM#143890). Early detection of patients withFH allows initiation of treatment, thus reducing the risk of
coronary heart disease. In this study we performed in vitro
characterization of new LDLR variants found in FH
patients.
Materials and Methods: DNA samples from FH patients
were analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) usinga customized panel of 198 genes. The LDLR missense
variants were generate into the expression vector
LDLR _NM_000527-Human-cDNA-GFPSpark ®-tag by site-
directed-mutagenesis and transfected in LDLR-de ﬁcient cell
line CHO-ldlA7
(2,3). Activity and expression of cell surface
LDLR were measured by ﬂow cytometry. LDLR expression
was detected by Western Blot and immuno ﬂuorescence. In
order to characterize the LDLR intronic variant, the RNA
extracted from patient´s peripheral-blood-mononuclear-cellswas analyzed by RT-PCR followed by Long-Range-PCR.
All transcripts were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Seven new variants at LDLR were character-
ized. The missense variants c.776A>G;p.(Tyr259Cys),
c.851G>A;p.(Cys284Tyr), c.1072T>G;p.(Cys358Gly)
showed signi ﬁcant differences in activity and expression
of LDLR regarding to the w ildtype(WT). The variants
c.2279C>T;p.(Thr760Ile) a nd c.2579C>A;p.(Ala860Glu)
did not showed any differences. The intronic variantc.2389+4A>G revealed impact on splicing of LDLR
resulting as pathogenic.
Conclusions: The functional in vitro characterization of
rare variants at the LDLR allow us to con ﬁrm the genetic
diagnosis of FH, avoiding the classi ﬁcation as “uncertain
signiﬁcant variants ”, and therefore, to allow for cascade
family screening.
C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. N. Agra: None. L.
Reinares-garcía: None. C. Guijarro: None. A. Carazo-
Álvarez: None. B. Gil Fournier: None. F. García-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1321Iglesias: None. C. Alonso-Cerezo: None. J. Mostaza:
None. S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None.
P05.41A
Divergent degradation pathways for corresponding
LDLR and VLDLR disease-causing mutants
P. Kizhakkedath, A. John, L. Al-Gazali, B. R. Ali
United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab
Emirates
Introduction: Misfolded proteins in the early secretory
pathway are mainly degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome
systems known as ER associated degradation (ERAD)which has been implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous
congenital disorders. Therefore, ERAD has been a promis-
ing target for therapy of such diseases. In this study wecompare and contrast the degradation behavior of equiva-
lent disease-causing mutations in LDLR and VLDLR, two
LDLR family receptors.
Materials and Methods: HRD1-SEL1L knockout (KO)
HEK293 cell lines have been generated using CRISPR/
Cas9. The missense mutants were generated by Quik-Change site-directed mutagenesis. The expressed proteins
were analyzed biochemically and by microscopy.
Results: We found that the disequilibrium syndrome-
causing VLDLR missense mutants (p.D487Y, p.D521H and
p.C706F) are retained in the ER whereas only p.D482H and
p.C667F of the LDLR corresponding mutants are retained.Two of the ER-retained VLDLR mutants were found to be
aggregation-prone leading to ER stress as measured by
spliced-XBP mRNA levels. However, there was no differ-ences between LDLR wild type and mutants with regard to
their aggregation status or ER stress. Treatment with inhi-
bitors of autophagy seemed to stabilize the degradation ofwild type receptors. In addition, p.C706F VLDLR mutant
stabilized during early phase of both proteasomal and
autophagy inhibition. Cycloheximide chase analysis inSEL1L-KO cells revealed that the HRD1-SEL1L complex
could be involved in the clearance of ER-retained VLDLR
mutants.
Conclusions: The downstream degradation and ER stress
induction behavior of ER-retained corresponding LDLR
and VLDLR mutants are divergent suggesting differentclearance mechanisms despite their structural similarities.
P. Kizhakkedath: None. A. John: None. L. Al-Gazali:
None. B.R. Ali: None.
P05.42B
Phenotype-driven strategy of DNA diagnostics inpatients with LVNC and different types of myocardium
remodelingM. Polyak
1, A. A. Bukaeva1, A. G. Shestak1,
O. V. Blagova2, L. B. Mitrofanova3, E. A. Mershina4,
Y. V. Frolova1, S. L. Dzemeshkevich1,
E. V. Zaklyazminskaya1,5
1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Sechenov First Moscow State Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation,3Federal Almazov
North-West Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg,Russian Federation,
4Medical Scienti ﬁc and Educational
Center of Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russian Federation,5Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is a
cardiomyopathy with causative genetic variants identi ﬁed in
more than 20 genes. It's often accompanied by other types
of myocardium remodeling. Several guidelines recommendDNA-diagnostics for LVNC patients but strategy remains
unclear. The aim of our study is to evaluate ef ﬁciency of
DNA-diagnostic in LVNC patients using gene panel (13candidate genes).
Materials and Methods: We observed 67 probands
diagnosed with LVNC. Deep phenotyping was performedincluding evaluation of cardiac remodeling (dilatation,
hypertrophy or isolated noncompaction). Genetic screening
by NGS (Ion Torrent) sequencing of 13 genes was per-formed for all patients. Sanger sequencing of additional
genes and whole exome sequencing (WES) were performed
if needed. Pathogenecity of genetic variants was analyzedaccording to ACMG Recommendations (2015). Results.
Overall 33 genetic variants in 30 probands (45% of cases)
were ascribed to III-V classes of pathogenicity: 12 variantswere classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic/pathogenic, and 21 - as
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance. Ef ﬁciency of DNA
diagnostic was 22.4% in whole cohort but it varied sig-niﬁcantly depending on cardiac remodeling. The highest
rate of V-IV class variants was found in “LVNC+cardiac
hypertrophy ”subgroup (53%). In subgroup “LVNC+car-
diac dilation ”variants of V-IV class were detected in 14%
of probands. We detected no mutations in isolated
LVNC cases.
Conclusion: Phenotype-driven strategy might be useful
for decision-making in LVNC patients. Screening of 13
genes might be cost-effective in “LVNC+cardiac hyper-
trophy ”subgroup. In patients with isolated LVNC/LVNC
and dilatation WES might be preferred. This work was
supported by RSF grant №16-15-10421
M. Polyak: None. A.A. Bukaeva: None. A.G. Shestak:
None. O.V. Blagova: None. L.B. Mitrofanova: None. E.
A. Mershina: None. Y.V. Frolova: None. S.L. Dze-
meshkevich: None. E.V. Zaklyazminskaya: None.1322P05.43C
Molecular analysis con ﬁrmed common ancestor of 10
Czech families with long QT syndrome carrying C926T-
KCNQ1 variant
I. Synková1,2, I. Valá šková1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2,
T. Novotný3,2, M. Bébarová4, I. Andr šová3,2,
A. Floriánová3, P. Vít5,2, R. Navrátil6
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital,
Brno, Czech Republic,2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic,3Department of Internal
Medicine and Cardiology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech
Republic,4Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic,5Department of
Pediatrics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic,
6Repromeda, Biology Park, Brno, Czech Republic
Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary
arrhythmic syndrome characterized by abnormal prolonga-
tion of QT interval, increased risk of ventricular arrhyth-mias, and sudden death. It is the most often diagnosed
hereditary arrhythmic disorder with prevalence 1:2000. The
KCNQ1 gene is one of the 3 major genes ( KCNQ1 ,KCNH2
and SCN5A ) which account for 75 % of the genetically
identi ﬁed LQTS cases. The same KCNQ1 mutation
c.926C>T (p.T309I) was identi ﬁed in 10 putatively
unrelated families.
Materials and Methods: 11 highly polymorphic short
tandem repeats (STR) markers were chosen for haplotypeanalysis in 10 families. Multiplex PCR and fragment ana-
lysis were performed to identify variant linked to the
mutation across families. Single nucleotide polymorphism(SNP) analysis was performed with HumanKaryomap-12
DNA Analysis Kit (Illumina) in one member of each
family. 6219 SNPs on p arm of chromosome 11 wereanalysed.
Results: The same haplotype was identi ﬁed in the nearest
region of the mutation spot in every family by STR analysisand then con ﬁrmed by SNP analysis, which also identi ﬁed
possible crossing-overs. The maximum size of the area
shared by all families is 658407 bp and contains the wholesequence of KCNQ1 gene. The maximum size of the area
shared by two families is 12633501 bp.
Conclusion: Allelic frequencies of identi ﬁed alleles in
STR markers in control population suggest that there is only
one common ancestor with mutation c.926C>T in the group
of families investigated in this study.
Supported by grant of the Ministry of health of the Czech
Republic: NV16-30571A.
I. Synková: None. I. Valá šková: None. R. Gaillyová:
None. T. Novotný: None. M. Bébarová: None. I.Andr šová: None. A. Floriánová: None. P. Vít: None. R.
Navrátil: None.
P05.44D
Novel LOX mutations in ﬁve probands with thoracic
aortic/arterial aneurysm and dissection with variableconnective tissue ﬁndings
M. Perik
1, I. Van Gucht1, A. Krebsova2, B. Diness3,
R. Zhurayev4, D. Adlam5, M. Kempers6, I. Luyckx7,
N. Peeters1, L. Van Laer1, A. Verstraeten1, B. Loeys1,6
1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium,2Department of Cardiology,
IKEM, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Clinical
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark,4Department of Clinical Pathology, Lviv
National Medical University after Danylo Halytsky, Lviv,
Ukraine,5Acute and interventional Cardiology, University
of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom,6Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,7Center of Medical Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University ofAntwerp, Anwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium
Loss-of-function variants in LOX, encoding lysyl oxidase,
were reported to cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and
dissection (TAAD). Using gene panel and exome sequen-
cing, we identi ﬁedﬁve additional probands carrying likely
pathogenic LOX variants, including three missense variants,
affecting highly conserved amino acids and absent from
gnomAD. The two stopcodons, (c.(351delC)) and p.(Gly149*), were identi ﬁed in males with type A dissection
at 19 and 51 years without family history. The ﬁrst proband
also suffered from splenic rupture, pneumothorax andvaricose veins whereas the second presented with ﬂat feet
and inguinal hernia surgery. A p.(Thr99Ala) missense
variant was found in a Marfan syndrome-like male withTAA. The second missense variant, p.(Met298Arg), was
discovered in 46 year old female presenting with left carotid
and prior coronary artery dissection. Interestingly, theidentical LOX variant previously segregated in ﬁve affected
members of a TAAD family. The woman presented skin
hyperelasticity with recurrent shoulder dislocations. Hermother is known with berry aneurysm, but not available for
genetic testing. The last missense variant, p.(Leu306Pro),
was found in a tall male with dilatation of the aorta sinusand ascendens with elective surgery at age 15. Family
history is signi ﬁcant for aortic dissection at paternal side of
the family. Segregation studies revealed the absence of p.(Leu306Pro) in unaffected mother. The latter two missense
variants are both located within the LOX catalytic domain.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1323Our data demonstrate that loss-of-function LOX variants
cause a wide spectrum of aortic and arterial aneurysmal
disease (including coronary artery dissection), combined
with connective tissue ﬁndings.
M. Perik: None. I. Van Gucht: None. A. Krebsova:
None. B. Diness: None. R. Zhurayev: None. D. Adlam:
None. M. Kempers: None. I. Luyckx: None. N. Peeters:
None. L. Van Laer: None. A. Verstraeten: None. B.
Loeys: None.
P05.46B
Left ventricular non-compaction and Ebstein anomalyin a patient with a variant in the sarcomere gene MYH7
I. Loddo, F. Barbera, G. Di Gesaro, D. Bellavia, E. La
Franca, G. Mamone, G. Gentile, F. Clemenza, D. Di
Carlo
IRCCS Mediterranean Institute for Transplantation and
Advanced Specialized Therapies (ISMETT), Palermo, Italy
Introduction: Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is
a rare hereditary cardiomyopathy, resulting from abnormal
embryonic myocardial development.
The most prevalent Congenital Heart Disease in LVNC is
Ebstein anomaly (EA), characterized by apical displacement
and partial fusion of the septal and posterior lea ﬂet of the
tricuspid valve with the ventricular septum.
Materials and Methods: We present the case of 46 years
old male affected by EA and LVNC.
MR imaging shows an Ebstein anomaly, in which the
origin of the septal lea ﬂet is displaced downward into the
right ventricle, dividing it into a proximal atrialized anddistal ventricularized (true or functional ventricle) cham-
bers. These features, in addition to annular dilatation, result
in valve regurgitation and right chambers dilatation. MRimaging shows the coexistence of left ventricle hyper-
trabeculation with spongy appearance of the myocardium
consistent with left ventricular non-compaction.
Genetic counselling was offered. He reported that his
nephew was affected by EA and she died at three months of
age. Molecular analysis by NGS target panel was performedto our patient.
Results: We identi ﬁed a heterozygous missense variant
(c.728G>A) p.Arg243His in MYH7 gene, classi ﬁed as
pathogenic according to ACMG Guidelines.
This variant was originally reported in an individual with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, has subsequently beenreported in multiple individuals with LVNC and in an
individual with isolated EA.
Conclusions: The association between EA, LVNC and
mutations in MYH7 , seems to represent a subtype of Ebsteinanomaly with autosomal dominant inheritance and variable
penetrance.
NGS target resequencing represents a valuable tool in
cardiomyopathy genetic testing.
I. Loddo: None. F. Barbera: None. G. Di Gesaro:
None. D. Bellavia: None. E. La Franca: None. G.
Mamone: None. G. Gentile:
None. F. Clemenza: None.
D. Di Carlo: None.
P05.47C
Genetic screening of cardiovascular genes in a heart
transplantation cohort
E. Cuesta-Llavona1, J. Gómez1, B. Díaz-Molina1,
J. Lambert1, B. Alonso1, R. Lorca2, J. Reguero1, E. Coto1
1Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain,
2Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Madrid, Spain
Heart failure is considered one of the main causes of death
in developed countries. Moreover, it is a disease that is
inﬂuenced by multiple genetic risk factors and the only
effective treatment when there are no medical or surgicalalternatives would be heart transplant. The aim of this study
is to genetically characterized patients whose undergo heart
transplantation. We sequenced 65 transplanted patients for acomprehensive cardiovascular gene panel of 209 genes,
using Ion semiconductor chips technology in a Ion
GeneStudio S5 Sequencer. We identi ﬁed 29 patients with
rare variants (either not described or gnomAD frequency ≤
0.0001). Twenty-two of them were single carriers (75.9%),
six harbor two variants (20.6%), and in one case weidenti ﬁed three variants (3.5%). Regarding to its patho-
genicity, eight patients were carriers of at least a variant
classi ﬁed as pathogenic by ClinVar database, six as variants
of unknown signi ﬁcance, and the others have no classi ﬁca-
tion. The reason for transplantation of these carriers was due
to ischemic heart disease in 48% of cases, 29% to dilatedcardiomyopathy, 4% valvular, 4% hypertrophic and 15% to
another type of heart disease. In conclusion, we have
identi ﬁed a signi ﬁcant percentage of new or rare genetic
variants in genes that would be associated with heart
diseases in a heart transplanted cohort. Therefore, detection
of these variants might be helpful to achieve an earlydiagnosis of these diseases. Further co-segregation and
functional studies have to be performed in order to
accomplish an accurate variant classi ﬁcation.
E. Cuesta-Llavona: None. J. Gómez: None. B. Díaz-
Molina: None. J. Lambert: None. B. Alonso: None. R.
Lorca: None. J. Reguero: None. E. Coto: None.1324P05.48D
Analysis of endothelin-1 ( EDN-1 ) UTR regions
C. Solarat1, M. Lago-Docampo1, A. Baloira2, D. Valverde1
1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain,2Servicio de Neumología,
Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Pontevedra, Vigo,
Spain
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a disease
characterized by an increase of secretion and deregulation
of Endothelin-1 (ET-1). This peptide is secreted by theendothelium of blood vessels and promotes vasoconstric-
tion. We carried out the characterization of the UTR regions
of endothelin-1gene ( EDN-1 ), in order to determine
common variations that may modulate disease outcome.
The analysis was carried out in 60 patients with different
classes of PAH, testing a fragment of 2 kb for both UTRregion. An in silico analysis was performed to evaluate
binding transcription factors. Luciferase assay was done to
evaluate in vitro the SNP in ﬂuence in gene expression. Data
revealed the presence of a deletion in the promoter region
(rs397751713), while a transversion in the 3 ’UTR region
was found (rs2859338). The distribution of the genotypefrequencies in our PAH patients were: for rs397751713: A/
A: 0.08; A/-: 0.27; -/-: 0.66; for rs2859338: A/A: 0.15; A/G:
0.60; G/G: 0.25. Variations are located in a KLF4 bindingsequence and a vitamin D receptor binding sequence
respectively. Both transcription factors are related to PAH
development. In conclusion, these SNPs in the UTR regionsofEDN1 are related with gene expression levels, as we
measured higher expression rates for patients with A/A and
G/G genotype. Moreover, we hypothesized that this over-expression is due to the inability of KLF4 and vitamin D
receptor to attach the target sequence and to regulate the
expression of EDN1 , as KLF4 is probe to avoid PAH when
present and vitamin D is an anti-hypertrophic factor.
C. Solarat: None. M. Lago-Docampo: None. A.
Baloira: None. D. Valverde: None.
P05.49A
Rare ABCC8 variants identi ﬁed in Spanish pulmonary
arterial hypertension patients
M. Lago Docampo
1,2,3, J. Tenorio4,5, C. Pérez Olivares6,
I. González Hernández7,8, P. Escribano Subías6,9,
G. Pousada2, A. Baloira10, M. Arenas1,2,3, P. Lapunzina4,5,
D. Valverde1,2,3
1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain,2IIS Galicia Sur, Vigo,
Spain,3Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CINBIO),
Vigo, Spain,4Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular
(INGEMM), Madrid, Spain,5Centro de InvestigaciónBiomédica en Red de enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Madrid, Spain,6Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain,
7Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain,8Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain,9Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de EnfermedadesCardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain, Madrid,
Spain,
10Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de
Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain
Introduction: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a
rare and fatal disease consisting in the obliteration of thepulmonary precapillary arteries, leading to right heart
failure and death.
Methods: We used targeted panel sequencing with a
custom panel (HAP v1.2) including 21 genes in 318 PAH
patients from the Spanish registry (REHAP). After detecting
several changes in ABCC8 we carried out a functional
analysis by minigene assay to evaluate possible splicing
variants (8/10). Lastly, we used protein modeling by
homology (Phyre2) to evaluate the pathogenicity of thechanges at protein level assessing its stability with
MODELLER.
Results: After validation, we identi ﬁed ten variants in the
ABCC8 gene that had never been related to PAH:
c.298G>A:p.(Glu100Lys), c.2176G>A p.(Ala726Thr) and
c.3238G>A:p.(Val1080Ile) were classi ﬁed as neutral.
c.2422C>A:p.(Gln808Lys) and c.3976G>A:p.(Glu1326-
Lys) were classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic. c.1429G>A:p.
(Val477Met), c.1643C>T:p.(Thr548Met), c.2694 +1G>A,
c.3288_3289del:p.(His1097ProfsTer16) and c.3394G>A:p.
(Asp1132Asn) were classi ﬁed as pathogenic. Minigenes
conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of c.3394G>A:p.
(Asp1132Asn) inducing an exon skipping, and the correct
processing of c.298G>A:p.(Glu100Lys) and c.1643C>T:p.
(Thr548Met). But they were inconclusive for 5 variants,none of the encoded exons transcribed correctly even in the
wild type. Protein modeling of the possible outcomes
revealed that amino acid changes would not alter proteinstability. The skipping of exons 20, 27 and 32 would yield
unstable proteins, while skipping of exon 22 would barely
affect stability.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed ten variants in ABCC8 ,
conﬁrmed experimentally the pathogenicity of c.3394G>A:
p.(Asp1132Asn) and bioinformatically c.3288_3289del:p.(His1097ProfsTer16). Protein stability analysis allowed us
to predict the possible outcomes of the uncon ﬁrmed splicing
variants.
M. Lago Docampo: None. J. Tenorio: None. C. Pérez
Olivares: None. I. González Hernández: None. P.
Escribano Subías: None. G. Pousada: None. A. Baloira:
None. M. Arenas: None. P. Lapunzina: None. D.
Valverde: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1325P05.51C
Familial hypercholesterolemia: functional
characterization of new variants in PCSK9
S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa1, C. Rodríguez-Jiménez1, E. Sánchez-
Nieves1, A. Carazo-Álvarez1, F. Arrieta2, L. Reinares-
García3, P. Martínez-Hernández4, R. Cañas5, J. Mostaza6
1Department of Genetics of metabolics diseases. Institute of
Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédicaen Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain,
2Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition. Unit Hospital
Ramón y Cajal. Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal,Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria
(IRyCIS), E-28034. CIBER de Fisiopatología de la
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain,
3Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clínico San
Carlos, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,4Department of
Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid,Spain., Madrid, Spain,
5Department of Internal Medicine,
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain,
6Lipid and Vascular Unit, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9
(PCSK9 ) is a post-transcriptional regulator of the Low-
density-lipoprotein receptor(LDLR). “Lost_of_function_-
variants ”atPCSK9 has been related with lower LDL-
cholesterol while the “gain_of_function_variants ”result in
autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia-3 (FH3,
OMIN#603776) whose prevalence is 0,1-2%(1,2).
Materials and Methods: The DNA samples from
patients clinically classi ﬁed as having probable or de ﬁnitive
familial hypercholesterolemia(FH), were analysed by NGSusing a customized panel of 198 genes. The new variants
found in PCSK9 were generated into the expression vector
PCSK9 _NM_174936.3-Human-cDNA-GFPSpark ®-tag by
site directed mutagenesis. The constructs were transfected
in HepG2 cells. We measure both activity and expression of
LDLR by ﬂow cytometry in order to determine the impact
ofPCSK9 variants.
Results: In silico study showed six variants in PCSK9:
c.289C>T;p.(Arg97Cys), c.1130C>G;p.(Thr377Ser),c.1495C>T;p.(Arg499Cys), c.1633A>G;p.(Ser545Gly),
c.1978G>A;p.(Asp660Asn), c.1987A>G;p.(Thr663Ala)
with potential effect in PCSK9. The variant c.1978G>A;p.(Asp660Asn) had a 15% decreased level of internalization
of LDL and 20% decreased level of LDLR expression
regarding WT-PCSK9. The rest of variants had the same orincremented level of LDL internalization and expression of
LDLR regarding WT-PCSK9.Conclusions: The functional characterization of variants
inPCSK9 has allowed us to classify the variants avoiding
the“uncertain signi ﬁcance ”variants and thus to con ﬁrm the
genetic diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia. The results
suggest that the variant c.1978G>A;p.(Asp660Asn) could
explain the raised level of LDL-c in the patient being a newcase of FH3 due to gain-of-function variant in PCSK9.
S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez:
None. E. Sánchez-Nieves: None. A. Carazo-Álvarez:
None. F. Arrieta: None. L. Reinares-García: None. P.
Martínez-Hernández: None. R. Cañas: None. J.
Mostaza: None.
P05.52D
Polygenic risk information for coronary artery disease -P5.ﬁFinHealth
M. M. Marttila
1, T. Paajanen1, H. Marjonen1, N. Kallio1,
A. Haukkala2, H. Kääriäinen1, K. Kristiansson1,
M. Perola1,3
11 National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland,22 Faculty of Social Sciences, University of
Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland,33 Research Program
for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: We have tested how polygenic risk scores
(PRS) for coronary artery disease (CAD), type 2 diabetes
and venous thromboembolism affect the risk of diseasewithin the following ten years in participants from a
population-based study FINRISK. We will also utilize
NMR metabolomic risk information in disease prevention.
Materials and Methods: Based on follow-up data from
national health care registries we modelled PRS in whole
genome genotyped population based FINRISK cohorts withmultiple registry follow-up for incident cases (N =21726)
using Cox regression models. We modelled the impact of
genetic and traditional risk factors on a risk of diseasewithin the next 10 years.
Results: We compared the CAD classi ﬁcation of Cox
regression model with traditional risk factors and polygenicadditive model with 6,6M variants. From basic model risk
class 10-20% PRS reclassi ﬁed 205 participants to highest
>20% risk class. In FINRISK participants risk for CAD washigher for men and smoking adds to risk of disease in all
PRS classes. Risk for disease increases with BMI being
highest in BMI class 30-35.
Conclusions: The validation showed that adding PRS to
the traditional risk factors signi ﬁcantly changed the risk
enabling reclassi ﬁcation of as many as 17% of the partici-
pants. PRS and metabolic risk information are returned to
volunteering participants through an internet portal.1326Changes in life style are followed up using questionnaires
through the portal and the morbidity will be collected
through health registers. P5 study is a pilot for P6 which
will recruit 200 000 participants and study 10-20 diseases.
M.M. Marttila: None. T. Paajanen: None. H. Marjo-
nen: None. N. Kallio: None. A. Haukkala: None. H.
Kääriäinen: None. K. Kristiansson: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Negen oy. M. Perola: None.
P05.53A
A heterogeneous molecular background of polymorphicventricular tachycardia in pediatric patients with
channelopathy and normal heart
M. Pelc
1, P. Kowalski1, A. Madej-Pilarczyk1,
D. Jurkiewicz1, J. Kosi ńska2, M. Rydzanicz2,
M. Posadowska3,K .P r ęgowska3, P. Stawi ński2,4,
M. Brzezi ńska3, E. Ciara1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1,
P. Halat-Wolska1, D. Siestrzykowska1,R .P łoski2,
K. Chrzanowska1, K. Bieganowska3
1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children ’s Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of Medical
Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland,
3Department of Cardiology, The Children ’s Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,4Department of Genetics,
Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw,
Poland
Introduction: Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (PVT)
is a life-threatening arrhythmia concomitant with the genetic
disorders related to myocyte transmembrane ion channeldysfunction called “channelopathies ”. They comprise long
and short QT syndromes (LQTS/SQTS), Brugada syn-
drome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventriculartachycardia (CPVT). Although nearly 30 genes have been
associated with arrhythmogenic channelopathies so far, the
mutation detection rate in syndromes other than LQTS isrelatively low (~15-65%), therefore their molecular pro ﬁle
remains largely unknown.
Patients and Results: A 62-gene panel comprising
known and candidate genes was used for NGS screening of
12 patients with PVT-associated channelopathy. In 8
patients we identi ﬁed 4 known and 6 novel, likely patho-
genic variants in KCNH2 ,RYR2 andSCN5A . Additionally,
rare variants of unknown signi ﬁcance in AKAP9, KCNA5,
KCNH2, KCNT1, MYH6, SCNN1A, TRDN, TTN were
found in 6 cases. Interestingly, in one CPVT patient two
novel RYR2 variants inherited from healthy parents co-
occured, suggesting recessive pattern of inheritance. In twoother patients diagnosed with PVT and LQTS possibility ofdigenic inheritance or genetic synergism, associated with
changes in RYR2 andKCNH2 , has been postulated.
Conclusions: PVT-related channelopathies remain a
diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. Phenotypic expression
and/or variable penetration observed in the disease may
result from the con ﬂuence of defects in different genes
encoding or modulating ion channels ’function. NGS
technology provides foundation to better understanding of
the genetic pro ﬁle, phenotype-genotype correlations and
etiopathological mechanisms of PVT. Improved detection
of risk factors will in ﬂuence genetic counseling and ther-
apeutic decision-making, preventing severe consequences,like sudden cardiac death.
Partially supported: CMHI-M31/18.
M. Pelc: None. P. Kowalski: None. A. Madej-Pilarc-
zyk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. J. Kosińska: None. M.
Rydzanicz: None. M. Posadowska: None. K. Pręgowska:
None. P. Stawi ński: None. M. Brzezi ńska: None. E.
Ciara:
None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. P.
Halat-Wolska: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. R.
Płoski: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. K.
Bieganowska: None.
P05.54B
RNF213 is a causative gene for pulmonary arterial
hypertension and is associated with poor clinical
outcomes
H. Suzuki1, M. Kataoka1, T. Hiraide1, M. Yamada1,
T. Uehara1, T. Takenouchi1, N. Hirose1, S. Gamou2,
K. Fukuda1, K. Kosaki1
1Keio University, Tokyo, Japan,2Kyorin University, Tokyo,
Japan
Introduction: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is
characterized by a strong genetic component. About 30% of
patients with idiopathic/heritable PAH have variants in
BMPR2 . The causative genes, if any, in the remaining 70%
of patients have yet to be clari ﬁed. Since we reported 2
unrelated patients with homozygosity for RNF213 p.
Arg4810Lys who had Moyamoya disease and severepulmonary hypertension in 2016, we suspected RNF213
would be causative gene for PAH.
Method: We performed whole-exome sequencing for 76
patients (19 males, 57 females) with idiopathic PAH who
had been negative for BMPR2 and other known pathogenic
gene mutations.
Result: We identi ﬁedRNF213 p.Arg4810Lys in a het-
erozygous state in 7 (9.2%) of the 76 PAH patients. Since
the minor allele frequency for the p.Arg4810Lys is 0.77%in the normal Japanese population, individuals who are
heterozygous for the p.Arg4810Lys might be predisposed toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1327PAH. From a therapeutic standpoint, patients with the
RNF213 p.Arg4810Lys were low responders to PAH-
speciﬁc vasodilators. The event-free rate of death or lung
transplantation was signi ﬁcantly poorer in RNF213 p.
Arg4810Lys variant carriers than in BMPR2 variants car-
riers (5-year event-free rate since the introduction of pros-taglandin I2 infusion, 0% vs. 93%, P<0.001).
Conclusion: We demonstrated that nearly 10% of
patients with PAH were heterozygous for the RNF213 p.
Arg4810Lys. Documentation of an RNF213 p.Arg4810Lys
might provide clinically relevant information when select-
ing pharmacologic interventions.
Grant references: This work was supported by
KAKENHI from the MEXT, a grant from the Medical
Department Collaborative Project of Kyorin University, anda grant from AMED (17kk0205002h0002) in Japan.
H. Suzuki: None. M. Kataoka: None. T. Hiraide: None.
M. Yamada: None. T. Uehara: None. T. Takenouchi:
None. N. Hirose: None. S. Gamou: None. K. Fukuda:
None. K. Kosaki: None.
P05.55C
Customized massive paralleled sequencing panel for
diagnosis of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
J. A. Tenorio
1, P. Arias1, I. Hernández2, N. Ochoa3,
E. Granda1, P. Navas4, G. Gómez-Acebo1, N. Gallego1,
PAH Spanish consortium, P. Lapunzina1, P. Escribano3
1INGEMM, Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Universitario
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain,3Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain,4Hospital
Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Diagnosis of Pulmonary Arterial Hyperten-
sion (PAH) is challenging due to phenotypic overlappingand variable expressivity. Current classi ﬁcation based on
clinical features, does not re ﬂect the underlying molecular
proﬁling of these groups, and patients from different groups
can share clinical features that could be associated with their
response. The advance in the massive paralleled sequencing
technologies has allowed describing several new genesrelated to PAH, improving diagnosis ratio and a better
clinical characterization Thus, our aimed was to address the
molecular diagnosis of patients with any form PAH
Material and Methods: 318 patients were included in
the analysis. 21 gene NGS custom panel was designed the
sequencing was performed with a MiSeq. Custom scriptwas developed to annotate and ﬁlter the variants.
Results: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were
found in 13% of the patients with a 14% of variants ofunknown signi ﬁcance. Interesting, we have found variants
in patients with connective tissue disease (CTD) andcongenital heart disease (CHD). In CTD, we have found
one pathogenic mutation and four VUS and, and for CHD
two pathogenic variants and 6 VUS. In addition, in a small
proportion of patients (0,93%) digenic mode of inheritance
was detected.
Conclusions: These results highlight the importance of
the genetic screening of PAH and allow to detect variants in
PAH-associated forms not described previously. Molecular
conﬁrmation of the clinical suspicious is mandatory in cases
with clinical overlapping and to perform a properly man-
agement and follow up of the patients. Grants FIS-PI15/
02012 Actelion unrestricted grant FCHP-grant
J.A. Tenorio: Other; Signi ﬁcant; Actelion. P. Arias:
None. I. Hernández: None. N. Ochoa: None. E. Granda:
None. P. Navas: None. G. Gómez-Acebo: None. N. Gal-
lego: None. P. Lapunzina: None. P. Escribano: C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or
other in-kind support); Signi ﬁcant; Actelion.
P05.57A
A case report of recessive restrictive cardiomyopathycaused by a novel mutation in cardiac troponin I
(TNNI3 )
M. P. Pantou
1, P. Gourzi1, A. Gkouziouta2, I. Armenis2,
C. Zygouri3, P. Constantoulakis3, S. Adamopoulos2,
D. Degiannis1
1Molecular Immunopathology and Histocompatibility Unit,
Molecular Genetics Facility, Kallithea-Athens, Greece,
2Heart Failure, MCS and Transplant Unit, Onassis Cardiac
Surgery Center, Kallithea-Athens, Greece,3Department of
Molecular Genetics, BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A., Athens,Greece
Introduction: Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare cardiac
disease, for which several genes including TNNT2 ,MYPN ,
FLNC and TNNI3 have been associated with its
familial form.
Materials and Methods: The index case and her rela-
tives underwent full cardiological assessment. Genetic
analysis of the index case was performed using Illumina'sTrusight Cardio sequencing panel and Sanger sequencing
was used to screen members of the family for the presence
of the reported mutation.
Results: Here we describe a female proband with a
severely manifested restrictive phenotype leading to heart
transplantation at the age of 41 who was found homozygousfor the novel TNNI3 mutation: NM_000363.4:c.586G>C, p.
(Asp196His). Her parents were third-degree cousins origi-
nating from a small village and although they were foundheterozygous for the same variant they displayed no
symptoms of the disease. Her older sister who was also1328found heterozygous was asymptomatic. Her twin sister and
her brother who were homozygous for the same variant
displayed a restrictive and a hypertrophic phenotype,
respectively.
Conclusion: These observations point to a recessive
mode of inheritance reported for the ﬁrst time for this
combination of gene/disease.
M.P. Pantou: None. P. Gourzi: None. A. Gkouziouta:
None. I. Armenis: None. C. Zygouri: None. P. Con-
stantoulakis: None. S. Adamopoulos: None. D.
Degiannis: None.
P05.58B
Theﬁrst Belgian SCN5A founder mutation:
establishment of an iPSC-cardiomyocyte model toidentify genetic modi ﬁers
M. Alaerts
1, A. Nijak1, E. Simons1, E. Sieliwonczyk1,
D. Schepers1, B. Vandendriessche1, E. Van
Craenenbroeck2, J. Saenen2, A. Labro3, D. Snyders3,
P. Ponsaerts4, B. Loeys1,5
1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and
Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp (Edegem), Belgium,
2Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital,
Antwerp, Belgium,3Laboratory for Molecular Biophysics,
Physiology and Pharmacology, Department of BiomedicalSciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,
4Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Vaccine and
Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp,Antwerp, Belgium,
5Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
Introduction: The SCN5A gene encodes the α-subunit of
the voltage-gated cardiac sodium channel Na v1.5. Muta-
tions are detected in 20% of the patients with Brugada
syndrome (BrS), an inherited cardiac arrhythmia that
predisposes to sudden cardiac death (SCD). We haveidenti ﬁed a loss-of-function SCN5A founder mutation
(c.4813 +3_4813 +6dupGGGT) in 23 different Belgian
families. We recruited 89 mutation carriers and their clinicalspectrum ranges from completely asymptomatic to palpita-
tions, syncopes and SCD. This provides us with a unique
patient cohort to study modi ﬁers that play a role in this
variable expressivity and we decided to create patient-
speciﬁc induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived
cardiomyocytes (CM) as a model for further investigations.
Materials and Methods: Dermal ﬁbroblasts from a skin
biopsy of two patients with different phenotypic severity
and two unrelated control individuals were reprogrammedusing Sendai viral vectors. The resulting iPSCs were vali-
dated using immunostaining, RT-qPCR and embryoid bodyformation, and for each individual three iPSC clones were
established. For differentiation to iPSC-CMs we followed
two published protocols and evaluated the cells using
immunostaining and patch-clamp experiments.
Results: Optimization of the methods resulted in robust
patient and control iPSC-CM models. The patient cellsdisplayed a reduced sodium current compared to the control
iPSC-CMs.
Conclusion: We established iPSC-CM models for a
unique Belgian SCN5A founder mutation displaying
remarkable variable expressivity. Further experiments
including transcriptomics, whole-genome sequencing,electrophysiological and functional investigations will
enable us to identify genetic modi ﬁers and unravel their
mechanism of action. This will hopefully stimulate thedevelopment of novel drugs for cardiac arrhythmias.
M. Alaerts: None. A. Nijak: None. E. Simons: None. E.
Sieliwonczyk: None. D. Schepers: None. B. Vanden-
driessche: None. E. Van Craenenbroeck: None. J. Sae-
nen: None. A. Labro: None. D. Snyders: None. P.
Ponsaerts: None. B. Loeys: None.
P05.59C
Clinical and genetic data of 151 individuals from 58unrelated families with SMAD3 mutations
B. Chesneau
1,2, T. Edouard2, Y. Dulac2, H. Colineau3,4,
N. Hanna5, N. Chassaing1, S. Julia1, G. Jondeau5,
J. Albuisson6, P. Khau Van Kien7, J. Plaisancié1,2
1Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de
Toulouse, Toulouse, France,2Centre de Référence du
syndrome de Marfan et des syndromes apparentés, Hôpitaldes Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,
3Department of Epidemiology, Health Economics and
Public Health, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse,France,
4LEASP UMR1027, INSERM, Université Toulouse
III, Toulouse, France,5Centre de référence pour le
syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bichat, Faculté Paris Diderot,
LVTS INSERM U1148, Paris, France, Paris, France,
6Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de
ToulouseAP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou,
Département de Génétique, Service de Médecine Vasculaire
et Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares,Paris, France,
7Service de génétique médicale, Centre
Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Nîmes, Nîmes,
France
Pathogenic variants in SMAD3 are mainly responsible for a
thoracic aortic disease, characterized by aneurysms anddissections, which has a major impact in terms of morbidity
and causing early mortality. These vascular damages areAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1329associated with multisystemic signs including premature
osteoarthritis. SMAD3 encodes one of the canonical TGF- β
pathway members whose defect is involved in connective
tissue disorders such as Loeys-Dietz syndrome and
represents a rare cause (2%) of familial thoracic aneurysms
and dissections. Clinical variability and incomplete pene-trance are commonly associated with pathogenic SMAD3
variants. This prompted us to review all the individuals for
which a SMAD3 mutation was identi ﬁed in our Reference
Centre and to compare these with published cases, to
determine any genotype-phenotype correlation associated
with mutations of this gene. Here, we report clinical andgenetic data from 20 new cases from 8 families from our
Reference Centre. After a complete review of the literature,
we collected a total of 49 unique variants of different nature,from 151 individuals of 58 unrelated families, including
missense, truncating and splicing variants. This report
conﬁrms the absence of correlation between the mutation
type and the phenotype severity and highlights the
important inter and intra familial clinical variability and
incomplete penetrance described with SMAD3 mutated
patients. Thus, this report brings additional data for the
absence of genotype-phenotype correlation of SMAD3
mutations and the need to explore in more detail the effectsof potential modifying factors that could in ﬂuence the
phenotype.
B. Chesneau: None. T. Edouard: None. Y. Dulac:
None. H. Colineau: None. N. Hanna: None. N. Chassa-
ing: None. S. Julia: None. G. Jondeau: None. J. Albuis-
son: None. P. Khau Van Kien: None. J. Plaisancié: None.
P05.60D
Clinical utility of FLNC variants identi ﬁed in 3 young
sudden cardiac arrest victims/survivors for clinical
management of their at-risk relatives
P. Votýpka
1, P. Norambuena1, M. Macek Jr.1,
A. Krebsová2
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty
of Medicine, Charles University and Motol, Prague 5,
Czech Republic,2Department of Cardiology, Institute for
Clinical and Experimental Medicine (IKEM), Prague,
Czech Republic
Introduction: Mutations in FLNC gene were initially
related to muscular dystrophy and myo ﬁbrillar myopathy
but more recently, variants in FLNC were reported to cause
familial cardiomyopathies in the absence of skeletal muscle
defects. Truncating mutations in FLNC cause an over-
lapping phenotype of dilated cardiomyopathy or arrhyth-mogenic cardiomyopathy while missense mutations are
associated with familiar hypertrophic cardiomyopathy andmight also play an important role in cases of unexplained
sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young subjects.
Materials and Methods: We investigated the cohort of
Czech cardiac arrest (CA) survivors/victims by performing
massively parallel sequencing using a custom-made panel
comprising 229 cardiac conditions-related genes (Nimble-Gen/Illumina). Detected variants were validated by Sanger
sequencing, including their familial segregation and classi-
ﬁed according to ACMG.
Results: We have identi ﬁed variants in FLNC gene in 3
cases. In 2/3 cases the rare variant NM_001458.4 (FLNC):
c.102G>A p.(Trp34*) was found in non-related Czechsubjects (26 years old male CA victim and 16 years old
female CA survivor). NM_001458.4 (FLNC):c.1732G>T p.
(Gly578Cys) in CA victim, where this variant was coex-istent with probable causative variant in TTN gene.
Conclusion: Both, truncating and missense mutations in
the FLNC gene might be associated with SCA and
demonstrate the clinical utility of genetic testing in at-risk
family members. The aim of our study is to increase the
usage of genetic analysis in post mortem investigations ofSCD in the young cases in order to improve clinical man-
agement of relatives at risk in the Czech Republic. Sup-
ported by IP00064203/6003; LM2015091; CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_013 and AZV - NV18-02-00237.
P. Votýpka: None. P. Norambuena: None. M. Macek
Jr.:None. A. Krebsová: None.
P05.61A
Determination of disease-associated genes and gene-setsin Tetralogy of Fallot
R. Manshaei
1, M. S. Reuter1,2, B. A. Mojarad3,
G. Pellecchia2, M. Zarrei2, R. Chaturvedi1,4,
A. S. Bassett5,6,7,8, R. Kim1,9,10, D. Merico2,11
1Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research, Cardiac Genome
Clinic, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada,2The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Program in
Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,4Labatt Heart Centre,
Division of Cardiology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada,5Clinical Genetics Research
Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,Toronto, ON, Canada,
6Division of Cardiology, Toronto
Congenital Cardiac Centre for Adults at the Peter Munk
Cardiac Centre, Department of Medicine, UniversityHealth Network, Toronto, ON, Canada,
7The Dalglish
Family 22q Clinic for Adults with 22q11.2 Deletion
Syndrome, Department of Psychiatry, and Toronto GeneralResearch Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
ON, Canada,
8Department of Psychiatry, University of1330Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,9Division of Clinical and
Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada,10Fred A. Litwin Family Centre in
Genetic Medicine, University Health Network, Department
of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,
11Deep Genomics Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada
Introduction: Genes and pathways are analyzed for excess
of ultra-rare truncating and missense variants in Tetralogyof Fallot using a binomial test comparing observed variation
rates to background de-novo mutation rates. This method
doesn ’t require matched controls.
Materials and Methods: Since original background
mutation rates were estimated for de-novo variants, we
applied a scaling factor to obtain new probabilities P' =k*P;
factor k was computed so that the number of predicted and
observed ultra-rare variants match. We applied the same
method pooling expected probabilities and observed var-iants by pathway, to boost power. We addressed the pro-
blem of gene-set correlations by using a greedy-step-down-
aggregation approach; and computed a sampling-basedFDR only for aggregated gene-sets. We tested gene-sets
derived from Gene Ontology and pathways, and MPO
annotation of human orthologs in mouse.
Results: By applying this method to genes predicted
haploinsuf ﬁcient, we found signi ﬁcant genes: FLT4 (BH-
FDR~0%), NOTCH1 (BH-FDR~0.5%), and etc. For GeneOntology and pathways, we found the VEGF and related
pathways (FDR~0%, including FLT4,KDR, ⋯), Cardiac
Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Differentiation, and relatedpathways (FDR~0.08%, including NOTCH1 gene, ⋯). For
MPO terms, we found abnormal vitelline vascular remo-
deling and related pathways (FDR~0%, including FLT4,KDR,FOXO1, ⋯), delayed heart looping and related
pathways (FDR~0.05%, including NOTCH1 gene, ⋯).
Conclusions: FLT4,KDR,FOXO1, and NOTCH1 genes
were in line with manual gene curation ﬁndings. Also,
pathways results con ﬁrm manual curation ﬁndings which
support dysregulated VEGF signaling as a novel mechan-ism contributing to the pathogenesis of TOF. Funded by
Ted-Rogers Centre for Heart Research, and CIHR (MOP-
89066).
R. Manshaei: None. M.S. Reuter: None. B.A.
Mojarad: None. G. Pellecchia: None. M. Zarrei: None.
R. Chaturvedi: None. A.S. Bassett: None. R. Kim: None.
D. Merico: None.
P05.62B
Pediatric patients with DCM have lower than expected
mutation rate in the TTN gene
V. Mikhailov
1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1,2, A. Bukaeva1,
N. Kotlukova2,3, I. Povolotskaya4, S. Dzemeshkevich11Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation,
3Bashlyaeva Pediatric City Hospital, Moscow, Russia,
Moscow, Russian Federation,4Centre of Genetics and
Reproductive Medicine “Genetico ”, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is
has the prevalence of 1:250, and at least one-third of all the
cases are inherited. According to various studies focused on
the adult patients, mutations in the TT Ngene accounts 10-
30% of DCM cases. The mutation rate in the TTN gene, the
characteristics of manifestations and their prognostic
signiﬁcance in childhood have not been studied.
Aim: To determine TTN mutation rate in children with
DCM and the relevance of including this gene in the DNA
diagnostic protocol for pediatric DCM.
Materials and Methods: Complete clinical and instru-
mental examination of 36 DCM
patients was conducted in cardiology centres. Genetic
study had included sequencing based on the IonTorrent ™
platform of the TTN isoform N2BA (25 isolated cases) and
whole exome sequencing trios on the Illumina platform (11family cases).
Results and discussion: The group included 36 probands
diagnosed with DCM before 18 years (average age: 6.5years). The sex ratio (M:F) was 23: 8. The only likely
pathogenic truncating variant p.Arg33703*in the TTN gene
was found in a 16-year-old male proband out of 36 (3%).Apparently, TTN-dependent forms of DCMs manifest later
at a young or more mature age.
Conclusion: These results do not support the TT Ngene
as the ﬁrst line of DNA diagnostics for DCM in the
pediatric group. Further research is needed to compare the
representation of mutations in the TTN gene in different age
groups of DCM patients.
This study was supported by grant of Russian Research
Foundation 16-15-10421
V. Mikhailov: None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None. A.
Bukaeva: None. N. Kotlukova: None. I. Povolotskaya:
None. S. Dzemeshkevich: None.
P05.63C
Large-scale genetic study provides new insights intogenetics and etiology of varicose veins
A. S. Shadrina
1,2,3, S. Z. Sharapov1,2, T. I. Shashkova1,4,5,
Y. A. Tsepilov1,2
1Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,2Institute of Cytology and Genetics,
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Institute of ChemicalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1331Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,4Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology,
Moscow, Russian Federation,5A.A. Kharkevich Institute for
Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Varicose veins are a common pathology of
lower extremities. Although heredity is a well-known risk
factor for varicose veins, genetic architecture of thiscondition is still poorly understood.
Materials and Methods: This study is a genome-wide
association study with deep in-silico functional follow-upanalysis. Summary statistics for 408,455 European-ancestry
individuals were provided by the Gene ATLAS and the
Neale Lab projects.
Results: Seven loci associated with the risk of varicose
veins were identi ﬁed that explain 10% of the SNP-based
heritability. In six of them, we prioritized the most likelycausal genes CASZ1 ,PIEZO1 ,PPP3R1, EBF1 ,STIM2 , and
HFE . Gene set enrichment analysis revealed gene categories
related to abnormal vasculogenesis. Summary data-basedMendelian Randomization analysis followed by the Het-
erogeneity in Dependent Instruments test showed pleio-
tropic effects on body mass-, fat-, blood- and bloodpressure-related traits. Genetic correlation analysis con-
ﬁrmed known epidemiological associations between VVs
and deep venous thrombosis, weight, rough labor, andstanding job, and found a genetic overlap with multiple
novel traits, including height, pain, educational attainment,
ﬂuid intelligence, walking pace, smoking, and gonarthrosis.
Mendelian randomization analysis revealed causal effects of
plasma levels of MICB and CD209 proteins and anthro-
pometric traits such as height, weight, waist and hipcircumference.
Conclusions: Our results provide novel insight into the
genetic underpinnings of varicose veins and their etiology.Prioritized genes and identi ﬁed proteins can be good can-
didates for future functional studies. The study was sup-
ported by the Russian Science Foundation [Project No 17-75-20223].
A.S. Shadrina: None. S.Z. Sharapov: None. T.I.
Shashkova: None. Y.A. Tsepilov: None.
P06
Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders
P06.03B
Farber disease (acid ceramidase de ﬁciency):
demographic and diagnostic data from the ﬁrst-ever
natural history studyE. Sundberg
1, B. Magnusson1, C. R. Ferreira2, C. Grant2,
J. Mitchell3, P. Harmatz4, N. O. Mungan5, F. D. Bulut5,
C. Lampe6, N. Guelbert7, N. Arslan8, B. Makay8,
R. D. Puri9, S. Bijarnia-Mahay9, L. Selim10, I. Gamal el
Din10, S. Kapoor11, M. DiRocco12, S. Ozen13, E. D. Batu13,
G. Gokcay14, M. Torcoletti15, J. Kara ﬁlidis16, A. Solyom17
1Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
2Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC,
United States,3Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal,
QC, Canada,4UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland,
CA, United States,5Cukurova University Hospital, Adana,
Turkey,6HSK Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, Germany,
7Children's Hospital of Cordoba, Cordoba, Argentina,
8Dokuz Eylul University Hospital, Izmir, Turkey,9Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India,10Cairo University
Children's Hospital, Cairo, Egypt,11Lok Nayak Hospital
and Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India,
12Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy,13Hacettepe
University, Ankara, Turkey,14Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey,15University of Milan, Milan, Italy,16Enzyvant,
Cambridge, MA, United States,17Enzyvant, Basel,
Switzerland
Introduction: Farber disease is a rare lysosomal storage
disorder caused by mutations in both alleles of the ASAH1
gene. The resulting de ﬁciency of the lysosomal enzyme acid
ceramidase, and accumulation of the pro-in ﬂammatory
sphingolipid ceramide, causes a broad spectrum of
symptoms and disease severity which may delay diagnosisor lead to misdiagnosis. The ongoing study described here
is the ﬁrst comprehensive, systematic clinical study of the
natural history of Farber disease.
Methods: The Observational and Cross-Sectional Cohort
Study of the Natural History and Phenotypic Spectrum of
Farber Disease (NCT03233841) is designed to collect ret-rospective and prospective data including demographics,
clinical presentation, phenotype, and diagnostic history of
patients diagnosed with Farber disease who have or havenot undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT), along with speci ﬁc prospective clinical evaluations
in living patients.
Results: From November 2017 to December 2018, 42
patients (25 living, 17 deceased) have been enrolled in the
study. The average age of the living patients is 9 years(range 1 to 28 years). Average time from onset of ﬁrst
symptoms to diagnosis is 2 years (range < 1 to 12 years).
Patient countries of birth include Afghanistan, Argentina,Canada, Egypt, Germany, India, Iraq, Italy, Mexico, Swe-
den, Syria, Turkey, and the USA.
Conclusions: Patients representing the breadth of the
phenotypic spectrum of Farber disease, from rapidly pro-
gressive (severe), to slowly progressive (attenuated) have1332been enrolled from 15 centers (9 countries). Demographic
data and numbers of patients enrolled indicate that Farber
disease is likely not as rare as previously thought.
E. Sundberg: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. B. Magnus-
son: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Enzyvant. C.R. Ferreira: None. C.
Grant: None. J. Mitchell: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. P.
Harmatz: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col-
laborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Enzyvant. N.O. Mungan: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Enzyvant. F.D. Bulut: None. C.
Lampe: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Enzyvant. N. Guelbert: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Enzyvant. N. Arslan: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Enzyvant. B. Makay: B. Research Grant (principal inves-
tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. R.D.
Puri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Enzyvant. S. Bijarnia-Mahay:
None. L. Selim: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. I. Gamal el
Din: None. S. Kapoor: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. M.
DiRocco: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Enzyvant. S. Ozen: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Enzyvant. E.D. Batu: None. G. Gokcay: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Enzyvant. M. Torcoletti: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. J.
Kara ﬁlidis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Enzyvant. A. Solyom: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Enzyvant.P06.04C
Lysosomal storage, neurodegeneration, and albinism
due to effects of a de novo CLCN7 mutation on
lysosomal acidi ﬁcation
E. Nicoli1, M. Weston2, M. Hackbarth1, A. Becerril2,
A. Larson3, W. M. Zein4, P. R. Baker II3, J. D. Burke5,
H. Dorward5, M. Davids1, Y. Huang1, D. R. Adams1,6,
P. M. Zerfas7, D. Chen8, T. C. Markello1,6, C. Toro1,6,
G. Elliott9,M .V u10, U. Undiagnosed Disease Network11,
W. Zheng10, L. Garrett9, C. J. Tifft1,6, W. A. Gahl1,6,5,
D. L. Day-Salvatore12, J. A. Mindell2,M .C .V .
Malicdan1,6,5
1National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH and NIH
Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Of ﬁce of
the Director, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
2Membrane Transport Biophysics Section, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH,
Bethesda, MD, United States,3Department of Pediatrics,
Section of Genetics, University of Colorado School ofMedicine, Aurora, CO, United States,
4Ophthalmic
Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,5Human
Biochemical Genetics Section, National Human Genome
Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
6Ofﬁce of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome
Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
7Diagnostic and Research Services Branch, Of ﬁce of
Research Services, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
8Division of Hemapathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
United States,9Embryonic Stem Cell and Transgenic
Mouse Core, National Human Genome Research Institute,NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
10National Center for
Translational Science, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,
11NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States,12Department of
Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Saint Peter ’s
University Hospital,, New Brunswick, NJ, United States
Lysosomes rely on the maintenance of an acidic luminal pH
for optimal function. The active accumulation of protons is
driven primarily by V-ATPase, but luminal acidi ﬁcation
also requires a neutralizing ion movement. Chloride has
been proposed to provide this counterion through the
transporter ClC-7, encoded by CLCN7 . Individuals with
loss-of-function CLCN7 mutations develop osteopetrosis; in
contrast, here we describe two unrelated children with an
identical pathogenic de novo variant in CLCN7 without
osteopetrosis but instead showing a pleotropic syndrome,
including cutaneous albinism, developmental delay, hepa-
tosplenomegaly, lysosomal storage, cellular accumulationof large intracellular vacuoles, and no osteopetrosis. The
mutation, c.2144A>G; p.Tyr715Cys, increases ClC-7-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1333mediated chloride ﬂux, decreases lysosomal pH and
increases the size and number of intracellular vacuoles in
the patients ’ﬁbroblasts, with a similar phenotypic spectrum
in mice carrying an equivalent mutation. The cellular
hyperacidity and cellular phenotype were rescued in vitro
by treatment with the alkalinizing agent, chloroquine,emphasizing the role of ClC-7 in regulating lysosomal pH.
E. Nicoli: None. M. Weston: None. M. Hackbarth:
None. A. Becerril: None. A. Larson: None. W.M. Zein:
None. P.R. Baker II: None. J.D. Burke: None. H. Dor-
ward: None. M. Davids: None. Y. Huang: None. D.R.
Adams: None. P.M. Zerfas: None. D. Chen: None. T.C.
Markello: None. C. Toro: None. G. Elliott: None. M. Vu:
None. U. Undiagnosed Disease Network: None. W.
Zheng: None. L. Garrett: None. C.J. Tifft: None. W.A.
Gahl: None. D.L. Day-Salvatore: None. J.A. Mindell:
None. M.C.V. Malicdan: None.
P06.06A
Biallelic disruption of SDHC leads to a novel
presentation of mitochondrial complex II de ﬁciency
S. I. M. Alsters
1, S. N. van der Crabben1, Q. Wais ﬁsz1,
L. P. van der Heuvel2, R. J. Rodenburg2, M. S. van der
Knaap3
1Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
2Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders (NCMD) at
the Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University MedicalCenter, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Amsterdam UMC, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Child Neurology,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Succinate dehydrogenase complex (i.e.
complex II) de ﬁciency is a rare mitochondrial disorder. So
far, in three out of the four nuclear encoded proteins
composing succinate dehydrogenase ( SDHA ,SDHB , and
SDHD ), and in one of its assembly factor genes ( SDHAF1 ),
biallelic disruption has been shown to cause complex II
deﬁciency with a leukoencephalopathy as central clinical
presentation. For the fourth SDH-gene composing succinatedehydrogenase, SDHC , biallelic disruption has not been
reported, as of yet.
Methods and Results: Here we describe the clinical and
molecular analysis of two siblings with biochemically
conﬁrmed complex II de ﬁciency, caused by compound
heterozygous variants in SDHC (c.31C>T; p.(Arg11Cys)
and c.202T>C; p.(Ser68Pro)). Segregation analysis supports
the recessive pattern of inheritance: in none of four healthy
siblings tested both variants were present. One patient had asevere neurological handicap and died of respiratory failure
at the age of 11 years. The other sibling was found to beaffected at prenatal testing; pregnancy was ended. Inter-
estingly, neuroimaging in the ﬁrst patient showed pro-
gressive cerebral atrophy but not the typical white matter
abnormalities seen in previously described complex II
deﬁcient patients. This might point towards a distinct fea-
ture of complex II de ﬁciency caused by SDHC disruption,
compared to complex II de ﬁciency caused by disruption of
the other SDH-genes and SDHAF1 .
Conclusion: Here we report for the ﬁrst time two cases of
complex II de ﬁciency caused by biallelic disruption of
SDHC , emphasizing the importance of screening all SDH-
genes in patients with (or suspected of) complex IIdeﬁciency.
S.I.M. Alsters: None. S.N. van der Crabben: None. Q.
Wais ﬁsz: None. L.P. van der Heuvel: None. R.J.
Rodenburg: None. M.S. van der Knaap: None.
P06.07B
Screening & Diagnosis of Congenital Metabolic
Disorders using Mass Spectrometry in India: 15 Years ’
Experience with Issues & Challenges
U. P. Dave
MILS International India & Haffkine Institute, Mumbai,
India
Introduction: Most congenital metabolic disorders cause
severe pathological sequel, such as mental retardation,
sudden infantile death or other irreversible mental/motor
disabilities. The dilemma for a clinician is overlapping
symptoms in majority of amino, organic & fatty acid
disorders like failure to thrive, seizures, vomiting, poorfeeding, metabolic acidosis, lethargy, and developmental
delay. Hence, a need of metabolic test to cover a large
spectrum of disorders in one test.
Materials and Methods: The urinary metabolic pro ﬁling
to cover more than 140 metabolic abnormalities was
developed for screening the 5880 patients. The con ﬁrmed
diagnosis was by gas chromatography /mass-spectrometry
or mutational analysis.
Results: The 48 % (2856 of 5880 cases) were diagnosed
to have metabolic abnormality. Amino and organic acido-
pathies accounted highest as a major cause of mortality and
morbidity. Overall, low birth weight (34%), convulsions(33%), premature birth (27%), acidosis, refusal to feed
(13%) and respiratory distress (13%) were recorded, with
consanguinity, history of mental retardation and death ofearlier sibs as other high-risk genetic factors. This high-risk
screening indicated that which metabolic disorders are more
frequent in Indian population and a need of strategic plan-ning for newborn screening at affordable cost.1334Conclusions: The method used for diagnosis covered a
large spectrum of metabolic disorders in a shortest time with
cost-effective approach & was found signi ﬁcant in a
resource constraint Indian scenario. Our experience & data
will be demonstrated emphasizing genetic counselling &
prenatal mutational diagnosis in few illustrative cases alongwith issues & challenges while implementation of the study.
U.P. Dave: None.
P06.08C
cDNA structure analysis revealed a novel CTNS
mutation
V. Serzhanova
1, A. Filatova1, S. Papizh2, M. Skoblov1,3
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Research Institute of Pediatrics and Pediatric
Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation,3School of
Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok,
Russian Federation
Introduction: Cystinosin, encoded by the CTNS gene, is a
carrier protein responsible for the export of cystine out of
the lysosome. Its de ﬁciency leads to cystinosis, an
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder. Here, we
report a patient with Infantile Nephropathic type of
cystinosis (INC).
Materials and Methods: Total RNAs from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of participants and primary ﬁbro-
blasts were extracted by the standard Trizol-based method.The cDNA structure analysis was performed by electro-
phoresis (EP) following Reverse Transcription PCR (RT-
PCR) and Sanger sequencing.
Results: The cDNA structure analysis of all exons of the
CTNS revealed homozygous loss of 4th and 5th exons. On
the DNA level we con ﬁrmed 9 kb deletion, spanning region
from 3
rdto 5thintrons. In order to identify the inheritance
pattern we analyzed the pro-band's mother's CTNS gene
both on the cDNA and the DNA levels. Mother was foundto be heterozygous for the same mutation.
Conclusions: For INC diagnostics we showed advantages
of cDNA sequencing versus DNA sequencing. First of all,in case of some genes, such as CTNS , it is cheaper to
sequence cDNA fragments rather than all exons separately.
We ampli ﬁedCTNS cDNA, consisting of 12 exons,as
3 separate fragments. Secondly, long enough deletions or
insertions could be detected by electrophoresis with fol-
lowing con ﬁrmation by DNA sequencing. We estimate this
novel deletion to be classi ﬁed as pathogenic according to
ACMG criteria because it leads to a truncated CTNS
protein.
V. Serzhanova: None. A. Filatova: None. S. Papizh:
None. M. Skoblov: None.P06.09D
D-Bifunctional protein de ﬁciency - diagnosis by whole
exome sequencing and ﬁbroblast analysis despite
normal plasma biochemistry
M. McClatchey
1, M. D'Alessandro2, A. Ross1,
S. Ferdinandusse3, DDD Study, J. C. S. Dean1
1North of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Aberdeen,
United Kingdom,2Unviersity of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
United Kingdom,3Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic
Diseases, Academic Medical Centre, University ofAmsterdam, Amsterdam, United Kingdom
D-Bifunctional protein (DBP) de ﬁciency is an autosomal
recessive disorder of peroxisomal fatty-acid beta-oxidation,
caused by mutations in the HSD17B4 gene. It is
characterised by early-onset neurological symptoms includ-ing hypotonia and seizures, developmental delay and
eventual neuroregression. Survival beyond 36 months is
rare. Diagnosis relies on the detection of accumulated levelsof VLCFAs in plasma but occasional patients have
undetectable or near normal plasma levels, sometimes
associated with longer survival.
We report a 9 year old male patient born to non-
consanguineous northern European parents, presenting with
neonatal seizures and global developmental delay fromearly infancy. Developmental progress was made until
around 4 years, after which steady neuro-regression was
seen. Metabolic testing of urine and plasma, includingVLCFAs, demonstrated normal ﬁndings on multiple
occasions.
Trio based whole exome sequencing undertaken through
the DDD study identi ﬁed compound heterozyosity for a
missense and a frameshift variant in HSD17B4, consistent
with DBP-de ﬁciency. The diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by
enzyme analysis in cultured skin ﬁbroblasts which showed
reduced DBP activity (mildly reduced hydratase activity;
undetectable dehydrogenase activity) despite a persistentnormal VLCFA pro ﬁle, consistent with type III DBP
deﬁciency.
This case highlights the unreliability of plasma VLCFA in
the diagnosis of DBP-de ﬁciency, particularly when residual
enzymatic activity may be present. Trio based whole exome
sequencing is an alternative, with con ﬁrmation by analysis
of enzyme activity in cultured ﬁbroblasts.
M. McClatchey: None. M. D'Alessandro: None. A.
Ross: None. S. Ferdinandusse: None. J.C.S. Dean: None.
P06.10A
A case of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase de ﬁciency
and homozygous mutation DPYD:c.1905 +1G>A in
Bulgarian patient with severe autistic disorderAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1335M. B. Ivanova1,2, V. Jordanova1, T. Todorov3,
A. Todorova3,4, D. Dimitrov1, I. Dimova5, A. Savov1
1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of
Obstetrics and Gynecology „Maichin dom “, Medical
University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Faculty of Chemistry and
Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry, So ﬁa
University "St. Kl. Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Genetic
Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,5Department of
Medical genetics, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Background: Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD)
deﬁciency is an autosomal recessive disorder of the
pyrimidine metabolism characterised by thymine-uraciluria
with variable expressivity and different phenotypes. It
varies from asymptomatic to severe neurological manifesta-tions and an increased risk of toxicity from 5- ﬂuorouracil
treatment.
Materials and Methods: A child with severe autistic
behavior, intellectual disability (no speech at 6 years old)
and family history - aunt with mental retardation, was
referred for genetic counseling. Metabolic screening wasperformed in urine sample by dipstick - glucose, ketone,
pH, and reducing sugars, followed by LC-MS/MS blood
aminoacids and acylcarnitines and GC/MS urine organicacids analysis. Mutations in DPYD gene are reported in
DPD de ﬁciency patients. The gene was investigated by
direct Sanger sequencing in proband and his parents.
Results: Elevated levels of thymine and uracil were
detected by GC/MS urine test which was suggestive of DPD
deﬁciency. Molecular analysis of DPYD gene showed a
homozygous splice-site mutation c.1905 +1G>A in the
proband, inherited from heterozygous parents. Subse-
quently, prenatal testing in the family was performed. Thefetus was healthy non-carrier.
Conclusion: Here we report the ﬁrst Bulgarian patient
with severe autistic disorder caused by DPD de ﬁciency and
subsequent prenatal diagnostics performed in the family. As
patients with this de ﬁciency could be easily detected by
determination of the thymine-uraciluria, screening for thesedefects are indicative for all patients with any autistic
behavior and intellectual disability. It also could be useful
for those patients who are going to be treated with 5-ﬂuorouracil to prevent lethal toxicities and personalise
treatments.
M.B. Ivanova: None. V. Jordanova: None. T.
Todorov: None. A. Todorova: None. D. Dimitrov: None.
I. Dimova: None. A. Savov: None.P06.11B
Electronic nose for diagnosis of metabolic diseases via
breath samples
M. Shinawi
1, S. Q. Shen1, R. Jeries2, M. Malik1, L. Bai1,
A. Osula1,R .W u1, B. Tomic1, E. Toolan1, D. K. Grange1,
H. Haick2
1Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
MO, United States,2Technion −Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel
Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are individually rare
but often devastating illnesses characterized by the toxic
accumulation of metabolites. Early diagnosis, frequentmonitoring, and dietary intervention starting in early
infancy substantially decrease morbidity and mortality.
However, current diagnosis and monitoring methods rely onrepeated blood draws and costly laboratory tests with
prolonged turnaround times. Thus, a non-invasive, ef ﬁcient,
and rapid approach is needed. Here, we present a novelapproach for monitoring patients with IEMs based on
analysis of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in breath
samples using a nanomaterial-based sensor array, theelectronic nose (eNose). Exhaled breath was collected from
31 patients with IEMs and 34 healthy controls and analyzed
using both eNose and gas chromatography mass spectro-metry (GC-MS). IEM patients comprised 21 patients with
phenylketonuria (PKU), three patients with ornithine
transcarboxylase de ﬁciency, and 7 patients with various
other IEMs. Machine learning-based pattern recognition
algorithms were used to identify breath pro ﬁles that
distinguished IEM patients from healthy controls with78% accuracy, 80-87% sensitivity, and 71-77% speci ﬁcity.
When restricting the analysis to patients with PKU, these
patients could be distinguished from healthy controls with78% accuracy, 80% sensitivity, and 76% speci ﬁcity. GC-
MS showed that dodecane, 5-butylnonane, and a propanoic
acid-derived compound were signi ﬁcantly elevated in
breath samples from PKU patients. Each of these
compounds reliably discriminated PKU patients from
controls (c-statistic =0.786-0.815). Together, these results
suggest that breath analysis could become a viable non-
invasive clinical monitoring and screening tool for IEMs
and other disorders that affect pediatric populations.
M. Shinawi: None. S.Q. Shen: None. R. Jeries: None.
M. Malik: None. L. Bai: None. A. Osula: None. R. Wu:
None. B. Tomic: None. E. Toolan: None. D.K. Grange:
None. H. Haick: None.
P06.13D
Measurement of myocardial native T1 value in Fabry
patients with treatment1336O. MIGITA1, K. Kida2, A. Kotoku3, H. Yamamoto1
1Department of Pediatrics, St. Marianna University School
of Medicine, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan,2Department of
Pharmacology, St. Marianna University School of
Medicine, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan,3Department of
Radiology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan
Fabry disease is known as most prevalent lysosomal storage
disease, and caused by mutations in the GLA gene.
Complete or partial defected enzyme activity leads to theaccumulation of enzyme substrate, sphingolipids in cells
and multiple organ failure. Several reports have been
published that native T1 value from magnetic resonanceimaging methods may re ﬂects the storage of organs. Several
reports also mentioned that native T1 value reduction was
observed in patients with Fabry disease which prior ofcardial structural or functional changes.
ECG, echocardiographic and MRI, including calculation
of native T1 value assessment, were performed with twopatients with Fabry disease prior to enzyme replacement
treatment. In those patients LVH was absent, but native T1
value showed lower value than means value in others. Afterstarting ERT treatment, no changes in cardiac function were
observed. But native T1 values were slightly normalized in
after 6-12 month ERT treatment.
The native T1 value is one of the candidate quantitative
assessment for myocardial storage for lysosomal diseases.
Our results show that it may detect early cardiac involve-ment and ef ﬁcacy the treatment of Fabry disease. The
reports which mentioned about T1 values in Fabry patients
have been limited. Therefore, it is still unclear whether thenative T1 value represents myocardial accumurations of
substrate in Fabry patients. Further results needed to
translate these ﬁnding, but native T1 value would be useful
for clinical evaluation of lysosomal diseases.
O. Migita: None. K. Kida: None. A. Kotoku: None. H.
Yamamoto: None.
P06.14A
Molecular heterogeneity in patients with familial partiallipodystrophy
L. Rutkowska, I. Pinkier, K. Salacinska, D. Salachna,
L. Jakubowski, A. Gach
Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute,
Lodz, Poland
Introduction: Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPL) is a rare
AD transmitted disorder characterized by abnormal dis-
tribution of adipose tissue. There are six different types ofFLP based on genetic background. The most common form
is FPL type 2 (Dunnigan disease) caused by mutation in
LMNA gene. Typical clinical features of patients with FLP
are excessive subcutaneous fat accumulation in the neck
and face, reduced subcutaneous fat in the arms and legs and
muscular appearance due to muscular hypertrophy. Theextent of adipose tissue loss usually determines the severity
of the associated metabolic complications such as hyper-
glycemia, hyperinsulinemia, insulin-resistant diabetes mel-litus, increased serum triglicerydes, hepatic steatosis,
pancreatitis, high blood pressure, and premature athero-
sclerosis with an increased risk of coronary heart disease.
Materials and Methods: Among 64 patients tested using
custom NGS panel due to familiar dyslipidemia, 9 showed
lipodystrophic features. Similarity of the phenotypic traitsand characteristic signi ﬁcant hypertriglyceridemia sug-
gested the diagnosis of FPL type 2.
Results: The study revealed the presence of R482Q
alteration in LMNA gene in 4 subjects in two families and
R148K in PPARG gene in two subjects in one family.
Conclusions: Recognition of FPL type 2 and type 3
conﬁrm the molecular heterogeneity of familial partial
lipodystrophy. Identi ﬁcation of patients with FPL is chal-
lenging due to variable and often mild phenotype. Severehypertriglyceridemia was consistent and easy to identify
feature. Thus we recommend all patient with markedly
elevated TG to undergo molecular testing for FPL, pre-ferably with targeted NGS. Financing: Statutory Research
No.2016/X/9-SZB, PMM Hospital Research Institute
L. Rutkowska: None. I. Pinkier: None. K. Salacinska:
None. D. Salachna: None. L. Jakubowski: None. A.
Gach:
None.
P06.15B
L-Ferritin: one gene, ﬁve diseases; from hereditary
hyperferritinemia to hypoferritinemia - Report of newcases
B. Cadenas
1,2,3, J. Fita-Torró4, M. Bermúdez-Cortés5,
I. Hernandez-Rodriguez6, J. Fuster5, M. Llinares5,
A. Galera5, J. Romero7, S. Pérez-Montero4,
C. Tornador1,4, M. Sanchez4,8,9
1Whole Genix SL., Barcelona, Spain,2Josep Carreras
Leukemia Research Institute (IJC), Badalona, Spain,
3Universitat de Vic-Universitat Central de Catalunya, Vic,
Spain,4BloodGenetics SL, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain,
5Clinic University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Instituto
Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB), Murcia,
Spain,6University Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol
(HGTiP), Institut Català d ’Oncologia (ICO), Badalona,
Spain,7University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United
States,8Program of Predictive and Personalised MedicineAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1337of Cancer (PMPPC), Institut d ’Investigació Germans Trias
i Pujol (IGTP), Badalona, Spain,9Universitat Internacional
de Catalunya (UIC), Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Ferritin is a multimeric protein composed of
light (L-ferritin) and heavy (H-ferritin) subunits that bindsand stores iron inside the cell. A variety of mutations have
been reported in the L-ferritin subunit gene ( FTL gene) that
cause the following ﬁve diseases: (1) hereditary hyperferri-
tinemia with cataract syndrome (HHCS), (2) neuroferritino-
pathy, a subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron
accumulation (NBIA), (3) benign hyperferritinemia, (4) L-ferritin de ﬁciency with autosomal dominant inheritance, and
(5) L-ferritin de ﬁciency with autosomal recessive inheri-
tance. Defects in the FTL gene lead to abnormally high
levels of serum ferritin (hyperferritinemia) in HHCS and
benign hyperferritinemia, while low levels (hypoferritine-
mia) are present in neuroferritinopathy and in autosomaldominant and recessive L-ferritin de ﬁciency.
Methods: We have sequenced FTL gene either by Sanger
sequencing or by next generation sequencing (NGS) inthree families with abnormal levels of ferritin. Moreover,
we have performed an extensive review of all reported
variants in the FTL gene linked with the previouslydescribed ﬁve conditions.
Results: Here, we identi ﬁed two novel FTL variants that
cause dominant L-ferritin de ﬁciency and HHCS (c.375 +2T
> A and 36_42delCAACAGT, respectively), and one pre-
viously reported variant (Met1Val) that causes dominant L-
ferritin de ﬁciency.
Conclusions: Globally, genetic changes in the FTL gene
are responsible for multiple phenotypes and an accurate
diagnosis is useful for appropriate treatment. We included adiagnostic algorithm for the detection of diseases caused by
defects in FTL gene.
Funding: This research was partially supported by grant
SAF2015-70412-R from Spanish Secretary of Research,
Development and Innovation (MINECO) Spain to M.S.
B. Cadenas: None. J. Fita-Torró: None. M. Bermúdez-
Cortés: None. I. Hernandez-Rodriguez: None. J. Fuster:
None. M. Llinares: None. A. Galera: None. J. Romero:
None. S. Pérez-Montero: None. C. Tornador: None. M.
Sanchez: None.
P06.16C
The contribution of molecular genetic methods to the
diagnosis of classical galactosemia and investigation of
genotype-phenotype correlation
I. Kalay
1, M. Balci2, C. gulec1, G. Gokcay2, M. Demirkol2,
S. Basaran1, Z. O. Uyguner11Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical
Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Division of
Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of
Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Classical galactosemia is a disorder of
pathogenic GALT variants leading to galactose-1-phos-
phate-uridyl-transferase de ﬁciency. Majority of the patho-
genic variants are small sequence alterations, nevertheless
gross alterations have also been reported (1%). We aimed to
investigate the frequency and distribution of GALT muta-
tions in Turkish galactosemia patients with genotype-
phenotype correlation.
Material and Methods: Clinically and biochemically
diagnosed 91 patients with galactosemia were included in
this study. Algorithmic genetic testing strategy for GALT
was performed initially with Sanger sequencing (n =91)
followed by MLPA (n =19), only for cases with incompa-
tible sequence result.
Results: We identi ﬁed 11 known and four novel patho-
genic variants (p.R67Pfs*19, p.S236Rfs*30, p.S156*, p.
V243I) in 91 patients leading to 95% detection rate. Ret-
rospective investigation of mutation unidenti ﬁed cases were
tentatively considered galactosemia initially however
deviated in follow ups.
Conclusions: As in European cohorts, p.Q188R in exon 6
was the most common (38%) GALT mutations. Second
most frequent mutation was p.E340* (14%) in exon 10,
which is known to be speci ﬁc for population in Turkey. The
third most frequent mutation (8%) was a novel single
nucleotide deletion leading to frameshift (p. R67Pfs*19) in
exon 2, found to aggregate in patients from eastern Turkey.Algorithmic analysis of exons 6 and 10 would delineate
molecular genetic diagnosis for 60% of the patients.
Absence of gross mutations is attributed to our small samplesize. Nevertheless, MLPA should still be recommended for
galactosemia patients with unidenti ﬁed pathogenic
sequence variants in GALT .
I. Kalay: Other; Modest; Istanbul University Research
Fund (Project No: TTU-2018-31142). M. Balci: None. C.
gulec: None. G. Gokcay: None. M. Demirkol: None. S.
Basaran: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None.
P06.17D
GBA1 mutational spectrum in the Republic of
Macedonia and a report of a novel de novo mutation
H. Ajdarche
1, M. Vujovic1, M. Jakimovska1,
Z. Stojanovski2, O. Karan ﬁlski2, K. Martinova3,
D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska113381RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of,2University Clinic for Hematology,
Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius ”,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
3University Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, University
“Ss Cyril and Methodius ”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by the
deﬁcient activity of β-glucocerebrosidase due to homo-
zygous or double heterozygous GBA1 mutations. In
addition, heterozygous GBA1 mutations represent the most
common genetic risk factor for Parkinson ’s disease. We
aimed to determine the GBA1 mutational spectrum among
GD patients and the frequency of common GBA1 mutations
among the general population from R. Macedonia.
Material and Methods: Thirty-four individuals belong-
ing to 10 families with 15 GD Type 1 patients, as well as
392 individuals from the general population were studied.
GD patients were studied using several different methods:direct DNA sequencing of GBA1 exons, Multiplex Ligation
Probe-Dependent Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA), and next-
generation sequencing on MiSeq using Illumina TruSightInherited panel. Allele-speci ﬁc ampli ﬁcation was designed
to screen for ﬁve common GBA1 mutations among the
general population.
Results: A total of eight pathogenic variants (c.115
+1G>A, c.392A>G, c.882T>G, c.1226A>G, c.1263-
1317del, c.1312G>A, c.1342G>C and c.1363A>G) weredetected. The most common mutation was c.1226A>G
(N370S), representing 60% of GBA1 alleles. The c.882T>G
and c.1342G>C were present on one allele (H255Q:D409H). The novel c.392A>G variant was detected in one
GD patient as a de novo event. The frequencies of GBA1
mutations among the general population were the follow-ing: c.1226A>G (3/700, 0.43%), c.882T>G/c.1342G>C (2/
784, 0.26%), c.115 +1G>A (1/668, 0.15%), while c.1263-
1317del was not detected among the studied individuals.
Conclusion: The knowledge of GBA1 mutational spec-
trum in our country will allow for better management of GD
patients as well as easier carrier screening among GDfamily members and Parkinson ’s patients.
H. Ajdarche: None. M. Vujovic: None. M. Jaki-
movska: None. Z. Stojanovski: None. O. Karan ﬁlski:
None. K. Martinova: None. D. Plaseska-
Karan ﬁlska: None.
P06.18A
FPLD3-associated PPAR γmutants de ﬁ
ne subclasses of
target genesM. F. Broekema1, M. Stahl Madsen2, M. Rønn Madsen2,
A. Koppen1, M. E. G. Kranendonk1, M. Groot Koerkamp1,
N. Hamers1, A. Borgmans1, A. M. J. J. Bonvin3,F .C .P .
Holstege1, W. Spiering4, H. Monajemi5, D. Cassiman6,
S. Mandrup2, E. Kalkhoven1
1Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,2Functional Genomics and
Metabolism Research Unit, University of SouthernDenmark, Odense, Denmark,
3Bijvoet Center for
Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
Netherlands,4Department of Vascular Medicine, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,5Internal
Medicine, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, Netherlands,6Center
for Metabolic Diseases, Leuven University Hospitals,Leuven, Belgium
Introduction: The nuclear receptor PPAR γ, encoded by
PPARG , is the master regulator of adipocyte differentiation
and function. Mutations in PPARG cause familial partial
lipodystrophy subtype 3 (FPLD3), characterized by adiposetissue redistribution causing type 2 diabetes, and dyslipide-
mia. In two non-consanguineous patients we identi ﬁed
PPAR γE379K and R212Q. The mutations are situated in
distinct domains of the PPAR γ. Whereas, E379K is located
in the ligand binding domain (LBD) and contacts the DNA
binding domain (DBD) of its binding partner RXR αin the
PPAR γ-RXR α-DNA crystal structure, R212Q is located in
the hinge region and interacts with the DNA. Methods and
materials: We have used genome-wide sequencing-basedstrategies in PPARG knockout mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts
transduced with PPAR γto determine how these PPARG
mutations - that do not interfere in interactions with RXR α,
ligand, and cofactors, but do impair the adipogenic capacity
- affect the ability of PPAR γto activate PPARG target
genes in the context of native chromatin structure.
Results: Both PPARG mutations impair the transactiva-
tion potential of PPAR γon an overlapping subset of target
genes. Classical PPAR γtarget genes such as FABP4 ,
ANGPTL4 , and LPL are among the genes that are highly
affected. Genome-wide pro ﬁling of PPAR γ(WT and
mutants) and the enhancer activity marker H3K27Ac showsthat these PPARG mutations impair PPAR γbinding on
enhancers that require PPAR γfor chromatin remodeling.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings indicate that a subset of
PPAR γtarget genes are sensitive to PPARG mutations. In
addition, relatively subtle molecular defects in PPAR γare
sufﬁcient to cause lipodystrophy.
M.F. Broekema: None. M. Stahl Madsen: None. M.
Rønn Madsen: None.
A. Koppen: None. M.E.G. Kra-
nendonk: None. M. Groot Koerkamp: None. N. Hamers:
None. A. Borgmans: None. A.M.J.J. Bonvin: None. F.C.
P. Holstege: None. W. Spiering: None. H. Monajemi:Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1339None. D. Cassiman: None. S. Mandrup: None. E.
Kalkhoven: None.
P06.19B
Ten novel mutations in the mitochondrial elongation
translation factor EFG1 are associated to neurologicalinvolvement
G. Barcia
1,2, M. Rio1,2, Z. Assouline1,2, C. Zangarelli2,
M. Schiff1,2, M. Barth3, A. Munnich1,2, V. Procaccio3,
J. Steffann1,2, A. Rotig2, N. Boddaert1,2, M. Metodiev2,
B. Ruzzenente2
1Necker Hospital, Paris, France,2Imagine Institute, Paris,
France,3CHU Angers, Angers, France
Mutations in nuclear genes encoding co-factors or structural
subunits of the mitochondrial translation machinery preventthe synthesis of the 13 mitochondrial DNA encoded
proteins which causes OXPHOS de ﬁciency. Mutations in
the GFM1 gene, encoding the mitochondrial translationelongation factor EFG1, have been linked to mitochondrial
diseases with neurologic or hepatic presentations in few
patients.
Here, we further expand the genetic and phenotypic
spectrum of GFM1-linked disease mutations by reporting
clinical, biochemical and neuroimaging ﬁndings from 9
unrelated pediatric patients harboring homozygous or
compound heterozygous GFM1 mutations, including 10
novel pathogenic variants.
All patients were born at term and without fetal distress.
In 8/9 children, the ﬁrsts clinical signs were noticed during
the neonatal period. Only 1 child had psychomotor regres-sion and lactic acidosis (8 months) after initial normal
development. All patients presented with neurological
involvement with axial hypotonia and dystonia being themajor signs. West syndrome was frequently observed (5/9
patients). One child had liver failure. Western blot analysis
on patient ﬁbroblasts revealed that all mutations result in
decreased abundance of the mutant EFG1 protein. Speci ﬁc
decrease of mtDNA-encoded proteins con ﬁrmed that
mitochondrial translation was impaired in patients, which inturn, resulted in an impaired biogenesis of OXPHOS
complexes I and IV.
In conclusion, GFM1 mutations result in OXPHOS
deﬁciency and constant neurological involvement with
hypotonia, dystonia, and epilepsy. Some patients had a
neonatal rapidly progressive disease, but a stable course ismore frequent. Liver failure is not a constant feature of
GFM1 related diseases.
G. Barcia: None. M. Rio: None. Z. Assouline: None. C.
Zangarelli: None. M. Schiff: None. M. Barth: None. A.
Munnich: None. V. Procaccio: None. J. Steffann: None.A. Rotig: None. N. Boddaert: None. M. Metodiev: None.
B. Ruzzenente: None.
P06.20C
Mutations in GLDC andAMT genes in Czech and
Slovak patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia
D. Zahorakova, J. Kucerova, M. Buganova,
A. Puchmajerova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek
Department of Pediatrics, Charles University and General
University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH,
MIM#605899) is a rare, life threatening disorder causedby a defect in the mitochondrial enzyme complex - glycine
cleavage system (GCS). The defect results in an accumula-
tion of glycine in the body. Classical form of NKH presentsin the ﬁrst days of life with lethargy, hypotonia, seizures,
coma and apnea. Surviving patients have profound devel-
opmental delay and severe, usually pharmacoresistantepilepsy. Cerebral spinal ﬂuid (CSF) and plasma glycine
levels are elevated as well as CSF:plasma glycine ratio.
NKH is an autosomal recessive disorder with causativemutations identi ﬁed in genes encoding the components of
GCS - GLDC ,AMT
andGCSH . We present the results of
mutation analysis in seven patients with classical formof NKH.
Materials and Methods: Analysis of the GLDC and
AMT genes was performed by Sanger sequencing
and MLPA.
Results: Mutations in the GLDC gene, including a large
deletion of exons 10 to 25, were detected in four patients.Five mutations (c.1420G>A, c.1543A>G, c.1877T>G,
c.2594del, c.2579G>T) are novel. Mutations in the AMT
gene were identi ﬁed in three patients. Analysis of mutations
in parents was performed to con ﬁrm compound hetero-
zygosity in all patients.
Conclusions: Identi ﬁcation of molecular defect enabled
genetic counseling and prenatal genetic testing in affected
families. We report 5 novel GLDC mutations and our
ﬁndings expand the spectrum of described variants asso-
ciated with NKH.
Supported by grants PROGRES Q26/LF1 and RVO-
VFN 64165.
D. Zahorakova: None. J. Kucerova: None. M. Buga-
nova: None. A. Puchmajerova: None. J. Zeman: None. P.
Martasek: None.
P06.21D
Genetic analysis of patients with GLUT1DS suspect: theimportance of diagnostic con ﬁrmation1340O. Sánchez-Lijarcio1,2, D. Yubero3,2, A. I. Vega1,2,À .
García-Cazorla3,2, M. O'Callaghan3,2, L. G. Gutiérrez-
Solana4,2, M. L. Couce5,2, M. del Toro6,2, E. López-Laso7,2,
M. Ugarte1,2, C. Pérez-Cerdá1,2, R. Artuch3,2, B. Pérez1,2
1Centro de diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares,
Centro de Biología Molecular, UAM, Madrid, Spain,
2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain,4Hospital Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,
5Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Madrid,
Spain,6Hospital Universitario Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain,7Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain
Introduction: Classic patients with GLUT1DS present
hypoglycorrhachia, drug-resistant epilepsy, developmentaldelay, a complex movement disorder and, in 50% of the
cases, an acquired microcephaly. Furthermore, patients
respond to ketogenic diet.
Methods: In this study, 48 suspected cases of GLUT1DS
were included. Inclusion criteria were: CSF glucose level
below 50.5 mg/dL and clinical ﬁndings suitable for
GLUT1DS. We have performed the identi ﬁcation of exonic
SNV and deletions in SLC2A1 by Sanger combined with
MLPA or its entire sequence were analysed by next gen-eration sequencing (NGS). Patients without pathogenic
variants in SLC2A1 were analysed by TruSight One
®panel
(Illumina®).
Results: We have detected 27 patients with variations in
SLC2A1 . Ten of them were de novo mutations, while ﬁve
others were associated to maternal or paternal inheritance(missense variants). The mutational spectrum in SLC2A1
includes two large deletions, three small deletions, one
small duplication and twenty nucleotide changes (eighteenlikely missense and two splice site mutations). Fifteen
variants are novel, ﬁve loss-of-functions and ten likely
missense, six with unknown signi ﬁcance following the
ACMG guidelines. In twenty-one cases no pathogenic
mutations in SLC2A1 were detected and were further ana-
lysed by TruSight One
®panel, allowing the detection of
pathogenic variants in eight different genes related to ion
channels, transcriptional factors or cellular traf ﬁcking.
Conclusions: Our results show that a response to keto-
genic diet, drug-resistant epilepsy and/or hypoglycorrhachia
is not a pathognomonic marker for GLUT1DS. Moreover,
the results highlight the fact that genetic analysis should bea must-have for GLUT1DS classi ﬁcation.
ACCI-CIBERER project: ER18P2AC746 and
ERTRLEOI1
O. Sánchez-Lijarcio: None. D. Yubero: None. A.I.
Vega: None. À. García-Cazorla: None. M. O'Callaghan:
None. L.G. Gutiérrez-Solana: None. M.L. Couce: None.
M. del Toro: None. E. López-Laso: None. M. Ugarte:None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. R. Artuch: None. B.
Pérez: None.
P06.22A
Targeted next generation sequencing in selected inborn
errors of metabolism
L. Dvorakova, K. Peskova, M. Reboun, M. Novakova,
G. Storkanova, P. Chrastina, T. Honzik
Clinic of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Prague 2,
Czech Republic
Introduction: We implemented a targeted NGS for the
diagnosis of patients with a suspicion for selected groups ofinborn errors of metabolism (IEM).
Methods: A total of 195 genes were analyzed using a
custom-designed oligo capture probe set (Roche Nimble-Gen) and MiSeq sequencer (Illumina). Positive results were
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: In total, we identi ﬁed 74 mutations in genes
associated with IEM. The found mutations were usually
SNVs or small deletions/insertions. In two cases we iden-
tiﬁed gross deletions ( PHKA2 , NM_000292.2: deletion of
exon 33, AGL, NM_000642.3: deletion of exons 11-21).
Genes associated with glycogen metabolism were analyzed
in 46 probands. The diagnosis of GSD was con ﬁrmed by
ﬁnding of causative mutations in 19 of them: GYS2 (1x),
G6PC (1x), AGL (4x), PYGL (2x) and PHKA2 (11x). We
established the diagnosis in 3 out of 6 patients with rhab-domyolyses (2x RYR1 ,1 x PFKM ). Four out of 6 patients
were diagnosed in the group of peroxisomal disorders (1x
PEX1 ,1 x PEX12 ,2 x HSD17B4 ). Among 17 patients with
hyperhomocysteinemia we identi
ﬁed 1 patient with CblD
deﬁciency ( MMADHC ), 2 patients with FTCD de ﬁciency,
and 3 patients with the MTHFR de ﬁciency. In two patients
with biochemical ﬁndings leading to urea cycle disorders
we diagnosed 1 patient with argininosuccinic aciduria ( ASL)
and 1 patient with CPSI de ﬁciency. The diagnostic yield for
MSUD was 100% (1x BCKDHA ,8 x BCKDHB ).
Conclusions: The correlation of phenotypic signs, bio-
chemical ﬁndings and NGS results is crucial for completing
the diagnosis of IEM. Support: MZ CR - RVO VFN64165,
SVV No.260367
L. Dvorakova: None. K. Peskova: None. M. Reboun:
None. M. Novakova: None. G. Storkanova: None. P.
Chrastina: None. T. Honzik: None.
P06.23B
Haemochromatosis type 4: structure/function analysis of
the newly identi ﬁed p.Ser47Phe missense mutation
provides new insights about the ferroportin biology and
mechanisms of diseaseAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1341K. Uguen1, M. Le Tertre1, A. Elbahnsi2,C .K a1,
I. Gourlaouen1, C. Ferec1, I. Callebaut2, G. Le Gac1
1Inserm UMR 1078, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire
et Histocompatibilité, CHRU de Brest, Hôpital Morvan,
Université Bretagne Loire, Brest, France,2IMPMC,
Sorbonne Universités –UMR CNRS7590, UPMC Univ
Paris 06, Muséum d ’Histoire Naturelle, IRD UMR206,
Paris, France
Haemochromatosis type 4 is the second most frequent cause
of inherited iron overload after HFE -related haemochroma-
tosis. The disease is due to heterozygous mutations in the
SLC40A1 gene, which encodes the sole iron export protein
reported in mammals; namely ferroportin 1 (FPN1). A largephenotypic heterogeneity is observed in adult patients. This
is partially explained by the existence of two categories of
genetic variants: loss-of-function mutations, which lead to aprogressive accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial
cells, and gain-of-function mutations, which are responsible
for a partial to complete resistance to hepcidin (the systemiciron metabolism regulatory hormone) and a progressive iron
deposition in parenchymal cells. The p.Ser47Phe missense
mutation was identi ﬁed in 8 related patients presenting with
an iron overload phenotype characteristic of FPN1 dysfunc-
tion. In vitro evaluations were performed in HEK293T cells.
They revealed that the 47Phe mutant was correctlyexpressed at the cell surface, while it signi ﬁcantly reduced
ability of FPN1 to export iron. They also evidenced that the
47Phe mutant was strongly resistant to hepcidin. Using a3D model of human FPN1, built by homology to the
experimental structure of a bacterial homolog (BbFpn) in
the outward-facing state, we observed that Ser47 is locatedin the vicinity of residues that play a critical role in the
transport of iron across the plasma membrane. The region
might also be involved in the docking of hepcidin anddown-regulation of FPN1. We conclude that p.Ser47Phe
missense mutation is responsible for ambivalent functional
effects, with loss-of-function having a predominant con-sequence on phenotype.
K. Uguen: None. M. Le Tertre: None. A. Elbahnsi:
None. C. Ka: None. I. Gourlaouen: None. C. Ferec:
None. I. Callebaut: None. G. Le Gac: None.
P06.24C
Polygenic risk score pro ﬁling of quantitative lipid traits:
lessons from a specialized dyslipidemic cohort
J. S. Dron
1,2, J. Wang1, H. Cao1, M. A. Iacocca1,2,
A. D. McIntyre1, M. R. Ban1, J. F. Robinson1,
R. A. Hegele1,21Robarts Research Institute, London, ON, Canada,
2Western University, London, ON, Canada
Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) are often
calculated in prospective cohorts representing generally
healthy populations. Given the rarity of phenotypicextremes, characterizing the polygenic underpinnings of a
quantitative trait ’s full spectrum can be challenging. In
patients referred to a specialized lipid clinic, we aimed toestablish polygenic pro ﬁles for triglyceride (TG), high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C).
Materials and Methods: We performed PRS analyses
using a 16-SNP TG score (N =1,406), 9-SNP HDL-C score
(N=1,298), and 10-SNP LDL-C score (N =1,226). For
clinical practicality, we utilized smaller PRSs that incor-
porate SNPs with the largest phenotypic effects. Extreme
scores re ﬂecting an excess of trait-raising SNPs were
deﬁned as scores ≥90th percentile, as calculated in the 1000
Genomes cohort.
Results: As TG levels increased, the prevalence of
extreme TG PRSs greatly increased; patients with the
highest TG levels were 5.30-fold (P<0.0001) more likely to
have an extreme PRS compared to those with normal levels.As HDL-C levels increased, the prevalence of extreme
HDL-C PRSs increased slightly; patients with the highest
HDL-C levels were 2.37-fold (P =0.003) more likely to
have an extreme PRS compared to those with normal levels.
As LDL-C levels increased, the prevalence of extreme
LDL-C PRSs increased slightly; however, the prevalence ofextreme PRSs was not different between patients with the
highest LDL-C levels and those with normal levels.
Conclusions: The polygenic pro ﬁles of these lipid traits
were quite distinct. Evaluation of patients at phenotypic
extremes allows for more ef ﬁcient use of resources to de ﬁne
clinically relevant genetic determinants.
J.S. Dron: None. J. Wang: None. H. Cao: None. M.A.
Iacocca: None. A.D. McIntyre: None. M.R. Ban: None. J.
F. Robinson: None. R.A. Hegele: None.
P06.25D
Hyperphenylalaninemia: identi ﬁcation and
characterization of pathogenic variants in DNAJC12
D. Gallego
1, F. Leal1, M. Castro1, I. Vitoria2, M. Bueno-
Delgado3, A. Belanger-Quintana4, A. Morais5,
C. Pedrón6, I. García7, C. Alcalde8, V. Hamilton9,
J. Campistol10, R. Artuch10, M. Ugarte1, A. Gámez1,
L. R. Desviat1, B. Pérez1
1Centro de diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares,
Centro de Biología Molecular, UAM, Madrid, Spain,2H. U.
La Fe, Valencia, Spain,3H. U. Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,1342Spain,4H. U. Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain,5H. U. La
Paz, Madrid, Spain,6H. U. Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,7H.
U. Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain,8Hospital Río Hortega,
Valladolid, Spain,9INTA, Santiago de Chile, Chile,10H.
Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is caused in
98% of cases by loss-of-function mutations in the gene
coding for the hepatic protein phenylalanine hydroxylase(PAH). The remaining 2% accounts for defects in the
synthesis or regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4),
cofactor of PAH and tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases(TH, TPH), both neurologically expressed. Biallelic variants
in gene DNAJC12 , cochaperone of these hydroxylases,
were recently described in HPA patients with neurologicalsymptoms and early-onset Parkinson. Here, we report the
genetic analysis of DNAJC12 in unsolved Spanish HPA
cases and the functional characterization of variants.
Patients and Methods: The study included DNAJC12
sequencing of 15 Spanish HPA cases (120-442 μM) neu-
rologically asymptomatic. BH4 treatment was only requiredunder fever episodes. Functional analysis of variants was
done using patient-derived ﬁbroblasts transiently transfected
with the three hydroxylases.
Results: Four novel nucleotide changes were identi ﬁed in
DNAJC12 in 15 HPA cases: two pathogenic variants
probably affecting splicing (c.298-2A>C, c.502 +1G>C)
and two likely pathogenic variants c.309G>T (p.
Trp103Cys) and c.524G>A (p.Trp175Ter). The change p.
Trp175Ter, present in 0.1% of Spanish control population,was detected in 80% of alleles, with 9 homozygous cases.
DNAJC12 mRNA levels were slightly diminished and
immunorreactive protein was undetectable. PAH transfec-tion suggest a pathogenic effect on PAH and TH stability
while no effect was found for TPH.
Conclusions: DNAJC12 sequencing should be incorpo-
rated in routine HPA genetic con ﬁrmation of cases detected
in newborn screening to apply a tailored therapy. To avoid
future neurological complications, our cases should beincluded in clinical follow-up.
Grants: PI16/00573; LCF/PR/PR16/11110018; ERDF
D. Gallego: None. F. Leal: None. M. Castro: None. I.
Vitoria: None. M. Bueno-Delgado: None. A. Belanger-
Quintana: None. A. Morais: None. C. Pedrón: None. I.
García: None. C. Alcalde: None. V. Hamilton: None. J.
Campistol: None. R. Artuch: None. M. Ugarte: None. A.
Gámez: None. L.R. Desviat: None. B. Pérez: None.
P06.26A
Mutations in SURF1 Gene Associated with Leigh
Syndrome İn Turkey
M. Kose, H. Onay, F. Ozk ınayEge university Medical Faculty Division of Pediatric
Genetics, Izmir, Turkey
Introduction: Leigh syndrome (LS) associated with
cytochrome coxidase (COX) de ﬁciency is an early onset,
fatal mitochondrial encephalopathy, leading to multipleneurological failure and eventually death, usually in the ﬁrst
decade of life. Mutations in SURF1 , a nuclear gene
encoding a mitochondrial protein involved in COXassembly, are the most common cause of LS.
Material-Methods: SURF1 gene was sequenced in 48
patients with clinical suspicion of mitochondrial disorder(mainly complex IV de ﬁciency and LS) between January
2016 and January 2019. Demographical, clinical and
molecular ﬁndings of the patients were obtained from
hospital ﬁles.
Results: We identi ﬁed 13 patients with clinical features
of LS who are either homozygous or compound hetero-zygous for SURF1 mutations. Of the 26 mutant alleles, 14
(54%) had null mutations (8 frameshift and 6 nonsense) 12
(46%) had missense. The most common two mutations wereC.769G>A (6/26) and c.870dupT (6/26) (%23). Although
mutations in SURF1 have been mainly associated with
typical LS, three of the patients in this report had an atypicalcourse of LS. There is no de ﬁnite genotype-phenotype
correlation. Electron transport chain studies were performed
in six patients in whom either muscle or skin ﬁbroblasts
specimen available. The COX activity in each of these six
patients was signi ﬁcantly decreased.
Conclusions: To date, more than 100 patients of Leigh
disease with SURF1 mutations have been reported. We
report clinical and molecular ﬁndings of 13 patients from 12
families and also the ﬁrst case series of SURF1 gene de ﬁ-
ciency from Turkey.
M. Kose: None. H. Onay: None. F. Ozk ınay: None.
P06.27B
Progeroid syndrome with focal segmental
glomeruloscrelosis due to ZMPSTE24 mutations
M. Matsuo
1, N. Iwasaki2,1, T. Kusakabe3, K. Sato4,
G. Nishimura5, K. Saito1
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan,2Institute of Geriatrics, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan,3Department of
Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Hypertension Research,
Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital OrganizationKyoto Medical Center, Kyoto, Japan,
4Department of
Cardiology, Tokyo Women ’s Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan,5Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical
University Hospital, Saitama, JapanAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1343Introduction: Biallelic ZMPSTE24 mutations cause man-
dibuloacral dysplasia with type B lipodystrophy (MADB),
an autosomal recessive progeroid syndrome characterized
by mandibular hypoplasia, progressive acroosteolysis, and
lipodystrophy. Two MADB patients with focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) were reported previously.Herein, we present an additional MADB patient with FSGS
due to ZMPSTE24 mutations.
Materials and Methods: The patient is 42-year-old
Japanese female. Her older sister had succumbed from
diabetic nephropathy at age 41 years. Her clinical course
was as follows: subcutaneous fat atrophy since childhood;proteinuria in her twenties; proteinuria with hypertension
after delivering her son at age 31 years; diabetes mellitus
(DM), hyperlipidemia, and fatty liver at 36 years; loss ofvisceral fat and renal dysfunction due to FSGS proven on
kidney biopsy at 39 years, and kidney transplantation at 41
years. At age 42 years, she was referred for diagnostic workup. She showed a progeroid appearance with decreased
subcutaneous fat. Radiographs revealed open cranial suture
and thin clavicles. The study protocol was approved by theInstitutional Review Boards of Tokyo Women ’s Medical
University. Written informed consent was obtained.
Results: Two rare heterozygous variants, p.Q41X and p.
R412L in ZMPSTE24 , were detected. R412L, a novel var-
iant conserved over species, was not found in ExAC or
1000G, and was predicted to be pathogenic on PolyPhen2and Mutation T@ster. She has since received Metreleptin
injections, achieving improvements of DM, liver dysfunc-
tion, and renal dysfunction.
Conclusion: We reported a progeroid patient associated
with FSGS caused by ZMPSTE24 mutations. Metreleptin
was estimated to ameliorate renal function.
M. Matsuo: None. N. Iwasaki: None. T. Kusakabe:
None. K. Sato: None. G. Nishimura: None. K.
Saito: None.
P06.28C
Isolated methylmalonic acidaemia in Slovakia
M. Skopkova
1, K. Brennerova2, J. Saligova3,
L. Potocnakova3, K. Halova4, V. Bzduch2, J. Stanik1,2,
D. Gasperikova1
1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Biomedical
Research Center, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia,2Department of
Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of Comenius University and
National Institute of Children's Diseases, Bratislava,Slovakia,
3Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of
Pavol Jozef Safarik and Children Faculty Hospital, Kosice,
Slovakia,4Pediatric Clinic, Children Faculty Hospital,
Banska Bystrica, SlovakiaIsolated methylmalonic acidaemia (iMMA) is a group of
autosomal recessive disorders caused by impairment of
propionate metabolism. The severity of clinical presentation
depends on the underlying gene and can range from mild to
life-threatening condition with failure to thrive, hypotonia,
metabolic acidosis, developmental delay, encephalopathy,pancreatitis, and chronic kidney disease. The common sign
is increased methylmalonic acid plasma/urine level and
hyperamonaemia. iMMA is genetically heterogeneous andcan be due to defects in genes involved in propionate
pathway or cobalamin metabolism. The most common are
MUT ,MMAA , and MMAB .
Patients and Methods: Nine children were reported for
genetic testing. Five patients were clinically diagnosed after
manifestation before year 2013 and 4 patients were found inextended neonatal screening from blood spots that has been
undertaken in Slovakia since 2013. Genes MUT andMMAA
were sequenced using Sanger sequencing. One patient wasanalyzed using whole exome sequencing.
Results: The diagnosis of iMMA was genetically con-
ﬁrmed in all tested patients. Six patients had bi-allelic
MMAA mutations (three different known pathogenic var-
iants and one novel variant p.A102T), two patients had bi-
allelic MUT mutations (two known pathogenic variants and
one novel variant p.R93C) and one patient had a homo-
zygous known pathogenic MMAB variant.
Conclusions: The neonatal screening from blood spots is an
effective way for early pick-up of individuals with iMMA.
The most prevalent iMMA underlying gene in Slovakia is
MMAA followed by MUT andMMAB , unlike reported in other
countries, where the MUT gene is the most prevalent one.
Support: APVV-17-0296, VEGA 2/0083/17, APVV-107-12
M. Skopkova: None. K. Brennerova: None. J. Sali-
gova: None. L. Potocnakova: None. K. Halova: None. V.
Bzduch: None. J. Stanik: None. D. Gasperikova: None.
P06.30A
A novel homozygous missense mutation in TUFM leads
to a mitochondrial cardiomyopathy syndrome withoutprogressive encephalopathy
T. Hershkovitz
1, A. Kurolap1,2, T. Paperna1, A. Mory1,
C. Gonzaga-Jauregui3, S. E. Wolf3, J. D. Overton3,
A. R. Shuldiner3, H. Mandel4, H. Baris Feldman1,2
1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus,
Haifa, Israel,2The Ruth & Bruce Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion –Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel,3Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, United
States,4Institute of Human Genetics and Metabolic
Disorders, Western Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya,Israel1344Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction typically results
in clinically heterogeneous, often devastating, disorders.
Accurate molecular diagnosis can be challenging. We
describe a proband, the third son of healthy consanguineous
parents of Muslim Arab descent. He presented at six months
with fatal, severe cardiogenic shock, dilated cardiomyo-pathy, lactic acidosis and multiple mitochondrial respiratory
complex de ﬁciency.
Materials and Methods: We performed trio whole-
exome sequencing (WES) and singelton mitochondrial
genome sequencing. Results were ﬁltered for rare, protein-
altering variants in genes related to mitochondrial function.Protein structures were modelled using SWISS-MODEL
based on the bovine crystal structure of mitochondrial
Elongation Factor Tu/Ts complex (PDB #1XB2), andvisualized with UCSF Chimera software.
Results: We identi ﬁed a novel homozygous missense
variant in TUFM (NM_003321.4): c.344A>C; p.His115Pro,
encoding the mtDNA translation elongating factor Tu
(EFTu). Pathogenic variants were not detected in
mitochondrial DNA.
This missense variant is located in domain 1 of the EFTu
protein, which is required for GTP/GDP-binding and for
complex formation with elongation factor Ts (EFTs). Thishighly conserved His115 (GERP 5.42) is predicted to be an
exposed and functional residue; therefore, substitution with
a physiochemically different residue may disrupt properprotein folding, and may hamper Tu/Ts complex stability
and EFTu reactivation.
Conclusions: To date, only four patients with bi-allelic
TUFM mutations have been reported, all with severe early-
onset lactic acidosis and progressive infantile encephalo-
pathy without cardiomyopathy. We present a novel variantin a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy and lactic acidosis
but without early encephalopathy, thus expanding the phe-
notype of TUFM -related mitochondrial disease.
T. Hershkovitz: None. A. Kurolap: None. T. Paperna:
None. A. Mory: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. S.E.
Wolf: None. J.D. Overton: None. A.R. Shuldiner: None.
H. Mandel: None. H. Baris Feldman: None.
P06.31B
Efﬁcacy of WES in patients with "unsolved phenotype":
expansion of the phenotype spectrum associated with
mutations in KARS gene
V. Palazzo
1, F. Peluso2, L. Dosa1, M. Della Monica3,
F. Mari4, E. Procopio5, M. Donati5, F. Santorelli6,
R. Guerrini4, S. Giglio1,2, D. Vergani7
1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University
Hospital, Firenze, Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit,
Department of Biomedical Experimental and ClinicalSciences, Firenze, Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit Cardarelli
University Hospital, Napoli, Italy,4Pediatric Neurology,
Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories,
Children's Hospital A. Meyer-University of Florence,
Firenze, Italy,5Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Meyer
Children's Hospital, Firenze, Italy,6Molecular Medicine,
IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy,7Medical
Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Experimental and
Clinical Sciences, Firenze, Italy
We evaluated a 14-month-old girl with apostural tetrapar-
esis, growth delay, severe psychomotor retardation, pro-found sensorineural hearing loss, leopard-like retinopathy,
hypogammaglobulinemia, anemia and thrombocytopenia,
hepatopathy, esophageal varices and calci ﬁcations in the
hepatic segment VI, startle-type critical manifestations,
brain calci ﬁcations, progressive cortico-subcortical atrophy
that result in tetraventricular hydrocephalus. Moreover,reduction of mitochondrial respiratory complex-I-III was
observed. The serious conditions led the patient to exitus at
24 months of age. Several molecular tests (panel genes forbrain calci ﬁcation, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, disorders
of glycosylation, peroxisomal disease) and CGH-array were
normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES) identi ﬁed two
rare variants in KARS gene. KARS gene encodes the
mitochondrial and cytoplasmic isoform of the t-RNA
synthase of lysine, essential for a correct protein synthesis.To date, mutations in KARS are associated with autosomal
recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth, non-syndromic hearing
loss, clinical features characterized by microcephaly,epilepsy, leukoencephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy,
visual impairment, auditory and hepatic failure and others
with severe cardiomyopathy, psychomotor and mild delaymyopathy. Functional study on muscle biopsy of our patient
revealed an alteration of protein expression.
Our case shows once again how WES analysis is the ﬁrst
level method in clinical practice in children with multi-
systemic, neurological and/or neuromuscular problems,
mostly in case of mitochondrial disorders whose diagnosisis often problematic because of their large phenotypic and
genotypic heterogeneity. Finally, the use of WES allowed
us to outline a new phenotype associated with a poorlycharacterized gene.
V. Palazzo: None. F. Peluso: None. L. Dosa: None. M.
Della Monica: None. F. Mari: None. E. Procopio: None.
M. Donati: None. F. Santorelli: None. R. Guerrini: None.
S. Giglio: None. D. Vergani: None.
P06.32C
Muscle involvement in a large cohort of pediatric
patients with genetic diagnosis of mitochondrial diseaseAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1345C. Jou1, J. D. Ortigoza-Escobar1, M. M. O'Callaghan1,
A. Nascimento1, A. Darling1, L. Pias-Peleteiro1, B. Perez-
Dueñas1, M. Pineda1, A. Codina1, C. Arjona1,
J. Armstrong1, F. Palau1, A. Ribes2, L. Gort2, F. Tort2,
P. Navas3, E. Ruiz-Pesini4, S. Emperador4, E. Lopez-
Gallardo4, P. Bayona-Bafaluy4, R. Montero1, C. Jimenez-
Mallebrera1, A. Garcia-Cazorla1, J. Montoya4,
D. Yubero1, R. Artuch1
1Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de
Llobregat, Spain,2Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBERER-
ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain,3Universidad Pablo de Olavide
and CIBERER-ISCIII, Sevilla, Spain,4Instituto de
investigación Sanitaria de Aragón and CIBERER-ISCIII,
Zaragoza, Spain
Mitochondrial diseases (MD) are a group of genetic and
acquired disorders which present signi ﬁcant diagnostic
challenges. Here we report the disease characteristics of a
large cohort of pediatric MD patients ( n=95) with a
deﬁnitive genetic diagnosis, giving special emphasis on
clinical muscle involvement, biochemical and histopatho-
logical features. Of the whole cohort, 51 patients harbored
mutations in nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes and 44 patientshad mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genes. The
nDNA patients were more likely to have a reduction in
muscle ﬁber succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) stains and in
SDH-positive blood vessels, while a higher frequency of
mtDNA patients had ragged red (RRF) and blue ﬁbers. The
presence of positive histopathological features was asso-ciated with ophthalmoplegia, myopathic facies, weakness
and exercise intolerance. In 17 patients younger than two
years of age, RRF and blue ﬁbers were observed only in one
case, six cases presented cytochrome c oxidase (COX)
reduction/COX- ﬁbers, SDH reduction was observed in ﬁve
and all except one presented SDH-positive blood vessels. Inconclusion, muscle involvement was a frequent ﬁnding in
our series of MD patients, especially in those harboring
mutations in mtDNA genes.
Grant References: This work was supported by grants
from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/00109, PI17/
00021, PI17/01286, PI15/01082, PI16/01048), FundaciónMutua Madrileña MMA17/01, AEPMI, the FEDER Fund-
ing Program from the European Union, the Agència de
Gestió d ’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca (AGAUR) (2014:
SGR 393), the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalu-
nya and CIBERER-ISCIII.
C. Jou: None. J.D. Ortigoza-Escobar: None. M.M.
O'Callaghan: None. A. Nascimento: None. A. Darling:
None. L. Pias-Peleteiro: None. B. Perez-Dueñas: None.
M. Pineda: None. A. Codina: None. C. Arjona: None. J.
Armstrong: None. F. Palau: None. A. Ribes: None. L.
Gort: None. F. Tort: None. P. Navas: None. E. Ruiz-Pesini: None. S. Emperador: None. E. Lopez-Gallardo:
None. P. Bayona-Bafaluy: None. R. Montero: None. C.
Jimenez-Mallebrera: None. A. Garcia-Cazorla:
None. J.
Montoya: None. D. Yubero: None. R. Artuch: None.
P06.33D
Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions due to mtDNA-
maintenance defects are identi ﬁed by next generation
sequencing of the mitochondrial genome througheKLIPse
C. Bris
1,2, D. Goudenège1,2, S. Bannwarth3,
P. Gaignard4,5, B. Rucheton6, C. Jardel6, A. Trimouille7,
M. Martin-Négrier7, S. Allouche8, A. Slama4,
V. Desquiret-Dumas1,2, N. Gueguen1,2, D. Bonneau1,2,
M. Barth1, G. Lenears2, P. Reynier1,2, P. Amati-Bonneau1,
V. Paquis-Flucklinger3, V. Procaccio1,2
1Département de biochimie et génétique, CHU d'Angers,
angers, France,2MITOVASC –Equipe MITOLAB UMR
CNRS 6214 - INSERM 1083, Angers, France,3Université
Côte d'Azur, CHU de Nice, INSERM, CNRS, IRCAN, Nice,
France,4Biochemistry Laboratory, Bicêtre Hospital,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France,
5U1195 Inserm and University Paris-Sud
and University Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France,
6Biochemistry Department and Genetics Center, APHP,
GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,7CHU Bordeaux,
Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France,8Service
de biochimie, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire de Caen,Caen, France
Purpose: Diseases caused by nuclear genes affecting
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) stability are an important
group of mitochondrial disorders and characterized by
multiple mtDNA deletions. However, mtDNA deletionsalso accumulate during aging, making their interpretation
difﬁcult in patients suspected of mitochondrial diseases.
The objective of this work was to identify criteria todistinguish normal aging vsmtDNA maintenance defects.
Methods: MtDNA of patient muscles with known
pathogenic variants in nuclear genes involved in mtDNAmaintenance (n =34) and muscle from controls without
mitochondrial enzyme and assembly defects (n =53) were
sequenced by next-generation sequencing (NGS). Thesequencing data were processed through eKLIPse, a
bioinformatic tool allowing the detection of mtDNA rear-
rangements. The deletions ’proﬁles were compared between
patients and controls according to age groups.
Results: In the overall cohort, selected parameters such as
location or number of deletions and heteroplasmy levelwere signi ﬁcantly different between patients and controls.
However, the criteria for identifying mtDNA maintenance1346defects was depending on patient age: The number of
deletions appearing to be signi ﬁcantly relevant only in the
elderly, while in young subjects breakpoint repeat lengths
surrounding the deletions were discriminant.
Conclusion: EKLIPse analysis of mtDNA NGS allowed
to discriminate age-related mtDNA rearrangements fromthose related to mtDNA maintenance defects. These char-
acteristics are promising criteria in order to guide the
molecular diagnosis towards mtDNA maintenance defectsand also to facilitate the prioritization of novel variants
identi ﬁed in nuclear-encoded genes involved in mtDNA
stability.
C. Bris: None. D. Goudenège: None. S. Bannwarth:
None. P. Gaignard: None. B. Rucheton: None. C. Jardel:
None. A. Trimouille: None. M. Martin-Négrier: None. S.
Allouche: None. A. Slama: None. V. Desquiret-Dumas:
None. N. Gueguen: None. D. Bonneau: None. M. Barth:
None. G. Lenears: None. P. Reynier: None. P. Amati-
Bonneau: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. V.
Procaccio: None.
P06.34A
Molecular diagnosis of mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex de ﬁciencies by whole exome sequencing
J. Vella
1, S. Laurie2, L. Matalonga2, J. Borg1,3, D. Soler4,
E. Said5, A. Felice1,5,6
1The Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt), Centre of Molecular
Medicine and Biobanking, University of Malta, Msida,Malta,
2Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-
CRG), Center for Genomic Regulation; Barcelona Institute
of Science and Technology (BIST); University PompeuFabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain,
3Department of Applied
Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University
of Malta, Msida, Malta,4Department of Paediatrics, Mater
Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta,5Department of Pathology,
Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta,6Department of
Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine andSurgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta
Mitochondrial disorders are considered to be rare diseases
which are genetically heterogenous. The oxidative phos-
phorylation system consists of ﬁve multiprotein enzyme
complexes. We report here two cases of patients suspectedto have a mitochondrial disorder whose samples were
banked at the Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt).
The analysis was part of a collaborative BBMRI-Large
Prospective Cohort (BBMRI-LPC) project focused on
mitochondrial disorders. The full mitochondrial genome
sequenicng, whole exome sequencing (WES) and dataprocessing were carried out at Centro Nacional de Análisis
Genómico (CNAG-CRG). Phenotypic data was recorded inthe RD-Connect PhenoTips instance, and variant ﬁltration
and prioritisation was undertaken using the RD-Connect
Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform.
In one patient WES identi ﬁed a rare nuclear homozygous
mis-sense variant c.308C>T (rs749249430) in NDUFAF3
on chromosome 3, three INDELs in NDUFS1 ,intronic
variants in NDUFA10 on chromosome 2 and a hetero-
zygous intronic variant c.408 +6468C>T (rs752756523) in
NDUFB9 on chromosome 8. In the other patient, a mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) mis-sense mutation in MT-ATP6
c.163A>G at m.8689 and a splice donor variant c.207
+2T>G (rs782792601) and two mis-sense splice region
variants: c.206A>G (rs781909386) and c.205A>G
(rs782503581) in NDUFB11 were identi ﬁed on the X
chromosome.
NDUFAF3 is a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I
(C1) assembly factor. mtDNA mutation m.8689 is asso-
ciated with mitochondrial complex V de ﬁciency and Leigh
syndrome while NDUFB11 is associated with mitochon-
drial C1 de ﬁciency. The pathogenicity of these genes is in
the process of being con ﬁrmed in patient ﬁbroblasts.
WES followed by functional validation of disease alleles
could identify disease-causative variants in mitochondrial
respiratory chain complexes.
J. Vella: None. S. Laurie: None. L. Matalonga: None.
J. Borg: None. D. Soler: None. E. Said: None. A.
Felice: None.
P06.36C
Two long-surviving adults with Myopathy LacticAcidosis Sideroblastic Anemia 1 (MLASA1) due to
previously undescribed mutations in PUS1
M. F. Smeland
1, K. Arntzen2,3,4, M. van Ghelue1,3,G .Å .
M. Hansen1, H. Hjellnes1, M. I. Olsen5
1Dpt of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North
Norway, Tromsø, Norway,2Dpt of Neurology, University
Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway,3Department
of Clinical Medicine, The Arctic University of Norway,
Tromsø, Norway,4The National Neuromuscular Centre of
Norway, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø,Norway,
5Dpt of Haematology, University Hospital of
North Norway, Tromsø, Norway
Introduction: Myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic
anemia 1 (MLASA 1, MIM#600462) is a rare, autosomal
recessive mitochondrial disease which is most often fatal byadolescence. A few cases of long-surviving patients have
been reported. Microcephaly, short stature, cognitive
impairment and cardiomyopathy are variable features. Wepresent two females aged 26 and 31, further demonstrating
long survival in MLASA 1.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1347Materials and Methods: Patient 1 presented with myo-
pathy, lactacidosis and anemia at age 7, and MLASA 1 was
suspected. Patient 2 presented with anemia at age 24.
Severe exercise intolerance and myopathy since childhood
was revealed. In both patients PUS1 was sequenced by
Sanger/Next-Generation Sequencing. Further clinicalinvestigations and cDNA analysis are ongoing.
Results: In patient 1, compound heterozygosity for
NM_025215.5( PUS1 ): c.431G>A p.(Arg144Gln) and c.441
+1G>A was detected. Patient 2 was shown to be homo-
zygous for c.441 +1G>A. This mutation is predicted to
disrupt the donor splice site of intron 3, making aberrantsplicing likely. The missense variant c.431G>T p.
(Arg144Gln) is located both at a highly conserved nucleo-
tide and amino acid. Both patients have high S-lactate andchronic acidosis. Ringed sideroblasts were observed only
once, in patient 1, but have otherwise not been demon-
strable in our patients.
Conclusions: cDNA analysis might give further insights
into the consequences of the identi ﬁed mutations, possibly
explaining the long survival. Classical sideroblastic anemiais not obvious in all MLASA patients, and the expressivity
and age of presentation of symptoms are variable. Darbe-
poetin alfa seems effective in controlling the anemia, whilesevere lactacidosis is dif ﬁcult to treat.
M.F. Smeland: None. K. Arntzen: None. M. van
Ghelue: None. G.Å.M. Hansen: None. H. Hjellnes: None.
M.I. Olsen: None.
P06.37D
Maple syrup urine disease mutation spectrum in a
cohort of 40 consanguineous patients; insilico analysis of
novel mutations
M. Abiri
1, H. Saei Ahan2,1, M. Eghbali3, R. Karamzadeh4,
T. Shirzadeh5, Z. Shari ﬁ6, S. Zeinali7
1Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences,Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2Student Research
committee, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,3Department of
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
44Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at
Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,5Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, 41
Majlesi St., Vali Asr St, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
6Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Nursing and
Midwifery, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic AzadUniversity, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
7Departmentof Molecular Medicine, Biotech Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is the primary
aminoacidopathyaffecting branched-chain amino acid
(BCAA) metabolism. The disease is mainly caused by thedeﬁciency of an enzyme named branched-chained α-keto
acid dehydrogenase (BCKD), which consist of four
subunits, and encoded by BCKDHA,BCKDHB, DBT , and
DLD gene respectively. Consanguinity increases the chance
of the presence of pathogenic mutations in a homoallelic
state. Bearing this on our minds, autozygosity mapping wasperformed with two sets of multiplex polymorphic STR
(Short Tandem Repeat) markers linked to the above-
mentioned genes. The aim was to indirectly ﬁnd the
probable mutated gene in the studied families. Then
families who showed a homozygous haplotype for the
STR markers ﬂanking gene/genes were subsequently
sequenced. In this study, we also summarized our recent
molecular genetics ﬁndings to illustrate the mutation
spectrum of MSUD in our country with high rate ofconsanguineous marriage (38.4%). Eleven novel mutations
and some recently reported mutations were identi ﬁed. We
found that BCKDHB mutation is the most common mutatedgene in our study which is different from other reports in
other parts of the world. Additionally, structural modelling
of MSUD mutations has been analyzed to predict thepathogenicity of the newly identi ﬁed variants. Identi ﬁcation
of these mutations will further expand the spectrum of
known gene mutations and contributes to the genotype-phenotype correlation and is very important in prenatal
molecular diagnosis of MSUD at- risk families.
M. Abiri: None. H. Saei Ahan: None. M. Eghbali:
None. R. Karamzadeh: None. T. Shirzadeh: None. Z.
Shari ﬁ:None. S. Zeinali: None.
P06.38A
Identi ﬁcation and characterization of new RNASEH1
mutations associated with PEO syndrome and multiplemtDNA deletions
L. Carreño-Gago
1,2, C. Blazquez-Bermejo1,2, J. Díaz-
Manera3,2, Y. Camara1,2, E. Gallardo3,2, R. Marti1,2,
J. Torres-Torronteras1,2, E. Garcia-Arumi4,1,2
1Departament de Patología Mitocondrial i Neuromuscular,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca
(VHIR), UAB, Barcelona, Spain,2Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain,3Servei de Neurologia,
Laboratori de Neurologia Experimental, Hospital de laSanta Creu i Sant Pau i Institut de Recerca de HSCSP,
UAB, Barcelona, Spain,
4Àrea de Genètica Clínica i1348Molecular. Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron.,
Barcelona, Spain
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion and deletion
syndrome encompasses a group of disorders caused by
mutations in genes involved in mtDNA replication andmaintenance. The clinical phenotype ranges from fatal
infantile hepatocerebral forms to mild adult onset progres-
sive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO). We report the case ofa patient with PEO and multiple mtDNA deletions, with
two new homozygous mutations in RNASEH1 . The ﬁrst
mutation (c.487T>C) is located in the same catalyticdomain as the four previously reported mutations, and the
second (c.258_260del) is located in the connection domain,
where no mutations have been reported. In silico study of
the mutations predicted only the ﬁrst mutation as patho-
genic, but functional studies showed that both mutations
cause loss of ribonuclease H1 activity. mtDNA replicationdysfunction was demonstrated in patient ﬁbroblasts, which
were unable to recover normal mtDNA copy number after
ethidium bromide-induced mtDNA depletion. Our resultsdemonstrate the pathogenicity of two new RNASEH1
variants found in a patient with PEO syndrome, multiple
deletions, and mild mitochondrial myopathy. This work wassupported by the Spanish Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias; EGA is the recipient of
a grant from the FIS PI15-01428-FEDER. JT was funded bya fellowship granted by the Generalitat de Catalunya
(PERIS program, SLT002/16/00370).
L. Carreño-Gago: None. C. Blazquez-Bermejo: None.
J. Díaz-Manera: None. Y. Camara: None. E. Gallardo:
None. R. Marti: None. J. Torres-Torronteras: None. E.
Garcia-Arumi: None.
P06.39B
Novel mutation m.13091T>C in MT-ND5 gene leads to
MELAS phenotype - retrospective study in Czech
patients with mutations in mtDNA-encoded subunits of
complex I
T. Da ňhelovská, H. Kolá řová, K. Beránková,
A. Vondrá čková, H. Hansíková, T. Honzík, J. Zeman,
M. Tesa řová
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General
University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
Isolated respiratory chain complex I (CI) de ﬁciency, the
most common cause of mitochondrial disorders (MD), may
be caused by mutations in nuclear or mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA). We analysed patients with maternally inherited
multisystem MD due to mutations in mtDNA-encodedsubunits (MT-ND genes) of complex I diagnosed in our
department.
Material: In the cohort of 106 unrelated families with
mtDNA mutations, mutations in MT-ND genes were found
in 13 patients from 12 families.
Results: Among 13 patients, 8 different heteroplasmic
mtDNA mutations in MT-ND1 (2x), MT-ND3 (1x) and MT-
ND5 (5x) genes were found. In patient with childhood-onset
of migraines followed by stroke-like episodes later inadulthood, novel heteroplasmic mutation m.13091T>C in
MT-ND5 was found. Six patients with heteroplasmy levels
>60% developed Leigh syndrome and their prognosis wassigniﬁcantly worse compared to
ﬁve patients with hetero-
plasmy levels <60%. MELAS syndrome including stroke-
like episodes was observed in these ﬁve patients. In two
children, the diseases started with optic neuropathy
mimicking LHON syndrome, later it transitioned to multi-
system diseases compatible with MELAS syndrome. CIactivities in muscle mitochondria were decreased in most
patients and mitochondrial energy-generating capacity was
altered in some patients.
Conclusions: Patients with multisystem MD due to
mutations in mtDNA-encoded subunits of complex I
usually develop Leigh or MELAS syndromes and represent11% of families with maternally inherited MD diagnosed in
our centre. Early onset of the disease and higher mtDNA
mutation heteroplasmy levels are accompanied with Leighphenotype and worse prognosis.
Supported by AZV17-30965A, RVO VFN 64165, AZV16-
32341A, and AZV16-33018A .
T. Daňhelovská: None. H. Kolá řová: None. K.
Beránková: None. A. Vondrá čková: None. H. Hansí-
ková: None. T. Honzík: None. J. Zeman: None. M.
Tesařová: None.
P06.40C
The mutation spectrum of NAGLU in
mucopolysaccharidosis type III B patients
F. Ozkinay
1, D. A. Emecen1, M. Kose1, E. Isik1,
E. A. Bozaci2, E. Canda2, B. Tuysuz3, T. Atik1, H. Onay4
1Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey,2Subdivision of Pediatric Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey,3Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Cerrahpasa University,Istanbul, Turkey,
4Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty
of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey
Aim: Mucopolysaccharidosis type III B (MPS IIIB) is an
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused byAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1349mutations in the NAGLU gene which codes the lysosomal
enzyme alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase. The major symp-
toms of the disease are cognitive and neurological defects.
In this study molecular spectrum of 13 MPS IIIB patients
were evaluated.
Materyal and Methods: Twelve MPS IIIB patients from
11 families both clinically and molecularly diagnosed were
included in this study. NAGLU gene sequencing was per-
formed using a next generation sequencing platform (Illu-mina MiSeq). Demographic, clinical and laboratory ﬁndings
of the patients were obtained from the hospital records.
Results: Ten different mutations in 13 MPS IIIB patients
were identi ﬁed. Eight of the all mutations were missense,
one mutation was splice site and one large deletion. Three
mutations (c.509G>T, c.700C>G, and c.1000G>A) weredeﬁned for the ﬁrst time in this study.
Conclucion: Our study expanded the mutation spectrum
of the NAGLU gene, contributing to the improved genetic
counseling of MPSIIIB patients. In accordance with the
literature, missense mutations were also the most common
mutations in our study.
F. Ozkinay: None. D.A. Emecen: None. M. Kose:
None. E. Isik: None. E.A. Bozaci: None. E. Canda: None.
B. Tuysuz: None. T. Atik: None. H. Onay: None.
P06.41D
Diagnostic exome in neurometabolic disorders
S. Beck-Woedl
1,2, L. Laugwitz1,2,3, R. Buchert1,
M. Grimmel1, M. Sturm1, U. Grasshoff1,2, O. Rieß1,2,
T. Haack1,2
1Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen,
Germany,2ZSE, Rare Disease Center, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,3Children ’s Hospital,
Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine,University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of neurometabolic
diseases is challenging due to the large number of
established and candidate disease genes associated with an
extreme heterogeneity of clinical presentations at variableages. Especially in infancy-onset of inborn errors of
metabolism an early diagnosis is crucial to guide down-
stream clinical management and treatment decisions.
Materials and Methods: We here report on the results of
exome-based diagnostics of 209index cases with clinically
suspected neurometabolic diseases. Coding genomicregions were enriched with a SureSelect Human All Exon
Kit V6/7 (Agilent technologies) for subsequent sequencing
on an Illumina HiSeq2500/NovaSeq6000 system. Clinicalvariant prioritization included different ﬁltering steps (e.g.
MAF < 0.1 % in gnomAD, in-house database).Results: In 83 cases (40%), we identi ﬁed likely patho-
genic or pathogenic variants in genes that have been asso-
ciated with mitochondrial diseases (42), other
neurometabolic diseases (21) or other neurodevelopmental
disorders (20). In 58 cases (28%) we identi ﬁed variants of
unknown signi ﬁcance where follow up studies for func-
tional analyses are pending. Moreover we newly identi ﬁed 8
candidate genes affecting the mitochondrial function or
selenoprotein metabolism. However 27% of the casesremain unsolved. Further ongoing investigations of the
latter in a research setting include the additional analysis of
parental DNAs (trio analysis) as well as full genome,transcriptome and proteome analysis.
Conclusions: Although presenting with a wide pheno-
typic spectrum WES facilitated a de ﬁnite diagnosis in 40%
and a possible diagnosis pending follow up in 28% of
the cases.
S. Beck-Woedl: None. L. Laugwitz: None. R. Buchert:
None. M. Grimmel: None. M. Sturm: None. U. Grassh-
off:None. O. Rieß: None. T. Haack: None.
P06.42A
The study of the full spectrum of variants leading to
hyperphenylalaninemia have revealed 10 new variantsin the PAH gene
I. Kuznetcova, P. Gundorova, O. Ryzhkova, A. PolyakovFederal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for
Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is a group of
disease characterized by elevated concentrations of pheny-lalanine in blood. HPA includes phenylketonuria and BH4-
deﬁcient forms of hyperphenylalaninemia.
Materials and Methods: 1265 unrelated probands from
Russia were previously searched for 25 frequent mutations
in the PAH gene. DNA samples of 293 probands without or
with one frequent mutation were analyzed. The next gen-eration sequencing (NGS) of PAH ,PTS,GCH1 ,PCBD1 ,
QDPR ,SPR and DNAJC12 genes to search for point
mutations and MLPA method to search for gross deletions
were conducted.
Results: Among 327 chromosomes without identi ﬁed
mutations, mutations in the PAH gene were found on 259
chromosomes, and mutations in the PTS gene were found
on 10 chromosomes. On 10 chromosomes gross deletions
by the MLPA method were detected. 104 rare variants oftheРАН gene, including 10 variants not previously
described (p.Pro69Thr, p.Leu83Trpfs*9, p.Gln232Pro, p.
Cys237Phe, p.Ala300Asp, p.Gly312Ser, p.Thr328Pro, p.Tyr417*, p.Asp435Val, IVS9-1G>C), and 6 variants of the1350PTS gene were revealed. Throught the use all the presented
methods, mutations were found on 97.3% of chromosomes.
Conclusions: According to the study results, a spectrum
of mutations leading to hyperphenylalaninemia in Russia
was established. The data obtained helped to reveal rare
mutations of the PAH gene and establish the percentage of
tetrahydrobiopterin-dependent HPA forms in Russia - 0.4%.
I. Kuznetcova: None. P. Gundorova: None. O. Ryzh-
kova: None. A. Polyakov: None.
P06.43B
Correlation of BDNF, LY86, ABCG2 polymorphismsand obesity in an Romanian Caucasian male cohort
O. Andrei
1, P. Iordache2, G. Ursu3, V. Radoi4,
L. Bohiltea4, R. Ursu4
1”Carol Davila ”University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Bucharest, Romania,2”Carol Davila ”University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Epidemiology,
Bucharest, Romania,3”Agrippa Ionescu ”Emergency
Military Hospital, Bucharest, Romania,4”Carol Davila ”
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of
Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania
Introduction: Obesity is one of the most important public
health problems worldwide. In Romania, the prevalence ofobesity is increasing and it is more common in male. The
aim of this study is to identify the genes involved in the
predisposition and pathogenesis of obesity. 3 allelic variantsof genes related to this condition were analysed:
rs11030104 of BDNF gene, LY86 gene rs2199936 poly-
morphism and rs2199936 of ABCG2 gene.
Methods: This study consists of 5281 male patients
hospitalized between 2012 and 2017 in multiple clinics in
Bucharest for various medical reasons. All subjects were ofself‐reported European descent. No signi ﬁcant difference
was observed between the average age of the cases (66.9)
and controls (64.3). DNA was extracted from whole bloodat deCODE Genetics (Reykjavik, Iceland) and genotyped,
using In ﬁnium OmniExpress ‐24 bead chips (Illumina). A
total of 716 503 SNPs were genotyped for each individualincluded in the study.
Results: The BDNF rs11030104 polymorphism has
shown statistical correlation for obesity alike with theworldwide rates (p =0.0004642). Another statistical corre-
lation between obesity and the rs1294410 LY86 variant,
responsible for the waist to hip ratio variation, was identi-ﬁed (p=0.003984). ABCG2 rs2199936, which is involved
in the serum uric acid adjustment, has also shown statistical
correlation for obesity (p =0.003733; OR =0.4707).
Conclusions: The results suggest that in the European
male population there is a strong correlation between theBDNF, LY86, ABCG2 polymorphisms and obesity. The
research is part of the EUFP7 ProMarka and ROMCAN
studies. Replication studies for con ﬁrmation of these
markes are ongoing.
O. Andrei: None. P. Iordache: None. G. Ursu: None.
V. Radoi: None. L. Bohiltea: None. R. Ursu: None.
P06.45D
Gene discovery for favourable adiposity using cross-phenotype analysis
L. O. Huang
1, U. Schick2, N. Yang2, T. O. Kilpeläinen1,
R. J. F. Loos2
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Copenhagen N, Denmark,2The Charles
Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States
Obesity has become a global pandemic in the last few
decades. It is often associated with cardiometaboliccomorbidities such as cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes. However, some individuals remain cardiometabo-
lically healthy despite being obese, also called themetabolically healthy obese (MHO). The biological
mechanisms that underlie MHO are poorly understood. To
identify novel adiposity-increasing variants with protectivecardiometabolic effects, we performed pairwise analyses of
adiposity and cardiometabolic traits using available sum-
mary statistics from 11 GWAS. These include threeadiposity traits (body fat percentage, body mass index,
and waist-to-hip ratio) and eight cardiometabolic traits
(high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipopro-tein cholesterol, triglycerides, fasting glucose and insulin,
blood pressure, and incident coronary artery disease and
type 2 diabetes). We identi ﬁed genome-wide signi ﬁcant
associations (P<5x10
-8) with any of the 24 trait pairs
consisting of one of three adiposity traits and one of the
eight cardiometabolic traits. This resulted in the discoveryof 62 independent loci residing in gene regions such as
COBLL1, PPARG, VEGFB andVEGFA . Results of tissue
and cell enrichment analyses using DEPICT implicatestrongest enrichment in adipose tissue, adrenal cortex, liver,
and arteries. Gene set enrichment analyses using DEPICT
highlighted several pathways (P<5x10
-4), such as “abnor-
mal muscle cell glucose uptake ”,“decreased percent body
fat”, and “response to insulin stimulus ”. Our results provide
insights into biological pathways that may underlie MHOand could shed light on future drug development targeting
improvement in cardiometabolic pro ﬁle of unhealthy obese
individuals.
Danish Council for Independent Research (DFF6110-
00183), Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF18CC0034900)Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1351L.O. Huang: None. U. Schick: None. N. Yang: None.
T.O. Kilpeläinen: None. R.J.F. Loos: None.
P06.46A
A clinical case of somatic mosaicism in an unaffected
father of female patient with ornithine transcarbamylasedeﬁciency (OTC)
N. Semenova
1, I. Anisimova1, O. Shchagina1,
A. Chuchrova1, O. Ryzhkova1, I. Bychkov1,
N. Pechatnikova2
1Reseach Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Morozov Children ’s City Clinical Hospital,
Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Ornithine transcarbamylase de ﬁciency
(OTC) is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism of theurea cycle. OTC de ﬁciency can occur as a severe neonatal-
onset disease in males and as a post-neonatal-onset (partial
deﬁciency) disease in females.
Materials and Methods: We present family with 4-years
old girl who has clinical symptoms of urea cycle disorders.
Another members of family are healthy. Proband ’s perinatal
period was normal. Since the ﬁrst year she refused to eat
meat product. At age of 3 years she was detected liver
transaminase elevated (more than 10 norm) with neurolo-gical symptoms. Orotic acid concentration in urine was
normal. A low-protein diet was effective: a liver transami-
nase normalized, neurological symptoms stopped.
Results: Analysis of whole exome sequencing data
revealed a pathogenic heterozygous variant c.78-1G>A in
OTC gene in the proband. This variant was con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing in proband, wasn ’t detected in her
mother and her healthy older sister, and was detected in her
father in heterozygous state in mosaic form. In her father wedetected only one copy of X -chromosome by different
methods, including cytogenetic. We detected mosaicism of
variant c.78-1G>A in OTC gene in the different tissues(buccal epithelium, blood, seminal ﬂuid, urinary sediment)
which are having an origin from every germ layer (ecto-
derm, mesoderm, endoderm).
Conclusions: Our clinical case shows that affected
females may inherit the OTC pathogenic variant from her
father who doesn't have clinical symptoms of disease. It isimportant for determination of genetic risk and discussion
of the necessary of prenatal testing.
N. Semenova: None. I. Anisimova: None. O. Shcha-
gina: None. A. Chuchrova: None. O. Ryzhkova: None. I.
Bychkov: None. N. Pechatnikova: None.P06.47B
Enrichment of variants affecting mitochondrial
metabolism in patients with Parkinson disease
G. Bergant, A. Maver, B. Peterlin
Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia
While age-related accumulation of somatic mitochondrial
mutations has been demonstrated in Parkinson disease (PD)
patients, the role of germline mitochondrial variants has
never been systematically studied. In the present study, weaimed to investigate the germline genetic burden in genes
affecting mitochondrial function and the role of the
subsequent genetic variability in PD. For this reason, wecompared the genetic variability in 70 patients with early
onset or familial PD without a discovered monogenic cause
with that of 253 controls. Mitochondrial genome wasreconstructed from clinical or whole exome sequencing
data, which allowed us to investigate both mitochondrial as
well as nuclear genes, including nuclear genes involved inhuman mitochondrial disorders. For further analysis,
variants were ﬁltered excluding nuclear variants based on
in-house populational data, those with mean allelefrequency over 5% in public databases and synonymous
mitochondrial variants. We detected signi ﬁcant differences
in burden of variants in three mitochondrially encodedgenes. The greatest increase of variant burden between PD
and controls was observed in MTND5 (38.6% versus
26.9%), MTCO2 (10.5% versus 5.5%) and MTND4L (7%versus 0.5%), with the ﬁrst and last being mitochondrial
respiratory complex I components. No signi ﬁcant differ-
ences have been observed in the variant burden of nucleargenes. In conclusion, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis
that germline mitochondrial variants might contribute to the
pathogenesis of PD.
G. Bergant: None. A. Maver: None. B. Peterlin: None.
P06.48C
Rapid mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) sequencing:
facilitating rapid diagnosis of mitochondrial diseases in
paediatric acute care
L. S. Akesson1,2,3, S. Eggers1, C. J. Love1, B. Chong1,
M. F. Hunter3,4, E. I. Krzesinski3,4, N. J. Brown1,2,
T. Y. Tan1,2, C. M. Richmond1, D. R. Thorburn1,2,5,
J. Christodoulou1,2,5, Z. Stark1,2,5, S. Lunke1,2,5
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne,
Australia,2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
3Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia,
4Monash University, Melbourne, Australia,5Australian
Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia1352Introduction: Standard rapid genomic testing techniques
analyse nuclear DNA variants using exome and/or genome
sequencing (ES/GS). Rapid mtDNA analysis is not
routinely available, particularly in centres performing ES,
which does not deliver clinical-grade mtDNA sequencing.We describe our experience using rapid mtDNA sequencing
in tandem with an ES-based rapid genomic diagnosis
program as part of the Australian Genomics Acute Careﬂagship.
Methods: Two infants presenting with persistent lactic
acidosis and bone marrow failure were recruited for rapidgenomic testing. With clinical suspicion of mitochondrial
disease, both infants underwent rapid ES and mtDNA
sequencing in tandem, the latter using Nextera librariesfrom a full length mtDNA amplicon.
Results: ES was non-diagnostic in both infants. mtDNA
sequencing identi ﬁed a single large mtDNA deletion in both
infants, diagnostic of Pearson syndrome (MIM 557000).
Diagnostic reports were issued within 73 hours 55 minutes
and 54 hours 25 minutes, respectively. Both infants avoidedinvasive bone marrow biopsies and a range of other
investigations.
Conclusions: Rapid mtDNA sequencing in tandem with
ES results in additional diagnoses in seriously ill children
with suspected mitochondrial pathology, suggesting that ES
alone may be insuf ﬁcient in this setting. When designing
rapid genomic diagnosis programs, centres should consider
incorporating mtDNA ampli ﬁcation and analysis in indivi-
duals with suspected mitochondrial pathology, by combin-ing ES and mtDNA sequencing in tandem, or analysing
mtDNA data from GS, which captures the mitochondrial
genome.
L.S. Akesson: None. S. Eggers: None. C.J. Love: None.
B. Chong: None. M.F. Hunter: None. E.I. Krzesinski:
None. N.J. Brown: None. T.Y. Tan: None. C.M. Rich-
mond: None. D.R. Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou:
None. Z. Stark: None. S. Lunke: None.
P06.49D
Biochemical and molecular genetic diagnosis of
Moldavian PKU patients: A novel missense mutation inPAH gene
K. R. Boiciuc
1, C. Gemperle-Britschgi2, D. Sato2,
N. Rimann2, T. Croitori1, D. Blanita1, E. Halabudenco1,
V. Sacara1, B. Thöny2, N. Usurelu1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova,
Republic of,2University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zürich,
SwitzerlandPhenylketonuria(PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism
involving impaired metabolism of phenylalanine that leads
to severe mental retardation. In Moldova PKU diagnosis is
based on newborn screening(NBS) from 1989.
Materials and Methods: Diagnosis of 123 Moldavian
PKU/HPA patients was based on Phe level >3mg/dL and
genetic analysis by PCR/RFLP method of hot-spot muta-
tions ( R408W, P281L, R158Q, R261Q, R252W, IVS12
+1G>A, L48S, R261X, G272X, IVS10-11G>A) carried out
on Eppendorf MasterCyclerPro followed by “Sanger ”DNA
sequencing on ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer(Switzerland),
ABI 3500dx Genetic Analyzer(Moldova).
The results: During 28 years, 107 PKU patients have
been identi ﬁed by NBS and 16 patients - extra screening,
showing the total PKU incidence of 1:6463 newborns,screening rate 92-97% for last 5 years. Most of them(69%)
have a classical PKU phenotype( Phe levels at diagnosis
24,3-52mg/dl), followed by moderate PKU(21%), mildPKU(7%), and HPA(2%). The 105 PKU patients were
subjected to genetic analysis of PAH gene being identi ﬁed
32 disease causing mutations: 18 missense(56%), 8 splicing(25%), 3 deletion(9%) and 3 nonsense(9%) mutations, that
compound 47 different genotypes in Moldavian PKU
patients. The most common mutation was R408W found in
50.5% of cases. One novel mutation c.2T>C in exon 1 was
identi ﬁed in a patient with constantly Phelevel ~13mg/dL,
slight intellectual disability and no other mutations in PAHgene was detected, that was suggestive for errors in BH4
biosynthesis genes.
Conclusion: Efﬁciency of PKU diagnosis in Moldova
has been increased, due to NBS coverage and mutation
detection over 90% rate, applying a targeted specialized
treatment and prenatal diagnosis.
K.R. Boiciuc: None. C. Gemperle-Britschgi: None. D.
Sato: None. N. Rimann: None. T. Croitori: None. D.
Blanita: None. E. Halabudenco: None. V. Sacara: None.
B. Thöny: None. N. Usurelu: None.
P06.50A
Whole genome sequencing characterizes precise break
points and extent of heterozygous deletion in PAH in a
patient identi ﬁed by newborn screening
E. K. Samuelsson, S. Rajaei, J. Asin Cayuela
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Göteborg, Sweden
Since 1965, newborn babies in Sweden are screened for
Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) by biochemical
analysis. For the past few years, ﬁndings are genetically
characterized in our laboratory by exon panel sequencingand Sanger. Here we complement exon panel sequencing
with whole genome sequencing (WGS), which is superiorAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1353characterizing copy number variations. Exon panel sequen-
cing of a sample positive for phenylketonuria (PKU) on
newborn screening detected a heterozygous SNV (single
nucleotide variant) in a well known CpG hotspot for PKU,
inPAH . Copy number analysis (CNV) indicated a
heterozygous deletion spanning exon 3 PAH , but not exon
2 nor 4. Using whole genome sequencing, we were able to
reveal the exact break points and size of the deletion. Exon
3o f PAH is involved in encoding the regulatory domain
(located at the N-terminal) of phenylalanine hydroxylase.
This domain determines the speci ﬁcity of the enzyme for
the amino acid phenylalanine. The break points as well asthe SNV, were subsequently veri ﬁed by Sanger sequencing
and both parents were also analyzed by Sanger sequencing
to con ﬁrm their heterozygous genotypes. The proband was
consequently found to be compound heterozygote, resulting
in classical PKU.
E.K. Samuelsson: None. S. Rajaei: None. J. Asin
Cayuela: None.
P06.51B
Proteostasis regulators as a possible mutation-speci ﬁc
therapeutic approach for PMM2-CDG
D. Gallego
1, A. Vilas1, P. Yuste2, L. R. Desviat1,
M. Ugarte1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, A. Gámez1, B. Pérez1
1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares
(CEDEM), Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Centro de InvestigaciónBiomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,
2Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Introduction: PMM2-CDG, the most common glycosyla-
tion disorder for which there is no cure, has been suggestedto be a conformational disease. The misfolded nature of
most of the disease-causing mutations makes the use of
stabilizing molecules, pharmacological chaperones (PCs) orproteostasis regulators (PRs), a promising therapeutic
strategy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect
of PRs on the stability and activity of PMM2 unstablemutants and decipher their molecular mechanisms.
Materials and Methods: Patient-derived ﬁbroblasts
transduced with their own PMM2 folding or oligomeriza-tion mutation were treated with different concentrations of
PRs (celastrol and MG-132) or combining celastrol and a
PC (CVIII). Their effect was studied by western blot andPMM enzymatic assay. The expression levels of several
molecular chaperones (HSPs) were assessed by qRT-PCR
and western blot. The speci ﬁcity of the molecular chaper-
ones involved was evaluated by using speci ﬁc HSP70 or
HSP90 inhibitors.Results: Celastrol treatment signi ﬁcantly increases
PMM2 protein levels and activity of various mutants in the
cellular model. These results correlate with an increment in
the transcriptional and proteomic levels of some HSPs of
the proteostasis network. The HSP90 inhibitor, but not the
HSP70 one, interferes with the effect of celastrol on PMM2.The combination of celastrol and CVIII has a mutation-
dependent synergistic effect on PMM2 activity.
Conclusions: These results show the positive effect of
celastrol on the PMM2 stability and activity through the
HSP90-driven modulation of the proteostasis network. This
is a proof-of-concept of the possible therapeutic use of PRsand PCs for PMM2-CDG.
D. Gallego: None. A. Vilas: None. P. Yuste: None. L.R.
Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None.
A. Gámez: None. B. Pérez: None.
P06.52C
Functional consequences of bi-allelic PNPT1 variants
associated with multisystemic disease
R. Rius
1,2, L. G. Riley3,4, N. J. Van Bergen1,2,
A. G. Compton1,2, D. J. Amor1,2,5, M. Kava6,7,8,
S. Balasubramaniam9,10,11, M. Fanjul-Fernandez5,
M. Cowley12,13,14, M. Fahey15,T .Y .T a n1,2,5,
D. R. Thorburn1,2,5, J. Christodoulou1,2,5
1Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Melbourne,
Australia,2Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,3Kids Research, The
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia,
4Discipline of Child & Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical
School, University of Sydney, Syndey, Australia,5Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children ’s Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia,6Department of Neurology, Perth
Children ’s Hospital, Perth, Australia,7School of
Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western
Australia, Perth, Australia,8Department of Metabolic
Medicine and Rheumatology, Perth Childrens ’Hospital,
Perth, Australia,9Discipline of Child & Adolescent Health,
Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia,10Western Sydney Genetics Program, The
Children ’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia,
11Discipline of Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,12Children's
Cancer Institute, Randwick, Australia,13School of Women's
and Children's Health, UNSW Sydney, Syndey, Australia,
14Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Sydney, Australia,15Department of Paediatrics, Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: PNPT1 encodes the Polyribonucleotide
nucleotidyltransferase 1 protein which predominantly1354localizes to the mitochondria, and is involved in multiple
RNA processing functions. Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in
PNPT1 have been identi ﬁed in patients with a hetero-
geneous phenotype ranging from non-syndromic deafness
to a multisystemic presentation with severe global devel-
opmental delay, seizures, dystonia, choreoathetosis,ophthalmological abnormalities and different MRI- ﬁndings.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 5 unrelated
patients with bi-allelic variants in PNPT1 identi ﬁed through
massively parallel sequencing. The patients presented with
clinical features in common with previously reported mul-
tisystemic cases. Using patient ﬁbroblasts and peripheral
blood samples, we performed functional studies to con ﬁrm
pathogenicity including cDNA studies, complex I (CI) and
IV (CIV) enzyme activity assays, immunoblotting, RT-qPCR analysis for detection of mitochondrial unprocessed
transcripts, and expression of targeted interferon
signalling genes.
Results: Compared to controls, patient ﬁbroblasts showed
mildly reduced CI and CIV protein activities, there was also
a reduction in PNPT1 protein expression and a 2-6 foldaccumulation of MT-ND5 +MT-ND6 and MT-CYTB +MT-
ND6 mitochondrial RNA unprocessed transcripts. In blood,
there was an increased expression of 6 genes involved in theinterferon I pathway.
Conclusions: The accumulation of mitochondrial
unprocessed transcripts and increased interferon pathwayexpression provides further evidence for the role of PNPT1
in mitochondrial RNA processing, and of the possible
contribution of an immune response to disease pathogen-esis. It also demonstrates that in order to con ﬁrm patho-
genicity, functional analyses of the primarily affected
processes are more sensitive than the modest defectsdetected downstream on the respiratory chain enzyme
activities.
R. Rius: None. L.G. Riley: None. N.J. Van Bergen:
None. A.G. Compton: None. D.J. Amor: None. M. Kava:
None. S. Balasubramaniam: None. M. Fanjul-Fernan-
dez: None. M. Cowley: None. M. Fahey: None. T.Y. Tan:
None. D.R. Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou: None.
P06.53D
Whole exome sequencing (WES) in suspected
mitochodrial disease: PUS1 gene and MLASA spectrum
F. Peluso
1, B. Siri2, V. Palazzo3, A. Provenzano1,
R. Artuso3, A. Pagliazzi1, G. Forzano1, G. Contro'1,F .D i
Giovanni1, T. Foiardelli4, F. Bassanese4, S. Savasta4,
S. Giglio1,3
1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical
Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University of Firenze,
Firenze, Italy,2Department of Pediatrics, OIRM, Universityof Torino, Torino, Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer
Children's University Hospital, Firenze, Italy,4Pediatric
Clinic, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico "San Matteo",
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
Mitochondrial diseases (MD) are the most common cause of
inherited metabolic diseases. Combined respiratory chain
(RC) complexes defects are caused by mutations in the
mtDNA-encoded RNA products and mutations in nucleargenes involved in mtDNA translation machinery. PUS1 ,a
nuclear gene, encodes for cytoplasmatic and mitochondrial
tRNA pseudouridine-synthase-1, that converts uridine intopseudouridine in several tRNA positions increasing the
efﬁciency of protein synthesis on both compartments.
Mutations in PUS1 cause MLASA syndrome, a rare
autosomal recessive disorder of oxidative phosphorylation
and iron metabolism, clinically characterized by Mitochon-
drial Myopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Sideroblastic Anemia.We report clinical, biochemical and molecular ﬁndings of
unreported patient in which Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES) revealed the presence of new biallelic mutations inPUS1 . Review of the 16 PUS1 mutant patients published to
date demonstrates a huge clinical heterogeneity with
intellectual disability, microcephaly and anemia as typicalclinical elements. Given the paucity of the patients
described, it is not possible to delineate a complete
phenotypic picture and the associated clinical evolution,and it is not possible to establish an accurate genotype -
phenotype correlation that allows us to indicate a proper
prognosis and follow-up. Moreover, our patient had severeosteoporosis with multiple fractures that were never
previously reported in the literature and a more early
evolution of neuro-muscular symptoms than the otherpatients. WES is increasing the diagnostic yield in MD, in
particular enhancing the ability to identify potential nuclear
gene mutations in patients with biochemically de ﬁned
defects affecting multiple mitochondrial RC and complex
phenotype.
F. Peluso: None. B. Siri: None. V. Palazzo: None. A.
Provenzano: None. R. Artuso: None. A. Pagliazzi: None.
G. Forzano: None. G. Contro': None. F. Di giovanni:
None. T. Foiardelli: None. F. Bassanese: None. S.
Savasta: None. S. Giglio: None.
P06.54A
Mitochondrial disease caused by a novel homozygous
mutation (Gly106del) in the SCO1 gene
N. Brix
1, J. M. Jensen2, I. S. Pedersen3,4, A. Ernst3,
S. Frost2, P. Bogaard5, L. Bender1, M. B. Petersen2,4
1Dept. of Pediatrics, Aalborg, Denmark,2Dept. of Clinical
Genetics, Aalborg, Denmark,3Section of MolecularAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1355Diagnostic, Aalborg, Denmark,4Dept. of Clinical
Medicine, Aalborg, Denmark,5Pathological institute,
Aalborg, Denmark
Introduction: The Cytochrome C oxidase assembly protein
SCO1 gene encodes a mitochondrial protein essential for
the mammalian energy metabolism. Only three cases of
SCO1 mutations have thus far been reported. All cases
presented with lactate acidosis and encephalopathy. Twohad hepatopathy and hypotonia. One further presented with
intrauterine growth retardation and hypertrophic cardiomyo-
pathy leading to cardiac failure.
Here we present a case of a girl of Afghan con-
sanguineous parents, born premature with a novel homo-
zygous mutation in the SCO1 gene and a different
phenotype than previously reported cases.
Within the ﬁrst two hours, the girl developed severe
lactate acidosis and hypoglycemia. Echocardiography, eyeexamination, ultrasound of the brain, kidneys and urinary
tract were normal. As was the level of ammonium. At four
days old an investigation of suspected metabolic diseasewas initiated including whole exome sequencing. Merely
ﬁve days later whole exome sequencing revealed a novel
homozygous mutation in the SCO1 gene (c.317_319del-
GAG) in exon 2 resulting in an in-frame deletion of Gly106.
A muscle biopsy was later performed, showing reduced
activity of complex IV in accordance with the SCO1
mutation detected by whole exome sequencing. The girl
died 1 month old.
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed a novel homozygous SCO1
mutation (Gly106del) in a patient with a clinical course of
mitochondrial disease different from previously reported
SCO1 cases. Mitochondrial disease may manifest in neo-
nates, but early diagnosis has so far been dif ﬁcult. Because
of improved technique as whole exome sequencing early
diagnosis and consideration of treatment level are nowpossible.
N. Brix: None. J.M. Jensen: None. I.S. Pedersen: None.
A. Ernst: None. S. Frost: None. P. Bogaard: None. L.
Bender: None. M.B. Petersen: None.
P06.55B
Characterization of seven mitochondrial DNA variants
of unknown signi ﬁcance by quanti ﬁcation of single cell
heteroplasmy
E. Zereg
1, S. Bannwarth1,2, G. Morel1, A. Chaussenot1,
S. Ait-El-Mkadem1, K. Fragaki1, B. Cha ﬁno1, M. Berthet1,
V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2, C. Rouzier1
1Departement of Medical Genetics, National Center for
Mitochondrial Diseases, Nice Teaching Hospital, Nice,France,2Nice Sophia-Antipolis University, IRCAN, CNRS,
INSERM, UMR 7284 & U1081, 06107 Nice, France
Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with a variety of
diseases. Each human cell contains several mitochondria
which hold multiple copies of mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA). mtDNA heteroplasmy is the coexisting of wild-
type and mutant mtDNA molecules in a cell. The proportion
of mutated mtDNA should exceed a threshold to causebiochemical defects. NGS leaded us to identify an
increasing number of pathogenic variants but also of variant
of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS).Only a tiny sub-group of
VUS was functionally evaluated with certitude, while the
pathogenicity of the great majority was only assessed in-
silico. We investigated seven patients with clinical features,muscle biopsy and biochemical defects suggesting a
mitochondrial dysfunction, including the presence of
cytochrome c oxidase - de ﬁcient ﬁbers (COX (-)). mtDNA
sequencing found a VUS for each patient. In order to
determine the pathogenicity of these VUS, we quanti ﬁed the
level of mtDNA heteroplasmy by semi-quantitative ﬂuor-
escent PCR in muscle ﬁbres COX ( +) and COX (-) single
cells. We found a statistically signi ﬁcant heteroplasmic
difference between individual COX ( +) and COX (-) cells
for 6 patients, which supports the pathogenicity of these
VUS, allowing us to con ﬁrm the diagnosis for these
patients. Determining the pathogenicity of the VUSidenti ﬁed by NGS is becoming a major goal to reduce
diagnostic wandering in patients. The single cell hetero-
plasmy quanti ﬁcation is a gold-standard method for the
mutation-disease causal link assessment and should be used
routinely in diagnosis. In this objective, we designed a
fastest and easiest single cell quanti ﬁcation tool.
E. Zereg: None. S. Bannwarth: None. G. Morel: None.
A. Chaussenot: None. S. Ait-El-Mkadem: None. K.
Fragaki: None. B. Cha ﬁno:None. M. Berthet: None. V.
Paquis-Flucklinger: None. C. Rouzier: None.
P06.56C
TANGO2 associated autosomal recessive disease: A
novel case
R. Ripszám, K. Hadzsiev, J. Zima, Á. Till, B. Melegh
University of Pécs, Medical School, Pécs, HungaryIntroduction: TANGO2-related disorder was ﬁrst pub-
lished in 2016. Homozygous or compound heterozygousmutations of TANGO2 gene lead to the disease Metabolic
encephalomyopathic crises, recurrent, with rhabdomyolysis,
cardiac arrhythmias, and neurodegeneration. Symptomsinclude recurrent metabolic crises associated with encepha-
lopathy, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac arrhythmias and1356laboratory ﬁndings such as hypoglycaemia, hyperammone-
mia, lactic acidosis and elevated CK levels. With the
progression of the disease epilepsy, developmental delay,
cognitive impairment, global brain atrophy and pyramidal
signs appear.
Materials and Methods: We report a 4-year-old child
with developmental delay. From 21 months of age he
showed episodes of suddenly onset hypotonia, gait
instability, ataxia, and distortion of the head and upperbody. During these paroxysm plasma creatinine kinase and
lactate was elevated. He has seizures from 2-years-of-age:
grand mal and spasms also occurred. He hashypothyreoidism.
Results: A pathogenic apparently homozygous
TANGO2:c.385C>T variant was identi ﬁed in exon 4 of the
TANGO2 gene by Whole Exome Sequencing. We exam-
ined the parents for the above mentioned variant, but we
could only detect the variant in the mother. Based on thatfurther examinations were needed to distinguish in between
homozygosity versus heterozygosity with a deletion. With
quantitative PCR assay by using 3 gene-speci ﬁc amplicons
encompassing the coding exons 3,4,5 of the TANGO2 gene
a large deletion encompassing exons 3-5 was detected.
Conclusions: The above mentioned compound hetero-
zygous state in our patient con ﬁrms the diagnosis of
TANGO2-associated biallelic disorder. The disease might
be very underdiagnosed, whole exome sequencing is still aclue to ﬁnd the alterations in TANGO2 gene.
R. Ripszám: None. K. Hadzsiev: None. J. Zima: None.
Á. Till: None. B. Melegh: None.
P06.57D
Adult form of Tay-Sachs disease: main symptoms,enzyme and genetic diagnostics in Czech patients
H. Vlaskova, H. Jahnova, E. Kostalova, M. Magner,
J. Jireckova, H. Poupetova, K. Peskova, V. Kozich
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic
Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) is a rare neurodegenerative
disorder caused by lysosomal β-hexosaminidase A de ﬁ-
ciency due to mutations in the HEXA gene. Phenotypic
spectrum of TSD is diverse and differs between infantile
and adult form. No effective treatment for TSD is available
and genetic counselling (DNA analysis) is thus importantfor prenatal diagnosis. Our cohort includes 14 patients with
adult form of TSD (surprisingly twice more than infantile
form) diagnosed in the Czech Republic between 2002 and2018 yielding an estimated birth prevalence of 1:325,000.
Median age of ﬁrst symptoms and of diagnosis were 21years and 35 years, respectively. The main clinical
symptoms were problems with mild dysarthria, rapid
speech, proximal weakness of lower extremities, balance
disturbances and/or psychiatric disorders. Cerebellar atro-
phy in brain MRI was a constant feature. Leukocyte
hexosaminidaseA activity was decreased to 1.8 - 4.1% ofcontrols. All patients carried at least one allele with the mild
variant p.Gly269Ser; a novel variant p.Arg252Cys was
detected in one family. Adult form of TSD seems to be anunderdiagnosed although an enzyme assay in serum/plasma
is a fast, inexpensive and reliable tool to detect patients with
this form of TSD and genetic con ﬁrmation is routine.
UNCE 204064; PROGRES Q26/LF1; RVO-VFN 64165
H. Vlaskova: None. H. Jahnova: None. E. Kostalova:
None. M. Magner: None. J. Jireckova: None. H. Pou-
petova: None. K. Peskova: None. V. Kozich: None.
P06.58A
TRMU-related transient liver failure of infancy presents
with microcephaly and neurodevelopmental delay
H. Azakl ı1, E. Yücel2,Ç .A r ıkan3, A. Armutlu4,
S. Eraslan2, H. Kayserili1,2
1Institute of Health Sciences, Koç University School of
Medicine (KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey,2Medical Genetics
Department, Koç University School of Medicine (KUSoM),İstanbul, Turkey,
3Gastroenterology Department, Koç
University School of Medicine (KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey,
4Pathology Department, Koç University School of Medicine
(KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey
21 months-old girl presented at genetics outpatient clinics
due to microcephaly, mild neurodevelopmental delay and
facial dysmorphism. She was born to healthy non-
consanguineous couple. Prenatal and perinatal history wasuneventful. She was followed up at metabolism& gastro-
enterology clinics for vomiting attacks, elevated liver
enzymes/ lactate levels during 3-to-12 month-of-age.Mitochondrial work-up had not revealed the underlying
pathology. SNParray showed 16q23.1 deletion encompass-
ing two genes, WWOX andLSM3P5 , which is associated
with bilateral cataracts, iris coloboma and autistic beha-
viour. Paternal transmission of the microdeletion was
conclusive for its possibly benign nature. Clinical ExomeSequencing(CES) revealed homozygous TRMU gene c.
G835A(c.V279M) pathogenic change explanatory for the
history of transient liver failure of infancy. FibroScan at 2
1/2
years revealed stage2 hepatosteatosis with mild ﬁbrosis and
liver biopsy was performed for histopathological evalua-
tion. TRMU (tRNA 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridylate
methyltransferase) gene mutations were identi ﬁed as
responsible from transient liver failure of infancy at 2009.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1357Twenty-two patients have been reported uptill now and
clinical variability ranges from early death(6/22) to normal
development. Although no systematic follow-up is avail-
able, microcephaly and mild neurodevelopmental delay has
been reported. The case we reported herein presented with
microcephaly and psychomotor retardation and diagnosticwork-up revealed the etiopathogenesis of transient liver
failure in infancy. CES as the leading diagnostic technology
for single gene disorders, enables clinical management,counselling also for TRMU-related hepatic failure which
has a relatively benign course. TRMU gene sequencing is
highly recommended in infants with unexplained liverfailure not only in Yemenite Jewish but in all Middle East
populations and Turkey.
H. Azakl ı:None. E. Yücel: None. Ç. Ar ıkan: None. A.
Armutlu: None. S. Eraslan: None. H. Kayserili: None.
P06.59B
Genetics meets Metabolomics in Type 2 Diabetes in a
Middle Eastern Population
N. A. Yousri
1, K. A. Fakhro2, K. Suhre1, R. G. Crystal3
1Weill Cornell Medical College- Qatar, Doha, Qatar,
2Sidra Medical Research, Doha, Qatar,3Weill Cornell
Medical College- NY, New York, NY, United States
T2D and its complications are a major concern for its high
prevalence in Qataris, and both genetic risk and lifestyle/
environmental factors play a role in T2D. We investigate:Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS) of T2D in Qataris, genetically
Determined Metabotypes (GDM) of T2D and gene-
metabolic networks. Polygenic risk scores highlight therole of genetics in early diagnosis, compared to other risk
factors. Identifying gene-metabolite associations is impor-
tant for understanding the genetic factors affecting meta-bolic pathways. 1000 Qatari samples (57% T2D), with
whole exome sequence and genotype array data were used.
All samples were pro ﬁled for more than 1000 metabolites.
We constructed a PRS using those SNPs that replicated
from 81 published loci, in the array data, and computed the
accuracy of PRS in individuals with whole exome data. Fordetermining GDMs in T2D, we ﬁrst identi ﬁed metabolites
signiﬁcantly associated with T2D, and then the associations
of those metabolites with 1.6 million common variants. Wefound 229 metabolites associated with T2D, among which 6
metabolites are signi ﬁcantly associated with SNPs in 5 loci.
We identi ﬁed a gene-metabolic network containing 21
unique loci and 33 unique metabolic pathways. In this study
we show genes that contribute to the polygenic risk score of
T2D, genetically determined metabotypes and gene-metabolic networks in T2D. We believe these results will
help improve the understanding of T2D mechanisms and inearly diagnosis of the disease.Acknowledgement: This work
was supported by Biomedical Research Program in WCM-
Q, and by Qatar National Research Funds grants numbers:
09-740-3-192 and 09-741-3-793.
N.A. Yousri: None. K.A. Fakhro: None. K. Suhre:
None. R.G. Crystal: None.
P06.60C
High-throughput metabolomics for early detection ofindividuals at increased risk for type 2 diabetes
J. Hällfors, S. Ruosaari, P. Würtz, N. TertipisNightingale Health Ltd., Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: Advances in metabolomics now allows for
proﬁling of large-scale cohorts. We identi ﬁed circulating
blood biomarkers predictive of T2D. Also, metabolicsignatures were generated for risk strati ﬁcation and tracking
the health of the individuals.
Materials and Methods: NMR metabolomics was used
to quantify 228 metabolic measures in 11,896 individuals
from four Finnish cohorts (mean age 35 years, range 24-45).
Results: Associations between baseline metabolites and
diabetes onset during the 7-15 years of follow-up (392
incident cases) were assessed by logistic regression. Alto-
gether 113 metabolites were associated with incident dia-betes (P<0.0009; range of odds ratios (OR) per 1-SD: 0.59-
1.50) after adjusting for sex, baseline age, glucose and BMI.
Among the strongest predictors of increased risk of diabeteswere higher concentrations of branched-chained and aro-
matic amino acids (OR: 1.33), triglycerides in very-low-
density lipoproteins (VLDL; OR 1.50), and lower levels ofomega-6 fatty acids (OR 0.75). A biomarker signature
comprised of phenylalanine, free cholesterol in large HDL,
and the ratio of cholesteryl esters to total lipids in largeVLDL was predictive of incident diabetes in an independent
validation cohort after adjusting for baseline glucose and
BMI (OR 10.1 comparing 5th vs 1st quintile of the bio-marker score).
Conclusions: Individuals at risk for T2D display a dis-
tinct metabolic signature even years before the diseasedevelops. Using the signature, both early risk strati ﬁcation
and personalised follow-up of the disease progression is
enabled. High-throughput metabolomics therefore providesa powerful tool for population-wide diabetes prevention and
control programs. Metabolomics is already used for health
tracking in Finland.
J. Hällfors: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Nightingale Health Ltd. S. Ruosaari: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Nightingale
Health Ltd. P. Würtz: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁ
cant; Nightingale Health Ltd. N. Tertipis: None.1358P06.61D
From prenatal cystic hygroma to rare metabolic disease-
a patient with Zellweger Syndrome
J. Jovanovic1, A. Maver2, A. Hodzic2, B. Peterlin2,
O. Miljanovic1
1Centre for Medical Genetics and Immunology, Podgorica,
Montenegro,2University Medical Centre, Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Introduction: Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a rare, fatal,
autosomal, recessive inheritable disease that occurs as a
consequence of mutations in one of the 14 PEX familial
genes. ZS represents the absence of peroxisomes resultingin damaging metabolic pathways, especially beta oxidation
of very long chain fatty acids. ZS is characterized by facial
dysmorphia, neurological disorders and gradual insuf ﬁ-
ciency of all vital organs. In the second half of pregnancy
the ventriculomegaly appearance is possible and endocra-
nium MRI could detect characteristical ZS changes:abnormal gyral forms, disturbed myelination and cerebral
periventricular pseudocysts.
The aim is to use the case report on a ZS patient to point
out the possibility of recognising a rare inheritable disease
expected with a frequency of one in 50,000 live births.
Results: The infant with dysmorphia, hypotonia, hyper-
bilirubinaemia, and hepatomegaly is presented. In 13th
week of gestation the enlarged nuchal region cystic
hygroma and the border ventriculomegaly were found byultrasound examination. Pre-natal diagnosis excluded
chromosomal aberrations and pregnancy was continued and
completed by birth in term. Severe hypotonia and dys-morphia were present at birth. In the further course a
jaundice, rise in liver enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase,
development of hepatic insuf ﬁciency, and multiorganic
failure have occurred with a lethal outcome in the ﬁfth
month of life. A clinical exome sequencing (NGS) identi-
ﬁed the homozygous mutation in the PEX6 gene, described
as pathogenic-causative to ZS.
Conclusion: Considering the characteristics of ZS, set-
ting up a suspicion and conducting prenatal diagnosing forZS are crucial in preventing this syndrome among
liveborns.
J. Jovanovic: None. A. Maver: None. A. Hodzic: None.
B. Peterlin: None. O. Miljanovic: None.
P07
Immunology and hematopoietic system
P07.01A
Shared immunogenetic associations across commonpathogens discovered through Multiplex Serology
screening in UK Biobank
A. Y. Chong
1, N. Brenner2,3, A. Jimenez Kaufmann4,
A. Cortes5, R. Almond6, M. Hill7, T. J. Littlejohns8,
J. J. Gilchrist1,9, T. Parks1, C. Watson10, O. Rodriguez10,
N. Allen6,8, G. McVean5, T. Waterboer2, A. Moreno
Estrada4, A. Hill1,11, A. J. Mentzer1,5
1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Infections and Cancer
Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center,Heidelberg, Germany,
3Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany,4Human Population
Genomics Lab, Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para laBiodiversidad, Irapuato, Mexico,
5Big Data Institute, Li Ka
Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,6UK
Biobank, Stockport, United Kingdom,7MRC-Population
Health Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom,8Nufﬁeld Department of Population Health,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,
9Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom,10Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY, United States,11The Jenner
Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Introduction: Infectious agents contribute signi ﬁcantly to
the global burden of disease, through both acute syndromesand chronic disease sequelae. Understanding the biological
mechanisms underpinning susceptibility to infection and
development of chronic disease may inform future pre-ventative and therapeutic strategies.
Materials and Methods: Using a rigorously validated
Multiplex Serology platform, we sought to identify humangenetic variation associated with differential response to
infectious agents. We undertook genetic association analy-
sis of antibody responses measured against 45 antigenstargeting 20 infectious agents implicated in chronic disease
pathogenesis (including human herpes and papilloma-
viruses, and Helicobacter pylori ) using baseline serum
samples from 9,611 individuals selected at random from the
UK Biobank.
Results: We identi ﬁed 2853 non-HLA regions associated
with antibody responses to our selected pathogens ( p<
1x10
-5), 13 of which contained peaks reaching genome-
wide signi ﬁcance (p < 5x10-8). Some of these association
signals validate candidate mechanisms of infection activity
whereas others implicate other plausible yet previously
unrecognised molecular pathways. Associations wereobserved within the extended MHC region for at least one
antigen from each of the 20 pathogens. Of the non-MHCAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1359associations, we identi ﬁed three regions associated with
more than one pathogen. These regions span NFKB1 on
chromosome 4, the IGH region on chromosome 14, and
FUT2 on chromosome 19.
Conclusions: Theﬁndings and approaches used in this
work and future ambitions to apply the Multiplex Serologyplatform to the entire UK Biobank cohort are likely to
improve our understanding of infection-disease associations
and molecular mechanisms facilitating therapeutic dis-covery and precision medicine.
A.Y. Chong: None. N. Brenner: None. A. Jimenez
Kaufmann: None. A. Cortes: None. R. Almond: None.
M. Hill: None. T.J. Littlejohns: None. J.J. Gilchrist:
None. T. Parks: None. C. Watson: None. O. Rodriguez:
None. N. Allen: None. G. McVean: None. T. Waterboer:
None. A. Moreno Estrada: None. A. Hill: None. A.J.
Mentzer: None.
P07.03C
Study of TNF, IL1B , and IL6genes polymorphisms and
susceptibility to bronchopulmonary dysplasia inpremature neonates
T. M. Damnjanovic
1, T. Varljen2, O. Rakic3, B. Jekic1,
J. Liston4, I. Novakovic1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia,2Institute of
Legal Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia,3Institute of
Neonatology, Belgrade, Serbia,4Escola de Ciencias Da
Saude, Faculdade de Medicina, ItajaI, Santa Catarina,Brazil
Introduction: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a
common chronic lung disease associated with preterm birth.
Our objective was to investigate whether the TNF, IL1B ,
IL6 genes polymorphisms have in ﬂuence on BPD
susceptibility.
Materials and Methods: The study included 351 neo-
nates with gestation period less than 32 weeks. GenotypingofIL1B -511 G/A ,IL6-174 G/C andTNF -308 G/A variants
was performed by Real-time PCR. The statistical differ-
ences in genotypes distribution among the groups werecompared using the chi-square or Fisher exact test.
Results: BPD was present in 36 neonates (11.43%).
There were no signi ﬁcant differences in the genotypes
distribution and allele frequencies for the IL1B and IL6
genes variants between neonates with and without BPD.
The frequencies of TNF genotypes were GG 55.6%, GA
38.9% and AA 5.6% in neonates with BPD and GG 79.7%,
GA 19.7% and AA 0.6% in neonates without BPD. TNF
genotypes frequencies between these groups were statisti-cally signi ﬁcantly different (p =0.001). Also, statistically
signiﬁcant difference was observed in TNF genotypesdistribution between neonates with BPD and without BPD
by dominant model (GG vs. GA/AA) (p =0.001;
RR=2.188, 95% CI 1.428-3.348; OR =3.138, 95% CI
1.539-6.397). After the adjustment for BMW, gestational
age, and sepsis, logistic regression con ﬁrmed statistically
signiﬁcant association between TNF -308G/A genotypes
and development of BPD in premature infants (B =- 0.992,
p=0.003). TNF -308 A allele is risk factor for BPD
(p=0.0007).
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings suggest that TNF -308 A allele
is a risk factor for development of BPD in premature neo-
nates under the 32 weeks.
T.M. Damnjanovic: None. T. Varljen: None. O. Rakic:
None.
B. Jekic: None. J. Liston: None. I.
Novakovic: None.
P07.04D
Hereditary angioedema due to C1-inhibitor de ﬁciency in
south-eastern Europe: SERPING1 mutations and
genetic factors modifying the clinical phenotype
M. Rijavec1,M .K o šnik1,2, M. Zidarn1, S. Andrejevi ć3,
L. Karad ža-Lapi ć4, D. Cikojevi ć5, V. Griv čeva-Panovska6,
P. Koro šec1
1University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases,
Golnik, Slovenia,2Medical Faculty Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,3Clinic of Allergology and Immunology, Clinical
Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia,4General Hospital
Šibenik, Šibenik, Croatia,5University Hospital Split, Split,
Croatia,6Dermatology Clinic, School of Medicine, Ss. Cyril
and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Hereditary angioedema due to C1 inhibitor
deﬁciency (C1-INH-HAE) is a rare genetic disorder
characterized by recurrent oedemas and large heterogeneity
in clinical presentation. Our aim was to determine the
spectrum of SERPING1 mutations in C1-INH-HAE
patients, including genotype-phenotype relationship and if
functional genetic variants in F12 and KLKB1 affect the
disease expression.
Materials and Methods: A cohort of 150 clinically well
characterised C1-INH-HAE patients from 75 unrelated
families from Croatia, Republic of Macedonia, Serbia, andSlovenia was recruited for genetic analysis, which included
sequencing and MLPA analysis of SERPING1 , as well as
detection of F12 (rs1801020) and KLKB1 (rs3733402)
variants.
Results: We have identi ﬁed 39 different mutations (14
missense, 11 nonsense, 7 frameshift, 1 in-frame deletion,2 splicing defects, 1 substitution affecting the promoter, 3
large indels). Thirteen mutations have not been previously1360described. When addressing the genotype-phenotype rela-
tionship we found that patients with nonsense and frame-
shift mutations, large indels, splicing defects, and mutations
affecting the C1-INH active site (at Arg444) exhibited an
increased clinical severity score, compared with those with
missense mutations, excluding mutations at Arg444.Importantly, the F12 variant was associated with disease
onset. No association between KLKB1 variant and disease
expression was identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: Our study identi ﬁed 39 different, among
them 13 novel, disease-causing mutations in C1-INH-HAE
patients, highlighting the heterogeneity of mutations in theSERPING1 gene. The mutations with a clear effect on C1-
INH function predispose patients to a more severe disease
phenotype and the CC F12 variant to earlier disease onset.
M. Rijavec: None. M. Ko šnik: None. M. Zidarn: None.
S. Andrejevi ć:None. L. Karad ža-Lapić:None. D.
Cikojević:None. V. Griv čeva-Panovska: None. P.
Koro šec:None.
P07.05A
Functional study of the rs6822844 SNP associated with
risk to celiac disease in intestinal cells
M. Sebastian de la Cruz
1, A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia1,
I. Romero-Garmendia1, I. Irastorza2, A. Castellanos-
Rubio1,3, J. R. Bilbao1
1University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), BioCruces
Health Research Institute, Leioa, Spain,2Cruces University
Hospital (UPV/EHU), Barakaldo, Spain,3IKERBASQUE,
Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain
SNP rs6822844 shows the strongest association with celiac
disease (CeD) susceptibility outside the HLA region. The
SNP is located between IL2 and IL21 genes, which encodefor immune IL-2 and IL-21 cytokines, respectively, and
have been proposed as candidate etiological genes for CeD,
although functionally con ﬁrmation is still pending. Thus,
the main aim of this study was to analyze the effect of
rs6822844 in intestinal cells. For that purpose, the genomic
region surrounding rs6822844 was mutated in HCT116epithelial intestinal cells using CRISPR-Cas9, and mRNA
levels of IL2, IL21 and FGF2 were analyzed. The CRISPR-
Cas9 edition produced a complex reorganization of thegenomic region, and provoked a downregulation of FGF2
expression located 240kb downstream of the SNP. On the
contrary, FGF2 expression was upregulated in intestinalbiopsies from CeD patients. In addition, U937 monocytes
were incubated in edited and non-edited HCT116-condi-
tioned media and ILB1 expression was measured toevaluate their activation. Proliferation assays were also
performed in both HCT116 and U937 cells. Monocytesincubated in conditioned medium from edited HCT116 cells
showed lower activation and slower proliferation than those
incubated in medium conditioned by wild-type HTC116
cells. Unlike, edited HCT116 cells presented a higher
proliferation rate compared to wild type cells. In conclusion,
disruption of the rs6822844 region provokes alterations inintestinal cells that seem to affect monocytes and in turn the
inﬂammatory status, suggesting the presence of genomic
elements within the region that could contribute to thedevelopment of celiac disease. Funding: PI16/00258 (JRB)
and EJ-2017111082 and ACM (ACR).
M. Sebastian de la Cruz: None. A. Olazagoitia-Gar-
mendia: None. I. Romero-Garmendia: None. I. Iras-
torza: None. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None. J.R.
Bilbao: None.
P07.06B
Immunoregulatory effect and the role of plasma cell-freeDNA in celiac disease
A. Zinkova
1, I. Brynychova1,2, I. Hoffmanova3,
M. Korabecna1, P. Dankova2
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General
University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,2Faculty of
Science, Charles University, Department of Anthropologyand Human Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic,
3Third
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University
Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Second Department ofInternal Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Immunoregulatory effects of plasma cell-free
DNA (cfDNA) have been reported but its role in
pathogenesis of celiac disease (CD) has not been
studied yet.
Materials and Methods: We determined the total
cfDNA concentration and relative content of telomeric
sequences in plasma cfDNA in recent celiac disease patients(rCD, n =10) and healthy age-matched controls (HC, n =
10) by qPCR. To document that the observed biological
effects are caused by cfDNA molecules, we treated thepaired plasma samples with DNase. Using paired samples
of plasma (non-treated and treated by DNase), we analyzed
the contribution of cfDNA to the activation of TLR9 andTNF- αmRNA expression in THP1 monocytic cell line.
Results: We found neither signi ﬁcant differences in the
quantity of cfDNA nor in the relative amount of telomeresequences in the non-treated rCD and HC plasma. Stimu-
lation of THP1 cells with non-treated rCD plasma led to
higher mRNA expression level TNF- α(p=0.031) than sti-
mulation with non-treated HC plasma. The cfDNA in rCD
plasma samples stimulated the production of TLR9 mRNA.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1361The TLR9 mRNA expression was signi ﬁcantly (p =0.014)
lowered after cfDNA removal from rCD plasmas.
Conclusions: We provide the ﬁrst evidence that cfDNA
contained in rCD plasma differs in its immunoregulatory
capacity from cfDNA in HC plasma.
Supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport
of the Czech Republic [grant numbers Progres Q25, Progres
Q43, SVV 260 436 and SVV 260 373] and by the Ministry
of Health of the Czech Republic [grant number RVO/VFN64165].
A. Zinkova: None. I. Brynychova: None. I. Hoffma-
nova: None. M. Korabecna: None. P. Dankova: None.
P07.07C
Machine learning classi ﬁers implicate B cell activation
in chronic fatigue syndrome
P. Comella, N. Beckmann, G. Hoffman, E. SchadtIcahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
United States
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a disease resulting in
extreme fatigue without any known underlying medicalcondition. CFS often presents in patients following a viral
infection and patients may appear to have slightly impaired
immune systems. With no positive diagnostic, CFS is oftenmisunderstood and misdiagnosed. A pilot clinical study was
established to give further insight into the immunological
role of CFS. This pilot study included 15 CFS patients and15 age and sex matched controls undergoing cardiopul-
monary exercise testing (CPET). Blood was extracted at
four time points - immediately before, 1 day after, 2 daysafter and 3 days after. Five immune cell types were sorted
from whole blood collected from each participant, and RNA
was extracted and sequenced for each cell type, as well aswhole blood, at each time point. Additionally, each
participant underwent extensive clinical surveys and
questionnaires.
Our team has employed machine learning approaches to
construct classi ﬁers that can accurately distinguish CFS
from non-disease states in immune cells using RNA-Seqdata. This technique has generated non-linear gene asso-
ciations that can be used to understand distinct gene
expression differences between disease and non-diseasestates. We were able to identify B cell classi ﬁers as being
the highest performing classi ﬁers in the immune cell
populations, suggesting B cells contain more interestingdisease-state biology. Gene signatures from these classi ﬁers
were further found to be enriched in co-expression modules
associated with B cell maturation. These classi ﬁer algo-
rithms can also be used to predict unseen observations as a
future diagnostic tool.P. Comella: None. N. Beckmann: None. G. Hoffman:
None. E. Schadt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Sema4 Genomics.
P07.08D
Angiogenesis in CML: miRNAs and angiogenic factorsin plasma before and after TKI treatment
Z. Litwinska
1,K . Łuczkowska1, A. Sobu ś1, D. Rogi ńska1,
E. Pius-Sadowska1, A. Pietrzyk2, E. Paczkowska1,
M. Gniot3, G. Helbig4, K. Lewandowski3, B. Machali ński1
1Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland,2Department of Clinical
Genetics and Pathology, University of Zielona Góra,Zielona Góra, Poland,
3Department of Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation, University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland,4Department of Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation, School of Medicine in
Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland
Introduction: The differences of an angiogenic potential
between clinical phases of chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML), point at the signi ﬁcance of neovascularisation in
CML pathogenesis. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI),
possessing antiangiogenic properties and microRNAs
(miRNAs), implicated in governing angiogenesis, bothseem vital in this process. In this study, we aimed to
investigate how TKI treatment affects angiogenesis-related
miRNAs expression and angiogenic factors concentration inplasma of CML patients.
Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood plasma sam-
ples were obtained from CML patients at the diagnosis(n=23) and during TKI treatment (n =12). Quantitative
assessment of the expression of miRNA-126-3p, miRNA-
150-5p and miRNA-21-3p was performed with qRT-PCR.Concentrations of selected angiogenic factors in plasma
(Angiogenin, bFGF, Endostatin,aFGF, PDGF-AA, PIGF,
Thrombospondin-2, VEGF-D, Angiopoietin-1, VEGF)were assessed using multiplex ﬂuorescent bead-based
immunoassays (Luminex Corporation).
Results: MiRNA-150-5p and miRNA-21-3p expression
was evidently higher in the treatment group (p =0,001 and
p=0,03, respectively). PDGF-AA concentration in newly
diagnosed patients with CML was higher than in alreadytreated patients (942,84 pg/ml vs 512,5 pg/ml, p =0,02),
similarly to VEGF (262,82 pg/ml vs 27 pg/ml, p =0,03).
Conclusions: TKI treatment affects miRNAs expression
and angiogenic factors concentration in plasma of CML
patients. MiRNAs could serve as biomarkers in monitoring
CML progression and drug response, however, their exactrole in CML-related angiogenesis remains to be further
elucidated.1362Funding: This work was supported by Pomeranian
Medical University Young Investigator Grant MB-173-218/
17.
Z. Litwinska: None. K.Łuczkowska: None. A. Sobuś:
None. D. Rogińska: None. E. Pius-Sadowska: None. A.
Pietrzyk: None. E. Paczkowska: None. M. Gniot: None.
G. Helbig: None. K. Lewandowski: None. B.
Machaliński:None.
P07.09A
Increasing fetal hemoglobin by genetic editing the cells
of sickle cell disease patients
S. Jalil1, Y. Novik1, R. Maldonado1, D. Balboa1,
T. Otonkoski1, U. Wartiovaara-Kautto2, K. Wartiovaara3,1
1Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,
3Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland
Beta-hemoglobinopathies, such as Sickle Cell Disease
(SCD) and beta-thalassemia are amongst the most commonmonogenic diseases with tens of millions of patients
globally. They arise from mutations in the beta-globin gene
HBB and the only curative treatment is an allogenichematopoietic stem cell transplant, which is complicated by
limited matching donor availability, severe adverse reac-
tions and excessive costs. Hemoglobinopathy symptomscan also be ameliorated with the increase of fetal
hemoglobin (HbF), but pharmacological treatments are
sub-optimal. However, naturally occurring bene ﬁcial altera-
tions can lead to elevated levels of HbF in adulthood. When
these benign Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin
(HPFH) syndrome alterations are coinherited with a beta-hemoglobinopathy the disease can be much milder or even
symptomless. Several HPFH alterations have been identi-
ﬁed. Gene therapy and gene editing tools such as ZFNs, and
CRISPR/Cas9 hold much promise for the treatment of
genetic diseases and have been studied also for the
treatment of beta-hemoglobinopathies. The ﬁrst CRISPR/
Cas9 clinical trials are also underway. Here, we have used
the CRISPR/Cas9 - based genetic engineering as well as
single base editing to produce bene ﬁcial HPFH mutations to
hematopoietic cell lines, control and SCD patient hemato-
poietic CD34 +cells in vitro . After genetic editing and
differentiation to hemoglobin- producing red blood cells,the cells show up to 35% production of fetal Hb. The
differentiation capacity and the genetic pro ﬁle of the cells
show no signi ﬁcant changes. Funding: Academy of Finland,
grants 308481, 286773S. Jalil: None. Y. Novik: None. R. Maldonado: None.
D. Balboa: None. T. Otonkoski: None. U. Wartiovaara-
Kautto: None. K. Wartiovaara: None.
P07.10B
Genome-wide association study identi ﬁes seven novel
loci associating with circulating cytokines and cell
adhesion molecules in Finns
E. Sliz
1, K. Marita1, A. Ahola-Olli2, O. Raitakari2,
M. Perola3, V. Salomaa3, T. Lehtimäki4, T. Karhu1,
H. Viinamäki5, M. Salmi2, K. Santalahti2, S. Jalkanen2,
J. Jokelainen1, S. Keinänen-Kiukaanniemi1,
M. Männikkö1, K. Herzig1, M. Järvelin1, S. Sebert1,
J. Kettunen1
1University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,2University of Turku,
Turku, Finland,3National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland,4Tampere University, Tampere, Finland,
5University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland
Introduction: Genetic factors modulate the in ﬂammatory
load, but the exact mechanisms are incompletely
understood.
Methods: We performed a genome-wide association
study (GWAS) on 16 circulating in ﬂammatory phenotypes
in Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 (NFBC1966,N=5,284). A subsequent meta-analysis was completed for
10 phenotypes available in a previous GWAS [1] adding up
to 13,577 individuals in the study. Complementary asso-ciation tests were performed to study the effect of the ABO
blood types on soluble adhesion molecule levels.
Results: We identi ﬁed seven novel and six previously
reported genetic associations (p<3.1x10
-9). We observed
three loci associating with soluble vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) level, one of which is the ABO
locus that has been previously associated with soluble E-
selectin (sE-selectin) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(sICAM-1) levels [2-4]. Our ﬁndings further suggest that
the blood type B associates primarily with the concentration
of sVCAM-1 while the A1 subtype shows a robust effect on
sE-selectin and sICAM-1 levels. The genotypes in the ABO
locus associating with higher soluble adhesion molecule
levels tend to associate with lower circulating cholesterol
levels and lower cardiovascular disease risk.
Conclusions: The present results extend the knowledge
about genetic factors contributing to the in ﬂammatory load.
Ourﬁndings suggest that two distinct mechanisms con-
tribute to the soluble adhesion molecule levels at the ABO
locus and that increased soluble adhesion molecule levels
by itself may not increase risk for cardiovascular disease.
References: (1) Am J Hum Genet 2017;100:40-50. (2)
PLoS Genet 2008;4:e1000118. (3) PLoS One 2012;7:Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1363e51441. (4) Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2009;29:1958-
67.
E. Sliz: None. K. Marita: None. A. Ahola-Olli: None.
O. Raitakari: None. M. Perola: None. V. Salomaa: D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia,
and expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk. Other; Modest;Bayer Ltd. T. Lehtimäki: None. T. Karhu: None. H.
Viinamäki: None. M. Salmi: None. K. Santalahti: None.
S. Jalkanen: None. J. Jokelainen: None. S. Keinänen-
Kiukaanniemi: None. M. Männikkö: None. K. Herzig:
None. M. Järvelin: None. S. Sebert: None. J.
Kettunen: None.
P07.11C
DOCK8 de ﬁciency; two patients with large deletions
detected by Next-generation sequencing
G. KÖk
1, A. Aykut1, A. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay1, N. GÜlez2,
F. Genel2,M .Ö .Ç o Ğulu1
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetics, İzmir, Turkey,2Dr Behçet Uz Children ’s
Hospital,Clinic of Pediatrics, İzmir, Turkey
Dedicator of cytokinesis 8 ( DOCK8) gene mutations lead a
combined primary immunode ﬁciency which is ﬁrst
described as a new entity in the autosomal recessive HyperIgE syndrome (HIES). Just like the HIES, these mutations
cause elevated serum IgE, eosinophilia, frequent staphylo-
coccal infections. Patients have increased risk for infectionsas well as autoimmunity and malignancy. DOCK8 gene
spans 48 exons and deletions are the most common type of
mutations. Here, we present 2 primary immune de ﬁciency
patients who are clinically diagnosed as DOCK8 de ﬁciency.
Both of the patients have consanguineous parents and
laboratory results indicating DOCK8 de ﬁciency. Ion
AmpliSeq ™Primary Immune De ﬁciency Research Panel
designed for sequencing 264 primary immune de ﬁciency
genes were used for mutation detection. After initialanalysis of 264 genes ﬁltering through minor allele
frequency, variant location and variant effect no causative
mutation was detected. Immune gene panel rechecked inboth cases due to the strong clinical ﬁndings and large
deletions were detected in both patients. First patient was
found to have a homozygous deletion (c.(53 +1_54-1)_(827
+1_828-1)del) extending from 2
ndto 7thexons and second
patient have homozygous c.(53 +1_54-1)_(3234 +1_3235-
1) deletion extending from 2ndto 26thexons.
We want to underline that large deletions may escape
from routine ﬁltering analysis and the suspected genes
should be checked individually by an integrative genomicviewer. If deletions are the majority types of the mutationfor some particular genes, this possibility should not be
underestimated.
G. Kök: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None. E.
Pariltay: None. N. Gülez: None. F. Genel: None. M.Ö.
ÇoĞulu: None.
P07.12D
Genetic variant rs16944 in IL1B gene is a risk factor for
early onset sepsis susceptibility and outcome in preterminfants
N. Maksimovic
1, T. Varljen2, G. Sekulovic3,
T. Damnjanovic1, I. Novakovic1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,2Institute of Legal
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia,3Institute of Neonatology, Belgrade,
Serbia
Introduction: Neonatal sepsis is progressive immunologi-
cal process caused by invasion of microbial pathogens on
the normally sterile tissue of infants. Despite the signi ﬁcant
improvement of intensive neonatal care it is the mostfrequent cause of morbidity and mortality among preterm
infants. Interleukin-1-beta (IL1B), is a proin ﬂammatory
mediator that appears very early in response to infection.The polymorphism -511 G/A inIL1B gene is located
upstream of the transcriptional start site and in ﬂuences its
transcriptional activity. The aim of this study was toevaluate the relationships between rs16944 polymorphism
inIL1B (-511 G/A) and susceptibility and outcome of early
onset sepsis (EOS) in preterm infants.
Material and Methods: Our study included 471 preterm
infants, 285 with EOS and 186 healthy premature infants.
For all patients data about gender, gestational age, weighton birth (BMW), Apgar score determined in the 5th minute
(AS5 ’), type of delivery and multiple pregnancies are col-
lected. IL1B -511G/A genotypes were detected with custom
real time genotyping assay.
Results: Frequency of AA IL1B -511G/A genotype is
statistically signi ﬁcantly higher in EOS group (p =0.028).
Genotype frequencies between EOS and control groups by
recessive (GG +GA/AA) model also show signi ﬁcant dif-
ferences (p =0.012). Logistic regression with weight on
birth and gestational age as covariates con ﬁrmed signi ﬁcant
association between IL1B -511 G/A genotypes and devel-
opment of sepsis (B =-0.427, p =0.000). Also, in the EOS
group AA genotype was signi ﬁcant predictor of lethal
outcome (p =0.033).
Conclusion: IL1B -511 G/A polymorphism could be
associated with early onset sepsis susceptibility and out-
come in preterm infants.1364N. Maksimovic: None. T. Varljen: None. G. Sekulovic:
None. T. Damnjanovic: None. I. Novakovic: None.
P07.13A
Genome-to-genome analysis of Epstein-Barr virus
infection
S. Rüeger1,2, C. Hammer3,4, A. Loetscher5,2,
E. Zdobnov5,2, J. Fellay1,2,6
1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland,3Department of Cancer
Immunology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, United
States,4Department of Human Genetics, Genentech, South
San Francisco, CA, United States,5Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,6Precision
Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,Switzerland
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is one of the most common
viruses latently infecting humans. It is the cause of
infectious mononucleosis and has oncogenic potential.
Little is known about the potential impact of human geneticvariation on inter-individual differences in response to
EBV. The challenge of genetic determinant discovery
explaining host susceptibility and response to EBVinfection is compounded by pathogen genetic variation.
We here use a genome-to-genome (G2G) strategy to search
for genetic associations between paired human and EBVsamples, which could highlight sites of host-pathogen
genomic con ﬂicts and shed light on pathogenesis.
We obtained and curated human genome-wide genotyp-
ing data and consensus EBV genome sequencing data from
266 HIV-infected individuals with elevated EBV plasma
viral load (>2000 copies/ml). We performed a separategenome-wide association study (GWAS) for each viral
variant using generalized linear mixed models, while con-
trolling for human and EBV population structure.
We performed a total of 850 GWASs. No host-pathogen
association survived the Bonferroni corrected G2G sig-
niﬁcance threshold of 10
-11. We observed four signals with
P<10-8, including an association between variants in the
EBV gene BFRF1 and in the human gene RSRC1 , which
functions in spliceosome assembly and participates inmultiple steps of mRNA splicing. Because EBV depends on
host proteins for viral gene expression, changes in alter-
native splicing due to RSRC1 variation could in ﬂuence EBV
pathogenesis by selecting speci ﬁc BFRF1 escape mutations.
The joint analysis of host and pathogen genetic variation
can help uncover novel genetic in ﬂuences on infectious
diseases.S. Rüeger: None. C. Hammer: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genentech. A. Loetscher: None. E.
Zdobnov: None. J. Fellay: None.
P07.14B
Implementation of a new diagnostic strategy for familialerythrocytosis in Slovenia
A. Kristan
1,J .G a šperšič1, P. Hudler1, D. Germ1,
T. Re žen2, D. Rozman2, T. Kunej3, T. Paji č4, M. Fink4,
S. An žej Doma4,Š.Žula4, I. Prelo žnik Zupan4, R. Koli č5,
T. Mar čac Grahek5,M .M o škon6, N. Debeljak1
1Medical Centre for Molecular Biology, Institute of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,Ljubljana, Slovenia,
2Centre for Functional Genomics and
Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Department
of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,4Clinical department of
Haematology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,Ljubljana, Slovenia,
5Kemomed Research and
Development, Kemomed Ltd., Kranj, Slovenia,6Faculty of
Computer and Information Science, University ofLjubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Familial erythrocytosis is a rare congenital
disorder de ﬁned by increased red blood cell number,
haemoglobin and haematocrit. Variants in genes involved
in oxygen sensing pathway (including EGLN1 ) or genes
affecting haemoglobin oxygen af ﬁnity results in seven
different types of familial erythrocytosis.
Materials and Methods: National diagnostic algorithm
was developed to identify patients with familial ery-
throcytosis, among patients undergoing polycythemia vera
testing over ﬁve-year period in Slovenia. Libraries were
prepared according to the protocol for Illumina Nextera
DNA Exome, enriched based on the protocol for Integrated
DNA Technologies xGen Hybridization Capture of DNALibraries and sequenced on MiniSeq sequencer. Identi ﬁed
variants were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: National diagnostic algorithm revealed that
among 1054 polycythemia vera negative patients, only 81
had increased haemoglobin and haematocrit at least twice
over a 2 month period. Further examinations pointed outseven families indicative for familial erythrocytosis. Tar-
geted exome-sequencing identi ﬁed heterozygous substitu-
tion rs61750991 in EGLN1 gene in two affected but not in
unaffected members of one family. The described diag-
nostic algorithm was also established within the in-house
developed ViDis platform, enabling visualisation andsharing of medical algorithms ( http://vidis.fri.uni-lj.si ).Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1365Conclusions: We successfully established diagnostic
algorithm for familial erythrocytosis in Slovenia and
facilitated its broad accessibility within medical society via
ViDis platform. Implementation into clinical practice iden-
tiﬁed an EGLN1 variant rs61750991 in one studied family,
indicative for familial erythrocytosis type 3.
Supported by Slovenian Research Agency grant no. L3-
9279 and Young Researcher founding. All rights reserved.
A. Kristan: None. J. Ga šperšič:None. P. Hudler:
None. D. Germ: None. T. Re žen:None. D. Rozman:
None. T. Kunej: None. T. Pajič:None. M. Fink: None. S.
Anžej Doma: None. Š.Žula: None. I. Prelo žnik Zupan:
None. R. Količ:None. T. Marčac Grahek: None. M.
Moškon: None. N. Debeljak: None.
P07.15C
Genotypic diversity observed within a large cohort of
Armenian patients with late-onset familialMediterranean fever
G. Kriegshäuser
1,2, H. Hayrapetyan3,4, S. Atoyan3,4,
S. Nemeth5, C. Oberkanins5, T. Sarkisian3,4
1Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine,
General Hospital, Steyr, Austria,2Clinical Institute of
Medical and Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University,
Graz, Austria,3Center of Medical Genetics and Primary
Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia,4Department of Medical
Genetics, Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan,
Armenia,5ViennaLab Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria
Introduction: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) as an
autoin ﬂammatory disease, results from mutations in the
MEFV gene mainly with an autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance. The age of onset of FMF varies, with about
60% and 90% of patients experiencing their ﬁrst attack
before the age of 10 and 20 years, respectively. Hence, FMF
with the ﬁrst attack occurring at the age of ≥40 years (i.e.
late-onset FMF) is rare and only a few small studies haveaddressed this disease subset.
Objectives: This work aimed at investigating the mole-
cular genetic characteristics of Armenian patients diagnosedwith late-onset FMF.
Methods: Genomic DNA isolated from 354 Armenian
late-onset FMF patients were analysed for the 12 mostcommon MEFV mutations plus SAA1 isoforms 1.1, 1.3 and
1.5 using multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridisation. Muta-
tional spectra and resulting genotypes were then matchedagainst the clinico-demographic pro ﬁles collected for these
patients.
Results: Of all 354 patients, 194 (54.80%) were female and
160 (45.20%) were male. The following genotypes were
signiﬁcantly associated with the late-onset variant: M680I/E148Q (P =0.004), M694V/E148Q (P<0.001) and V726A/
V726A (P =0.001). Of note, 12/354 (3.39%) patients were
found to be homozygous for the M694V mutation.
Conclusions: Our data suggest that late-onset FMF is
more prevalent in women and is of greater genetic diversity
than previously reported. Further studies including late-onset FMF patients homozygous for MEFV mutation
M694V are ongoing and may lead to the identi ﬁcation of
novel disease-modifying mechanisms.
G. Kriegshäuser: None. H. Hayrapetyan: None. S.
Atoyan: None. S. Nemeth: None. C. Oberkanins: None.
T. Sarkisian: None.
P07.16D
Rare frameshift mutation in SERPINA3 contributes to
generalized pustular psoriasis
U. D. Hüffmeier
1, H. Sticht2, J. Wenzel3, D. Wilsmann-
Theis3, K. Wolff4, S. Löhr1,B .F r e y5, M. Hahn6,
A. B. Ekici1, S. Uebe1, C. Thiel1, A. Reis1, J. Prinz7,
V. Oji8, P. Schulz9, K. Kingo10, S. Kõks11, R. Mössner12,
L. Munoz6, A. E. Kremer4, S. Frey6
1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany,2Bioinformatics, Biochemistry, University of
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,3Department of
Dermatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
4Department of Medicine 1, University of Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany,5Department of Radiation Oncology;
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,
6Department of Internal Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and
Immunology; Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen,Germany,
7Department of Dermatology, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany,8Department of Dermatology,
University of Münster, Münster, Germany,9Department of
Dermatology, Fachklinik Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim,
Germany,10Department of Dermatology, Dermatology
Clinic, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,11Department of
Pathophysiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
12Department of Dermatology, Georg-August-University
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany
Recent research in psoriasis has identi ﬁed pustular mani-
festations as either Mendelian or oligogenic traits in contrastto the numerous associated SNPs in common plaque
psoriasis. Autosomal-recessive mutations in IL36RN have
been identi ﬁed in 16-30% of patients with generalized
pustular psoriasis (GPP), a rare, severe pustular psoriasis
accompanied by multi-systemic in ﬂammation. These muta-
tions increase pro-in ﬂammatory signaling in the IL-36
pathway. In exome sequences of 25 independent patients
negative for IL36RN , we identi ﬁed 2 patients with the1366identical heterozygous frameshift variant in SERPINA3 .W e
next sequenced the coding exons in further 54 GPP and 319
palmoplantar PP patients by Sanger without identifying
further truncating variants. SERPINA3 is an excellent
functional candidate as it encodes serine protease inhibitor
A3 which inhibits cathepsin G, a neutrophil-speci ﬁc
protease known to increase IL-36ß activity >500fold.
SERPINA3 expression in liver cell lines, ﬁbroblasts and
the epidermal cell line HaCaT could be stimulated by pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and dexamethasone. Protein
amounts in sera of the two mutation carriers were in the
lower normal range. By transfecting HaCaT cells withvectors containing the mutant or wildtype cDNA, we
observed evidence for an unstable mRNA and lack of
protein in the mutant. Immunohistochemical analysesrevealed an increased staining of serpin A3 within upper
epidermal layers in GPP, accentuated at the edge of
psoriatic pustules. This close proximity to neutrophilssuggests an interaction between serpine A3 and the
neutrophilic enzyme cathepsin G. This interaction might
be compromised by SERPINA3 variants leading to more
activation of pro-in ﬂammatory IL-36ß.
Funding: CRC1181-project A05, BMBF-Metarthros
01EC1407A
U.D. Hüffmeier: None. H. Sticht: None. J. Wenzel:
None. D. Wilsmann-Theis: None. K. Wolff: None. S.
Löhr: None. B. Frey: None. M. Hahn: None. A.B. Ekici:
None. S. Uebe: None. C. Thiel: None. A. Reis: None. J.
Prinz: None. V. Oji: None. P. Schulz: None. K. Kingo:
None. S. Kõks: None. R. Mössner: None. L. Munoz:
None. A.E. Kremer: None. S. Frey: None.
P07.17A
Differential expression of Type I IFN signaling pathway
genes in Hepatitis C patients treated with Pegylated
Interferon plus ribavirin
A. Marques Vieira da Silva
1, L. E. Alvarado-Arnez2,
T. Azamor1, L. Ribeiro Batista-Silva1, F. S. G. Kehdy1,
T. Leal Calvo1, M. Ribeiro-Alves1, C. Bayma1,
A. C. Magalhães1, M. D. L. Sousa Maia1, R. Páez
Meireles3, H. Nodarse Cuni3, P. Dornelles Picon4,
D. C. de Souza Matos1, M. Ozório Moraes1
1Fundaç ão Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
2Universidad Privada Franz Tamayo - UNIFRANZ,
Cochabamba, Bolivia, Plurinational State of,3Centro de
Ingeniería Genética y Biotecnología, Havana, Cuba,
4Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil
Introduction: In Chronic Hepatitis C, 20% of patients will
develop cirrhosis and may progress to hepatocellular
carcinoma. Over the past years, many studies have triedto identify how IFN- λand Type I Interferon pathway genes
are expressed during treatment.
Materials and Methods: We evaluated the expression of
genes of the type I IFN signaling pathway in 24 CHC
patients treated with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin and
further strati ﬁed according to rs12979860 polymorphism.
Samples were evaluated at different time points (time 0,
week 1 and week 12 during treatment and week 3 after
treatment). Allelic discrimination was performed usingTaqman Genotyping SNP assay (AHBKCW9, Thermo-
Fisher). Expression levels for 30 Type I IFN genes was
evaluated using Biomark HD System (Fluidigm). Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn´s post tests were used for comparisons.
Results: Most of the genes had elevated expression levels
before treatment, except for IFNA1, IFNAR and IFHI .
Overall, they had a decline in week 1 and a signi ﬁcant
higher expression levels in later time points. In week 1
during treatment, CC homozygote patients for rs12979860had lower gene expression levels, compared to patients that
carried the risk allele T, this was observed for IFI6, IFI16,
IRF9 andRIGI . In contrast, relative mRNA expression for
IFH1 andRNASEL were subtle higher in patients with CC
genotype.
Conclusions: Gene expression levels in Type I IFN sig-
nature genes was different according to time points eval-
uated and also when patients were strati ﬁed according to
rs12989860 polymorphism.
A. Marques Vieira da Silva: None. L.E. Alvarado-
Arnez: None. T. Azamor: None. L. Ribeiro Batista-Silva:
None. F.S.G. Kehdy: None. T. Leal Calvo: None. M.
Ribeiro-Alves: None. C. Bayma: None. A.C. Magalhães:
None. M.D.L. Sousa Maia: None. R. Páez Meireles:
None. H. Nodarse Cuni: None. P. Dornelles Picon: None.
D.C. de Souza Matos: None. M. Ozório Moraes: None.
P07.18B
Analysis of the CD40 and CD40LG in Turkish Hyper
IgM Syndrome: Mutation pro ﬁle and description of six
novel mutations
E. uzay
1, A. Aykut1, A. Durmaz1, N. Karaca2, N. Gülez3,
N. Kütükçüler2, Ö. Çog ̆ulu1
1Ege university faculty of medicine. department of medical
genetics, İzmir, Turkey,2Ege university faculty of medicine.
department of pediatric immunology, İzmir, Turkey,3Dr
Behçet uz children's hospital. clinicof pediatrics, İzmir,
Turkey
Hyper IgM syndromes (HIGM) is a group of primary
immune de ﬁciency disorders characterized by defective
CD40 signaling. Five types of Hyper IgM syndrome have
been characterized: Hyper IgM syndrome type 3 (autosomalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1367recessive) (MIM: 606843) is characterized by mutations of
theCD40 gene and Hyper-IgM syndrome type 1 (X-linked)
(MIM 308230), characterized by mutations of the CD40LG
gene. Patients with HIGM syndrome are susceptible to
recurrent and severe infections and in some types of HIGM
syndrome opportunistic infections and an increased risk ofcancer as well. The disease is characterized by decreased
levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) in the blood and normal
or elevated levels of IgM. The aim of this study was toevaluate the spectrum of CD40 and CD40LG gene
mutations in Turkish HIGM patients. We present a
molecular analysis of 9 Turkish HIGM patients. All mutantalleles were identi ﬁed, including 7 CD40LG mutations 4 of
which were novel and 2 novel CD40 mutations. CD40LG
mutations were c.31C>T (p.Arg11Ter), c.755G>A (p.Gly252Asp), were previously reported whereas c.89 T>A
(p.Val30Asp), c.446G>A (p.Ser149Asn), c.578T>G L193R
(p.Leu193Arg) c.616_619delCTCA (L206EfsX35) muta-tions were novel. Novel CD40 mutations were
c.170_172delTAA and one stoploss mutation
c.830_833delAGTG. Herein, we describe on 8 HIGMpatients of Turkish origin and report ﬁve novel mutations in
CD40 andCD40LG genes.
E. Uzay: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None. N.
Karaca: None. N. Gülez: None. N. Kütükçüler: None. Ö.
Çoğulu: None.
P07.19C
The role of rare genetic variation in the Interleukin-1
pathway
R. C. van Deuren
1,2, P. Arts1,2, L. A. B. Joosten1,
M. Jaeger1, M. Steehouwer2, M. van der Vorst2,
C. Gilissen2, C. A. Dinarello1,3, M. G. Netea1, F. L. van de
Veerdonk1, A. Hoischen1,2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Human
Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States
The interleukin-1 (IL1)-pathway has a fundamental role in
infection and in ﬂammation. It comprises both IL1-agonists
and -antagonists that together are responsible for maintain-
ing a balance in innate immunological response. Commonvariants in underlying genes have previously been asso-
ciated with infection, in ﬂammation, cardiovascular disease
and cancer, whereas the role of rare variants remains to beelucidated.The highly-multiplexed targeted re-sequencing technol-
ogy Molecular Inversion Probes (MIPs) enabled a genetic
screen for the complete coding sequence of 48 genes of the
IL1-pathway. Rare Variant Burden Analysis (RVBA) was
performed on 520 healthy individuals for whom extensive
immunophenotyping measurements are available.
We identi ﬁed 221 variants, out of which 166 rare (gno-
mAD-Exome AF< 1%), in 41 genes. When considering
individuals with 1% most extreme cytokine production,RVBA showed association with identical genes over dif-
ferent stimulations; e.g. in individuals with the highest IL6-
producing macrophages, IL1R2 is associated with LPS-,
Candida- and MTB-stimulations. When using the con-
tinuous measurements, associated genes are unique per
stimulation. More than 50% of the continuous associationsbecome stronger in extreme phenotypes; e.g. IL6-
production in whole blood stimulated with PHA is asso-
ciated to NCF4 continuously, in the corresponding 1% of
individuals with lowest IL6-production this signal is mag-
niﬁed and even extended by associations with NCF2 and
CYBA (other ROS-production genes).
We show that distinctive rare genetic variation, identi ﬁed
by MIPs, in ﬂuence cytokine responses to various stimuli in
different cell-types in healthy individuals. We now plan tovalidate initial associations by functional follow-up and aim
to expand this method to various IL1-mediated diseases.
R.C. van Deuren: None. P. Arts: None. L.A.B. Joosten:
None. M. Jaeger: None. M. Steehouwer: None. M. van
der Vorst: None. C. Gilissen: None. C.A. Dinarello:
None. M.G. Netea: None. F.L. van de Veerdonk: None.
A. Hoischen: None.
P07.20D
Identi ﬁcation of novel Non-MHC association loci/region
in IgAD patients through MHC risk allele strati ﬁcation
and polygenic risk score analysis
C. LIM
1,2, J. Varadé3, Y. Goh1, T. Behrens4,
L. Hammarström2,5
1Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore,
2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,3University of
Vigo, Immunology- Biomedical Research Center CINBIO
Singular Research Center, Vigo, Spain,4Genentech, Inc,
South San Francisco, CA, United States,5BGI-Shenzhen,
Shenzhen, China
Introduction: Immunoglobulin A de ﬁciency(IgAD) is the
most common human primary immunode ﬁciency disease
and has strong association with the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC), however, its etiology remains unclear. Weaimed to identify non-MHC region markers associated with1368IgAD by de ﬁned genotypic subgroups of IgAD based on
MHC susceptibility alleles.
Materials and Methods: Total of 10993 individuals
were analyzed. Previously published MHC risk haplotypes
were evaluated and the subjects were then strati ﬁed based
on the MHC susceptibility alleles ( HLA*B0801-
DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201/HLA-DRB1*0701-DQB1*0202/
HLA-DRB1*01-DQB1*0501 ). Gene-based association ana-
lysis was performed to investigate the non-MHC associationusing approximately 540000 SNPs and 24000 genes.
Additionally, polygenic risk score (PRS) pathway/gene set
analysis was performed using 4760 pathway/genes set toinfer the pathway involved in the respective subgroup.
Results: The presence of HLA-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201
(P=0.07) or HLA-DRB1*0701 (P=0.72) alone was not
sufﬁcient to confer susceptibility to IgAD. In the cohort
carrying at least one MHC risk allele, a protective allele,
rs4097492, at STXBP6 (P=7.63x10
−9) was observed. CD40
(P=6.89x10−5) was observed potentially associated with
patients homozygous for the HLA-B*0801-DRB1*0301-
DQB1*0201 haplotype whereas DHX38 (P=8.60x10−5), a
novel inhibitor of protein phosphatase 4, shows a weak
association with patients homozygous for HLA-DRB1*01-
DQB1*0501 . For patients lacking any risk alleles, seven
gene regions were identi ﬁed, including TNFRSF13B (TACI)
(P=1.12x10−4), with suggestive evidence of association
with IgAD. Pathway PRS analysis shows that cohort car-rying at least one HLA-B*0801-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201
haplotype have strong association with autoimmune and
immune pathway while HLA-DRB1*01-DQB1*0501 cohort
having association with asthma pathway and IgA
production.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings suggest that the pathogenesis
of IgAD may be different depending on the presence of
selected MHC susceptibility haplotypes.
C. Lim: None. J. Varadé: None. Y. Goh: None. T.
Behrens: None. L. Hammarström: None.
P07.21A
Application of whole exome sequencing for patients with
inherited platelet disorders
A. Simons, M. Stevens-Kroef, W. van Heerde, S. Schols,
P. Brons, S. de Munnik
Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
Inherited platelet disorders (IPDs) are disorders consisting
of thrombocytopenia (reduction in number of platelets),
thromobocytopathy (defect in function of platelets) or acombination of these. Diagnosis is often hampered by the
lack of speci ﬁcity and correct validation of currenthematological assays. In addition, these disorders exhibit
a genetic heterogeneity with over 50 genes involved. This
study reports the results of an upfront diagnostic strategy
using whole-exome sequencing (WES) with a targeted
analysis of a panel of 145 genes involved in thrombosis and
hemostasis (besides platelet genes also other genes involvedin coagulation and venous thrombosis embolism are
analysed). Sixty-Six patients suspicious for an IPD were
subjected to this WES approach. Fourteen patients (21%)harbored (likely) pathogenic variants that explained the
clinical spectrum in these patients. Genes affected were
GP9,MYH9 (2 cases), NBEAL2 ,P2RY12 ,RUNX1 (3
cases), SLFN14 and VWF (2 cases); all involved in
thrombocytopenia or thromobocytopathy. Additionally, 2
patients with a mutation in the THPO gene and 1 patient
with a mutation in S EPRINC1 were observed, both genes
are known to be involved in venousvenous thromboembolic
disease thromboembolic diseasethromboembolic diseaseve-nous thromboembolic disease. In 4 (6%) other patients only
one heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variant of an auto-
somal recessive gene was observed. In 12 patients (18%) avariant of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS/class 3) was
observed. Further segregation studies within the family en
functional studies are required to fully solve these cases. Inconclusion, we found that WES is a powerful tool in
genetically diagnosing patients with IPD.
A. Simons: None. M. Stevens-Kroef: None. W. van
Heerde: None. S. Schols: None. P. Brons: None. S. de
Munnik: None.
P07.22B
Uncovering the pathogen induced host-response on
RNA level to aid genetic diagnosis of primaryimmunode ﬁciencies (PIDs)
S. Kersten
1,2, C. Kaffa3, M. G. Netea2, A. Hoischen1,2
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Science, Radboud University MedicalCenter, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Department of
Experimental Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Science, Radboud University MedicalCenter, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Centre for Molecular and
Biomolecular Informatics (CMBI), Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Primary immunode ﬁciencies (PIDs) constitute a group of
diseases characterized by immune system dysfunction, that,due to its phenotypical and clinically heterogeneous nature,
remains complex to diagnose. Consequently, leading to
misdiagnosis and misclassi ﬁcation of patients in a clinical
setting. Although whole exome sequencing (WES) has
proven its signi ﬁcance as a diagnostic assay in PIDs, two-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1369thirds of all patients remains diagnosis-negative. As
accurate identi ﬁcation of the underlying genetic defect is
paramount to the clinical management of the disease,
exploring alternative approaches to improve PID diagnosis
is crucial. Given the relative ease of access to the affected
tissue and ex vivo stimulations, we hypothesize RNA-
sequencing holds the potential to reduce this diagnostic gap
signiﬁcantly.
To gain functional insight into the host-response,
3’mRNA-seq was performed on peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from ﬁve healthy donors.
Mimicking bacterial, viral, fungal and a more generalimmune response, PBMCs were exposed to speci ﬁc
immune stimulants, i.e. S.Auris, PolyI:C, C.Albicans and
LPS, respectively, in vitro for 4 and 24 hours (n =50).
Differentially expressed genes were identi ﬁed by correcting
for baseline expression in non-stimulated PBMCs. In turn,
comparison of differential expression between conditionsenabled us to unravel the core host-response, as well as
pathogen speci ﬁc responses in both the early and late con-
text. Collectively, these insights not only aid our quest toidentify novel PID candidate genes, i.e. genes of unknown
function or undescribed immune function, it also assists
WES-based variant ﬁltering and prioritization. Ultimately,
paving way to expand the current host-response series for
unsolved PID patients.
S. Kersten: None. C. Kaffa: None. M.G. Netea: None.
A. Hoischen: None.
P07.23C
Clinical importance of rapid exome sequencing in
patients with inborn errors of immunity
W. Koole, K. Neveling, S. Castelein, S. S. V. Henriet,
J. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers, T. Rinne, M. Nelen, A. Simons
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
In case of a severe inborn error of immunity a fast diagnosis
is of vital importance and can change clinical decision
making. In order to get a diagnosis in critically ill patientswith a differential diagnosis for an inborn immunity
disorder we make use of our in-house rapid whole-exome
sequence work ﬂow with a turnaround time of 1-3 weeks.
Using this work ﬂow we, so far, have analyzed the exomes
of 14 patients using a primary immunode ﬁciency gene-
panel (currently 386 genes). Depending on the clinicalphenotype, another gene panel analysis and/or an analysis
of the entire exome was additionally performed in 8 out of
14 cases. For 10 of the 14 cases trio-sequencing wasperformed to enable de novo analysis. The panel analyses
resulted in a genetic diagnosis in 3 patients (21%). In these3 patients we detected a homozygous (likely) pathogenic
variant in the genes MKL1 ,DHFR andPRF1 , respectively.
The exome-wide analysis did not result in additional
diagnoses. For the 3 solved cases the genetic diagnosis
had direct impact on the clinical decision making.
Medication was adjusted, speci ﬁc dietary suggestions were
provided for the DHFR case and the genetic diagnosis was
instrumental in ﬁnding potential matching transplantation
donors for the PRF1
andMKL1 cases. Also the diagnosis
helped the parents in future family planning. We conclude
that rapid exome sequencing can be of great added value for
the diagnosis and treatment choice of patients with a severeinborn error of immunity.
W. Koole: None. K. Neveling: None. S. Castelein:
None. S.S.V. Henriet: None. J. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers:
None. T. Rinne: None. M. Nelen: None. A. Simons: None.
P07.24D
The impact of rare and low-frequency genetic variants
in common variable immunode ﬁciency (CVID)
A. Bisgin
1,2, O. Sonmezler1, I. Boga1, M. Yilmaz3
1Cukurova University AGENTEM (Adana Genetic Diseases
Diagnosis and Treatment Center), Adana, Turkey,
2Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Balcali Hospital
and Clinics, Department of Medical Genetics, Adana,Turkey,
3Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Balcali
Hospital and Clinics, Division of Pediatric Allergy and
Immunology, Adana, Turkey
Introduction: NGS (Next Generation Sequencing) have
uncovered hundreds of common and rare genetic variantsinvolved in complex and rare diseases such as immune
deﬁciencies. However, these rare variants cannot be
classi ﬁed clinically vice versa those common variants only
marginally contributes to disease susceptibility. In this
study, we evaluated the multi-gene panel results of CVID
patients and argued that if rare variants located in differentgenes could in fact play a more important role in disease
susceptibility and/or etiology.
Material and Methods: We performed NGS from 103
patients ’peripheral blood via a CVID-related 19 genes
panel (CARD11, CD19, CD81, ICOS, CTLA4, CXCR4,
GATA2, ICOS, IRF2BP2, MOGS, MS4A1, NFKB1, NFKB2,PLCG2, TNFRSF13B, TNFRSF13C, TNFSF12, TRNT1 and
TTC37) . Detected variants were evaluated and classi ﬁed
based on their impact, pathogenicity classi ﬁcation and
population frequency as well as the frequency within our
study group.
Results: Next generation sequencing revealed 112 dif-
ferent (total of 227) variants with under 10% population
frequency in 103 patients which 22 (19.6%) were benign,137028 (25%) were likely benign, 5 (4.5%) were likely patho-
genic and 2 (1,8%) were pathogenic. Moreover, 55 (49.1%)
variants were classi ﬁed as variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance.
We also observed different variant frequencies when com-
pared to population frequency databases.
Conclusion: Case-control data is not suf ﬁcient enough to
unravel the genetic etiology of immune de ﬁciencies. Thus,
it is important to understand the incidence of two or more
rare variants ’coexistence for the possible key role in the
pathogenesis of immune de ﬁciencies.
A. Bisgin: None. O. Sonmezler: None. I. Boga: None.
M. Yilmaz: None.
P07.25A
Unravelling the role of HSPE1 in regulatory T cellheterogeneity identi ﬁed by a single-cell transcriptomic
approach
Á. F. Kovács, N. Fekete, L. K őhidai, E. I. Buzás, É.
Pállinger
Dept. of Genetics, Cell- and Immunobiology, Budapest,
Hungary
Introduction: Regulatory T cell (Treg) signature is
composed of cell clusters of discrete states dispersed in a
continuum gravitating around four different well-de ﬁnable
functional poles. The cell number and function of memory
Treg cells is of key question, as these cells promote
reproductive ﬁtness during human pregnancy by reinforcing
immune tolerance against fetal antigens. The aim of our
study was to examine the role of HSPE1 in Treg
differentiation and its in ﬂuence on the functional states.
Methods: Single-cell Treg and naïve T cell sequencing
data were obtained from 10x Genomics repository. Python
based Scanpy toolkit was used for the analysis of single-celldata. Furthermore, qPCR-based gene expression of HSPE1
in circulating PBMCs was evaluated.
Results: We identi ﬁed 7 different cell clusters in the Treg
cell population. We de ﬁned 4 in-house panels for the Treg
cell subtype identi ﬁcation. Two clusters of memory Treg
were identi ﬁed. Among Treg cells, HSPE1 shows a cluster-
dependent expression pattern; the memory subtype expres-
sing the highest levels. Furthermore, mass spectrometry
showed the presence of HSPE1 in BeWo trophoblastic cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). BeWo-derived EVs
bound to CD4 +T cells and induced downregulation of
IL6RA together with an increased IL-10 production.
Conclusion: By our in silico approach, we de ﬁned 4 gene
panels which provide a good identi ﬁcation tool for the
different Treg cells subtypes. Single-cell analysis shows aTreg cell subtype-speci ﬁc signature of HSPE1 expression.
Our results raise the possibility that BeWo-derived HSPE1+EVs may be an inducing factor for Treg cell differ-
entiation and memory Treg expansion.
GrantsandFellowships:
ÚNKP-18-3-IV-SE-14.Árpád-
FerencKovácsisaKerpel-FroniusÖdönFellow.
Á.F. Kovács: None. N. Fekete: None. L. Kőhidai:
None. E.I. Buzás: None. É. Pállinger: None.
P07.26B
Reduced Severity of Collagen-induced Arthritis inPeptidylarginine deiminase knockout mice
A. Suzuki, Y. Kochi, T. Shibuya, K. YamamotoRIKEN, Yokohama, Japan
Previously, peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 (PADI4) was
identi ﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) by genome-wide association studies. Peptidyl citrul-line is a target antigen of anti-citrullinated peptide
antibodies (ACPAs), and only PADs (translated protein
from PADI genes) can provide peptidyl citrulline viamodiﬁcation of protein substrates. Also the distribution of
PADI4 and PADI2 has overlap in immune cells. The aim of
this study was to investigate the relationship betweenPADI4 gene and PADI2 gene in the progression of RA. To
clarify the physiological function of PADI4 and PADI2 in
RA, we used collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), known as aRA model mouse. We examined that localization of PAD4
and PAD2 protein was indicated by immunohistochemistry
in CIA mice. We also measured expression of Padi genesand various in ﬂammatory cytokines in immune cells by
real-time TaqMan assay and ELISA, respectively. We
generated PADI4 −/−and PADI2 −/−mice and performed
experimental arthritis. We demonstrated that the clinical
disease score was signi ﬁcantly decreased in PADI4 −/−
mice and PADI4 expression was induced by CII immuniza-tion. In PADI4 −/−mice sera, serum anti-type II collagen
(CII) IgM, IgG, and in ﬂammatory cytokine levels were also
signiﬁcantly decreased compared with those in wild-type
mice sera. Interestingly, PADI2 expression was compensa-
tionally induced in CD11b +cells of PADI4-/- mice.
Furthermore, we examined that the clinical disease scoreand expression levels of Padi genes in PADI2 −/−CIA
mice. It appears that PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen-
initiated in ﬂammatory responses. This study was supported
by Grants-in-Aid for Scienti ﬁc Research (C).
A. Suzuki: None. Y. Kochi: None. T. Shibuya: None.
K. Yamamoto: None.
P07.27C
A systems genetics approach to study Candidasusceptibility using single-cell RNA-seqAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1371D. H. de Vries, V. Matzaraki, M. G. P. van der Wijst,
O. B. Bakker, V. Kumar, L. Franke
UMCG, Groningen, NetherlandsCandida albicans infection of the blood stream, candidae-
mia, has mortality rates over 30% and is the most common
invasive fungal infection in immunocompromised patients.
Candidaemia is poorly understood and has poor treatmentavailable. To better understand candidaemia response, we
used single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) in 24 hour Candida
stimulated and unstimulated peripheral blood mononuclearcells of six donors to identify cell-type-speci ﬁc responses to
Candida stimulation.
Differential expression (DE) analysis with MAST bulk-
like scRNA-seq, shows high (97.3%) concordance with an
independent bulk RNA-seq candida cohort. In addition,
MAST was also run on 7 cell types to identify cell-type-speciﬁc DE effects. While the CD4 +T cells and natural
killer (NK) cells have most DE genes (1459 and 1313,
respectively), classical monocytes have the most distinctresponse. We are now able to show that the previously
identi ﬁed interferon pathway upregulation in candidaemia is
consistently present throughout all immune cell types afterstimulation with Candida albicans .
Subsequently, we did eQTL analysis on 72 stimulated and
75 unstimulated individuals with bulk RNA-seq dataavailable, to identify response-speci ﬁc eQTLs. However,
we were unable to link speci ﬁc cell types to these eQTLs
when we overlapped the eQTL genes with the DE genes,likely due to small sample sizes in both datasets. In con-
clusion, we found no enrichment of stimulation-speci ﬁc
eQTLs in cell-type-speci ﬁc DE genes, but were able iden-
tify cell-type-speci ﬁc responses to Candida albicans expo-
sure, revealing NK cells to have a stronger response than
expected from previous studies.
Funding: L.F.: ZonMW-VIDI 917.14.374, ERC Starting
Grant 637640
D.H. de Vries: None. V. Matzaraki: None. M.G.P. van
der Wijst: None. O.B. Bakker: None. V. Kumar: None.
L. Franke: None.
P07.28D
Targeted next-generation sequencing suggests novel risk
loci in juvenile onset systemic lupus erythematosus
J. K. Sandling
1, L. Hultin Rosenberg2, F. H. G. Farias2,
A. Alexsson1, D. Leonard1, S. Kozyrev2, E. Murén2,Å .
Karlsson2, A. Mathioudaki2, P. Pucholt1, D. Eriksson3,
G. Pielberg2, J. Meadows2, J. Nordin2, J. Dahlqvist2,
M. Bianchi2, The ImmunoArray Development
Consortium, C. Bengtsson4, A. Jönsen5, L. Padyukov6,
M. L. Eloranta1, C. Sjöwall7, I. Gunnarsson6,E. Svenungsson6, S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist4,
A. A. Bengtsson5, A. C. Syvänen8, K. Lindblad-Toh9,
L. Rönnblom1, The DISSECT Consortium
1Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden,2Science for Life Laboratory,
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,3Dept. of Medicine
(Solna), Karolinska Institutet, and Dept. of Endocrinology,Metabolism and Diabetes Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden,
4Department of Public Health and
Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå University, Umeå,Sweden,
5Department of Clinical Sciences Lund,
Rheumatology, Lund University, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden,6Department of Medicine, Rheumatology
unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
7Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Rheumatology/Neuro and In ﬂammation Sciences,
Linköping, Sweden,8Department of Medical Sciences,
Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,9Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Boston, USA, and Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Introduction: Childhood onset systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE) is associated with a more aggressive diseasecourse and higher mortality risk than adult onset SLE. To
identify genetic risk loci in juvenile onset SLE (jSLE) we
performed DNA sequencing in a Swedish SLE cohort.
Materials and Methods: Coding and regulatory regions
of 1853 genes were sequenced in 958 patients with SLE and
in 1030 healthy individuals. 117 of the patients had jSLE(disease onset at age <18 years). Target capturing was
performed with a Roche NimbleGen custom liquid capture
library followed by Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencing.
Results: Single variant case-control association analysis
revealed that 40 SNVs were associated with jSLE
(FDR<5%). These 40 SNVs were enriched for missensevariants (8% vs 1.8% for all SNVs). Two coding SNVs in
theNCF2 gene showed the strongest evidence of associa-
tion to jSLE (rs17849502 and rs17849501, best P =1E-10,
OR=3.9, 95% CI[2.6-5.9]). This association exceeded the
signal from the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region in
statistical signi ﬁcance (best HLA SNV was TNXB
rs369580, P =6E-08, OR =2.5[1.8-3.5]). In order to further
isolate the genetic contribution to jSLE, a case-case asso-
ciation analysis comparing juvenile and adult onset SLEcases was also performed. The two top loci from this ana-
lysis were IL27 andLIFR (P<1E-05). Currently replication
of these two loci is ongoing in an additional 100 jSLE cases.
Conclusion: Using targeted sequencing we have identi-
ﬁed coding SNVs in novel candidate risk loci in jSLE,1372highlighting differences in the genetic risk factors for
childhood and adult onset SLE.
J.K. Sandling: None. L. Hultin Rosenberg: None. F.H.
G. Farias: None. A. Alexsson: None. D. Leonard: None.
S. Kozyrev: None. E. Murén: None. Å. Karlsson: None.
A. Mathioudaki: None. P. Pucholt: None. D. Eriksson:
None. G. Pielberg: None. J. Meadows: None. J. Nordin:
None. J. Dahlqvist: None. M. Bianchi: None. C.
Bengtsson: None. A. Jönsen: None. L. Padyukov: None.
M.L. Eloranta: None. C. Sjöwall: None. I. Gunnarsson:
None. E. Svenungsson: None. S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist:
None. A.A. Bengtsson: None. A.C. Syvänen: None. K.
Lindblad-Toh: None. L. Rönnblom: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-niﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
P07.29A
Rapid identi ﬁcation of a bi-allelic SPTB mutation in a
neonate with severe haemolytic anaemia and liver
failure
C. M. Richmond
1, S. Campbell2, H. W. Foo3, S. Lunke1,4,
Z. Stark1,5,6, E. Bannister3,5, A. Greenway2, N. J. Brown1,5
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's
Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia,2Department of
Haematology, Royal Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia,3Department of Gastroenterology, Royal
Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia,4Department of
Clinical Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia, Melbourne, Australia,5Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,Australia,
6Australian Genomics Health Alliance,
Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: Erythrocyte membrane defects, caused by
deﬁciencies in membrane proteins ankyrin and spectrin, are
an important cause of neonatal non-immune haemolyticanaemia. Heterozygous mutations in SPTB , encoding
β-spectrin, cause autosomal dominant hereditary spherocy-
tosis. Few cases of bi-allelic mutations have been reported,with severe consequences, including hydrops fetalis and
fatal or near-fatal anaemia. Rapid genomic testing facilitates
early diagnosis and informs management in critically illpatients. We describe rapid genomic diagnosis of a novel
homozygous SPTB mutation in a case of severe prenatal-
onset haemolytic anaemia with transfusion-dependence, andconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia with hepatosplenomegaly.
Methods: Clinical rapid trio exome testing was per-
formed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood usingAgilent Sureselect QXT CREv2 kit, followed by sequen-
cing on Illumina NextSeq500.Results: We identi ﬁed a novel homozygous missense var-
iant NM_001024858.3( SPTB ):c.6119C>T (p.Thr2040Ile),
located in the spectrin repeat region. Parents were both het-
erozygous for this variant. The time from sample receipt to
result was 68hrs. Pretransfus ion eosin-5-maleimide (E5M)
staining in the proband was markedly reduced (ratio <0.6) andblood ﬁlm showed marked spherocy tosis including micro-
spherocytes and nucleated erythrocytes. Both parents
demonstrated mildly reduced E5M staining, with occasionalspherocytes and elliptocytes seen in the maternal and paternal
blood ﬁlms respectively. The proband has life-threatening
haemolytic anaemia with progressive liver failure, and earlygenetic diagnosis has facilitated hypertransfusion to suppress
ineffective erythropoiesis and reverse hepatic dysfunction.
Conclusions: This case of severe prenatal haemolytic
anaemia due to a homozygous SPTB mutation broadens the
genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of spectrin de ﬁciency
and highlights the value of rapid early genomic diagnosis.
C.M. Richmond: None. S. Campbell: None. H.W. Foo:
None. S. Lunke: None. Z. Stark: None. E. Bannister:
None. A. Greenway: None. N.J. Brown: None.
P07.30B
A genome-wide association study of CM-SJS/TEN withSOC in Japanese population based on whole genome
sequencing
Y. Kawai
1, Y. Hitomi1, M. Ueta2, S. Khor1, K. Nakatani1,
C. Sotozono3, S. Kinoshita2, M. Nagasaki4, K. Tokunaga1
1Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,
2Department of Frontier Medical Science and Technology
for Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan,3Department of Ophthalmology,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan,
4Department of Integrative Genomics, Tohoku Medical
Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
Introduction: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) are immunologically mediated
severe reactions of the skin and mucous membranes.Although previous genome-wide association studies identi-
ﬁed the common SNPs as genetic risk factors of cold
medicine related SJS/TEN with severe ocular complications(CM-SJS/TEN with SOC), little is known about the
contribution of rare variants and structural variants (SVs)
to development of CM-SJS/TEN with SOC.
Materials and Methods: In order to investigate impact
of these variants as well as common variants, we conducted
the whole genome sequencing (WGS) of 133 CM-SJS/TENwith SOC patients and 418 healthy control.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1373Results: WGS identi ﬁed more than 21 million variants, of
which 2.3 million were SVs. Genome-wide association test
of these variants reproduced the associations of previously
reported common variants on HLA-A and chromosome
16q12.1 loci. In addition, the novel associations of micro-
satellite polymorphism near CDH12 gene and the aggre-
gation of rare coding variants on TRPM8 andPARD3 genes
were identi ﬁed.in silico gene expression analysis revealed
that the disease susceptibility alleles of HLA-A andBRD7
affect gene expression levels at whole blood in GTEx
database.
Conclusion: Majority of variants with signi ﬁcant asso-
ciation with CM-SJS/TEN with SOC were found among
non-coding region illuminating the regulatory role of
genetic variations on the development of CM-SJS/TENwith SOC.
Grants: This study was partially supported by grants in
aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Scienceand Technology of the Japanese government (BioBank
Japan Project) and the Japan Agency for Medical Research
and Development (JP17km0405001).
Y. Kawai: None. Y. Hitomi: None. M. Ueta: None. S.
Khor: None. K. Nakatani: None. C. Sotozono: None. S.
Kinoshita: None. M. Nagasaki: None. K.
Tokunaga: None.
P07.31C
Genetic predictors of immune response to bacterial and
viral stimuli in children
M. Tutino
1, L. Lin1, J. Hankinson1, E. Bakhsoliani2,
J. Curtin1, M. Edwards2, A. Custovic2, M. Rattray1,
S. Johnston2, A. Simpson1
1The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,2Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
Background: Little is known about variability of immune
responses to microbial ligands between individuals, andover time. Within the setting of a population based birth
cohort, we investigated genetic predictors of immune
responses to bacterial and viral stimuli in children.
Materials and Methods: We measured cytokine
responses (n =27) to stimuli including live viruses and
bacteria (n =14) in peripheral blood mononuclear cell from
children at ages 11 (n =306) and 16 (n =335) years. We
sequenced exons, promoters and 3 ’- and 5 ’-UTRs of 364
immune response genes. After QC, 1705 SNPs (LD R
2<
0.8 and MAF > 8%) and 328 differentially expressed
cytokine-stimulus pairs at age 11, and 364 cytokine-
stimulus pairs at age 16 were available for cytokineQuantitative Trait Loci (QTL) analysis using linear
regression.Results: A missense variant in Toll-Like receptor 1
(TLR1) rs5743618 was a cytokine QTL for IFN-gamma
response to the TLR1/2 stimulus PAM3CSK4 at age 11 (p-
value
FDRcorr=1x10-4) and age 16 (p-value FDRcorr=3.42x10-9)
years. The same variant was a cytokine QTL for IL-13
response to PAM3CSK4 at age 11 (p-value FDRcorr=1x10-4)
and age 16 (p-value FDRcorr=3.53x10-3) and IL-2 response to
LPS at age 11 (p-value FDRcorr=0.031) and age 16 (p-
value FDRcorr=3.34x10-2) years.
Conclusions: The missense variant rs5743618 in TLR1
was identi ﬁed as the main cytokine QTL for IFN-gamma
and IL-13 to TLR1/2 ligand PAM3CSK4 as well as IL-2responses to LPS. This variant has recently been associated
with asthma and allergic rhinitis in large-scale GWAS. The
mechanisms linking immune responses to allergic diseaseneeds to be established.
M. Tutino: None. L. Lin: None. J. Hankinson: None.
E. Bakhsoliani: None. J. Curtin: None. M. Edwards:
None. A. Custovic: None. M. Rattray: None. S. John-
ston: None. A. Simpson: None.
P07.32D
Rare variants in antiviral response genes drive severe
viral respiratory infections in children
D. Lawless
1, S. Asgari2, L. Schlapbach3, J. Fellay1
1Global Health Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,2Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, UnitedStates,
3Mater Research Institute, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
A robust and self-limiting immune response is required for
clearance of viral respiratory infections. In rare cases, life-
threatening infections may occur in previously healthychildren. To uncover this susceptibility to severe disease we
searched for rare genetic variants in 120 children requiring
intensive care support upon infection by a respiratory virus.We used exome sequencing followed by protein network
analysis to catalog rare coding variants and cluster them by
known physical and functional associations. We identi ﬁed
potentially causal variants in 14 genes involved in
proin ﬂammatory response and viral nucleic acid detection,
including DDX58 andIFIH1 , encoding RIG-I and MDA5,
respectively. Both proteins share a common mechanism of
RNA recognition and signal repression. In the absence of
viral infection, each is maintained in an autoinhibited state,where the CARD effector domain and the ATP-binding
helicase domain are masked by the C-terminal repressor
domain (CTD). Binding of viral dsRNA at the CTD relievesrepression and results in a proin ﬂammatory cascade. Three
loss-of-function variants in IFIH1 were previously reported1374for this cohort. A further four patients had helicase / ATP-
binding domain variants in IFIH1 and one patient with a
rare CTD variant. Rare variants were found in DDX58
affecting the RNA binding motif; one patient harboured a
variant predicted to disrupt the ATP-binding helicase. In
total, we identi ﬁed 10 rare variants in 15 patients. We
present a primary immunode ﬁciency resulting in extreme
susceptibility to common respiratory RNA viruses, due to
genetic variants in a common pathway that severely impairsviral recognition. SNSF Grant PP00P3157529
D. Lawless: None. S. Asgari: None. L. Schlapbach:
None. J. Fellay: None.
P07.33A
Whole exome sequencing and functional studies forFanconi anemia diagnostics
M. Bogliolo
1, M. Aza-Carmona2, N. Muñoz Subirana1,
R. Pujol1, J. Casado3, F. Garcia4, T. Paprotka5,
C. Bauser6, J. Dopazo7, J. Bueren3, J. Surrallés1
1Hospital de Sant Pau and UAB, Barcelona, Spain,
2Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM),
Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, UniversidadAutónoma de Madrid, Spain; Skeletal Dysplasia
Multidisciplinary Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,
3Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras CIBERER U710:
Hematopoietic Innovative Therapies Division, (CIEMAT).
Advanced Therapies Mixed Unit. Instituto de InvestigaciónSanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz (UAM, IIS-FJD).
Madrid. Spain., Madrid, Spain,
4Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) U715:Departamento de Genómica Computacional, Centro de
Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain,
Valencia, Spain,
5GATC Biotech AG, Jakob-Stadler-Platz
7,D-78467 Konstanz, Germany, Kostanz, Germany,6GATC
Biotech AG, Jakob-Stadler-Platz 7,D-78467 Konstanz,
Germany, Konstanz, Germany,7Clinical Bioinformatics
Area, Director Fundacion Progreso y Salud CDCA,
Hospital Virgen del Rocío c/Manuel Siurot s/n, 41013,
Sevilla, Spain, Sevilla, Spain
Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) patients exhibit
chromosome fragility, bone marrow failure, malformationsand cancer susceptibility. FA is caused by point mutations
and large deletions in 22 genes following 3 heritability
patterns, making it diagnostics challenging.
Material and Methods: 68 FA patients with a positive
chromosome fragility test were analyzed by WES. Copy
number variations were evaluated by sequencing data ana-lysis with Rstudio. To test FANCA missense variants,
wtFANCA cDNA was cloned and variants were introducedby site directed mutagenesis, and tested for its ability to
complement DNA repair defects of a FANCA-KO human
cell line generated by TALEN technologies.
Results: using WES data, we identi ﬁed 93.3% of mutated
alleles including large deletions later con ﬁrmed by MLPA
or SNPs arrays. We demonstrated pathogenicity of 3FANCA missense variants and demonstrated that 2 FANCA
variants reported in mutations databases as “affecting
functions ”are non pathogenic SNPs. Deep analysis of
sequencing data revealed the actual mutations, highlighting
the importance of functional analysis.
Conclusion: WES and proper bioinformatics analysis are
sufﬁcient to effectively characterize FA patients regardless
complementation group, type of mutations, mosaic condi-
tion, and DNA source.
M. Bogliolo: None. M. Aza-Carmona: None. N. Muñoz
Subirana: None. R. Pujol: None. J. Casado: None. F.
Garcia: None. T. Paprotka: None. C. Bauser: None. J.
Dopazo: None. J. Bueren: None. J. Surrallés: None.
P08 Intellectual disability
P08.01B
CNOT2 as the critical gene for phenotypes of 12q15
microdeletion syndrome
T. Uehara
1, H. Suzuki1, M. Yamada1, T. Takenouchi1,2,
K. Kosaki1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan,2Department of Pediatrics, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
[Background]Chromosome 12q15 microdeletion is charac-
terized by intellectual disability and dysmorphic facialfeatures. Recently, the smallest region of overlap (SRO) in
16 previously reported patients was used to de ﬁne three
candidate genes for the 12q15 microdeletion syndrome:CNOT2 ,KCNMB4 , and PTPRB . The relative contributions
of these three genes have not yet been delineated. Herein,
we document a patient with a microdeletion of thechromosomal 12q15 region and re-de ﬁne the SRO. [Clinical
Report]The patient was a 12-year-old female with intellec-
tual disability and multiple structural abnormalities includ-ing cleft lip and palate and 2-3 toe syndactyly. She
exhibited dysmorphic facial features such as upslanting
and short palpebral ﬁssures, micrognathia, low-set ears, and
hypoplastic antihelix. [Molecular Analysis] A microarray
analysis showed a de novo 1.32-Mb deletion within 12q15
that included CNOT2 , a member of the CCR4-NOT
complex that regulates gene expression by regulating
transcription and mRNA degradation, and 14 other genes.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1375Results and Discussion: Remapping of the 12q15 dele-
tion region in the 16 previously reported patients together
with that in the newly identi ﬁed patient indicated that
CNOT2 is the only gene that is commonly deleted. In
conclusion, these ﬁndings suggest that CNOT2 is the prime
candidate for the neurological phenotypes of the 12q15microdeletion syndrome.[Funding] This study was sup-
ported by Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Grant
Number: Research on Rare and Intractable Diseases) andJapan Agency for Medical Research and Development
(Grant Number: JP18ek0109301).
T. Uehara: None. H. Suzuki: None. M. Yamada: None.
T. Takenouchi: None. K. Kosaki: None.
P08.02C
Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in the lanosterol synthase
gene LSS involved in the cholesterol biosynthesis cause
alopecia with intellectual disability, a rare recessiveneuroectodermal syndrome
T. Besnard
1,2, N. Sloboda3, A. Goldenberg4, S. Küry1,2,
B. Cogné1,2, F. Breheret1, E. Trochu1, S. Conrad1,
M. Vincent1,2, W. Deb1,2, X. Balguerie5, S. Barbarot6,
G. Baujat7, T. Ben-Omran8, A. Bursztejn9,
V. Carmignac10,11, A. N. Datta12, A. Délignières13,
L. Faivre10,11, B. Gardie2,14, J. Guéant3, P. Kuentz10,11,
M. Lenglet2,14, M. Nassogne15, V. Ramaekers16,
R. E. Schnur17,Y .S i17, E. Torti17, J. Thevenon18,
P. Vabres10,11, L. Maldergem19,20, D. Wand21,
A. Wiedemann3, B. Cariou2, R. Redon2, A. Lamazière22,
S. Bézieau1,2, F. Feillet3, B. Isidor1,2
1CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes,
France,2L'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV
Nantes, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France,3INSERM, UMR
1256 Nutrition-Genetics-Environmental Risk Exposure andReference Centre of Inborn Metabolism Diseases,
University of Lorraine and University Hospital Centre of
Nancy (CHRU Nancy), Nancy, France,
4Department of
Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Normandy Centre for
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France,
5Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Center of
Rouen, Rouen, France,6CHU de Nantes, Department of
Dermatology, Nantes, France,7Department of Medical
Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes-SorbonneParis Cité University, IMAGINE Institute, Necker Enfants
Malades Hospital, Paris, France,
8Section of Clinical and
Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, HamadMedical Corporation, Doha, Qatar,
9Dermatology
department, hôpital Brabois, Vand œuvre-Lès-Nancy,
France,10Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence
Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs
de l'Est, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,11UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD Team, Génétique des Anomalies
du Développement, Université de Bourgogne Franche-
Comté, Dijon, France,12Department of Pediatric
Neurology and Developmental Medicine, University of
Basel Children's Hospital (UKBB), Basel, Switzerland,
13CH Auray-Vannes, Hôpital Bretagne Atlantique, Service
de Pédiatrie, Vannes, France,14Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes, PSL Research University, Paris, France,
15Pediatric Neurology Unit, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-
Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium,
16Center of Autism and Department of Genetics, University
Hospital Liège, Liège, Belgium,17GeneDx, Gaithersburg,
MD, United States,18Centre de Génétique, Hôpital Couple-
Enfant, CHU de Grenoble-Alpes, La Tronche, France,
19Centre de génétique humaine, Université de Franche-
Comté, Besançon, France,20Integrative and Cognitive
Neurosciences Research Unit EA481, University of
Franche-Comté, Besançon, France,21Department Medical
Genetic and Pathology, University Hospital of Basel (USB),
Basel, Switzerland,22Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry,
INSERM ERL 1157, CNRS UMR 7203 LBM, SorbonneUniversités-UPMC, CHU Saint-Antoine, Paris, France
Purpose: Lanosterol synthase ( LSS) gene was initially
described in families with extensive congenital cataracts.
Recently, a study has highlighted LSS associated to
hypotrichosis simplex. We expanded the phenotypicspectrum of LSSto a recessive neuroectodermal syndrome
formerly named Alopecia with mental retardation (APMR)
syndrome. It is a rare autosomal recessive conditioncharacterized by hypotrichosis and intellectual disability
(ID) or developmental delay (DD), frequently associated
with early onset epilepsy and other dermatological features.
Methods: Through a multi-center international colla-
borative study, we identi ﬁedLSS pathogenic variants in
APMR individuals either by exome sequencing or LSS
Sanger sequencing. Splicing defects were assessed by
transcripts analysis and minigenes assays.
Results: We reported 10 APMR individuals from 6
unrelated families with bi-allelic variants in LSS.W e
additionally identi ﬁed one affected individual with a single
rare variant in LSS and an allelic imbalance suggesting a
second event. Among the identi ﬁed variants, two were
truncating, seven were missense and two were splicing
variants. Quanti ﬁcation of cholesterol and its precursors did
not reveal noticeable imbalance.
Conclusion: In the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, the
lanosterol synthase leads to the cyclization of (S)-2,3-oxi-dosqualene into lanosterol. Our data suggest LSSas a major
gene causing a rare recessive neuroectodermal syndrome.
T. Besnard: None. N. Sloboda: None. A. Goldenberg:
None. S. Küry: None. B. Cogné: None. F. Breheret:
None. E. Trochu: None. S. Conrad: None. M. Vincent:1376None. W. Deb: None. X. Balguerie: None. S. Barbarot:
None. G. Baujat: None. T. Ben-Omran: None. A.
Bursztejn: None. V. Carmignac: None. A.N. Datta:
None. A. Délignières: None. L. Faivre: None. B. Gardie:
None. J. Guéant: None. P. Kuentz: None. M. Lenglet:
None. M. Nassogne: None. V. Ramaekers: None. R.E.
Schnur: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDx. Y. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; GeneDx. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. J. Thevenon: None. P.
Vabres: None. L. Maldergem: None. D. Wand: None. A.
Wiedemann: None. B. Cariou: None. R. Redon: None. A.
Lamazière: None. S. Bézieau: None. F. Feillet: None. B.
Isidor: None.
P08.03D
Genotype-phenotype correlation in 11 Angelman-like
syndrome patients with new molecular diagnosis
C. Aguilera1, A. Ruiz1, E. Gabau2, N. Baena1,
N. Spataro1, L. Capel1, N. Capdevila2, A. Ramírez2,
V. Delgadillo1, S. Ourani2, C. Brun2, M. Guitart1
1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc
Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain,2Paediatric Unit.
Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Approximately 10% of patients with a
clinical diagnosis of Angelman syndrome (AS) remainwithout a molecular diagnosis (AS-like). Whole-exome
sequencing in a cohort of 17 AS-like patients led to the
identi ﬁcation of 11 pathogenic/likely pathogenic de novo
variants in 10 genes involved in neurodevelopment
disorders, not previously associated with AS. Clinical re-
evaluation was performed in order to establish thegenotype-phenotype correlation in the molecularly diag-
nosed patients.
Materials and Methods: The clinical characteristics of
the 11 patients were reviewed for the presence of the con-
sistent and frequent AS clinical features. Additional dis-
tinctive clinical features were collected and compared withthe clinical phenotypes reported in the literature in patients
carrying pathogenic variants in the identi ﬁed genes.
Results: Clinical re-evaluation showed that the 11
patients meet the consistent and almost all of the frequent
features of AS. The additional clinical ﬁndings in patients
carrying variants in SMARCE1, KIF1A, SYNGAP1 and
SLC6A1 genes ﬁt with the phenotypes reported in patients
with pathogenic variants in the same genes. On the otherhand, patients carrying variants in SATB2, ASXL3, SPTAN1
and LAS1L genes present some but not all the consistent
features attributed to these genes.
Conclusion: Molecular heterogeneity in AS-like patients,
together with the presence of distinctive clinical features in
some of them, indicates that AS-like is made up by differentclinical entities overlapping phenotypically with AS, mak-
ing them dif ﬁcult to distinguish.
We thank ISCIII (PI16/01411), Asociación Síndrome
Angelman and Fundació Parc Taulí-I3PT (CIR2016/025)
for their ﬁnancial support.
C. Aguilera: None. A. Ruiz: None. E. Gabau: None. N.
Baena: None. N. Spataro: None. L. Capel: None. N.
Capdevila: None. A. Ramírez: None. V. Delgadillo:
None. S. Ourani: None. C. Brun: None. M.
Guitart: None.
P08.04A
When high incidence and high genetic heterogeneity
lead to different genetic aetiologies within one family: a
case of two sibs with neurodevelopmental disorders andde novo variants in one known and one candidate gene
D. Prchalová
1, M. Havlovicová1, M. Han čárová1,Š.
Bendová1, V. Stránecký2, Z. Sedlá ček1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,2Department of Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unitfor Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of
Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech
Republic
We report on a family with two affected patients, a 13-year-
old girl (P1) with severe intellectual disability (ID), autism,agenesis of corpus callosum, abnormal EEG ﬁndings,
hearing loss, eye defect and short stature, and her brother
(P2) with congenital chylothorax and hydrops who died36 hours after birth.
Exome sequencing identi ﬁed in P2 a de novo PTPN11
variant NM_002834.4:c.417G>C p.(E139D) listed aspathogenic in ClinVar and causing Noonan syndrome,
which was consistent with the clinical ﬁndings. There were
no clear-cut ﬁndings in P1, with a possible exception of a de
novo frameshift ARGLU1 variant NM_018011.4:
c.695delAAGA p.(K232Ffs*6). ARGLU1 encodes arginine-
and glutamate-rich protein 1 which may have a transcrip-tional regulatory role. ARGLU1 has not been associated
with ID yet but is among possible candidate genes. The
gene is intolerant to loss-of-function variation (3/20observed/expected variants in gnomAD). Several de novo
ARGLU1 variants (gene deletions and a frameshift) haveAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1377been identi ﬁed in a large candidate gene screen, and the
same variant as that of P1 was de novo in one patient of the
DDD cohort. The variant is located in the last exon but
truncates the glutamate-rich domain, which may alter pro-
tein function. Phenotype information on previous patients is
limited but suggests overlap with P1.
Our study supports the notion that due to the high inci-
dence of neurodevelopmental disorders and their huge
genetic heterogeneity affected siblings often have differentgenetic aetiologies. Additional patients and analyses are
needed to con ﬁrm or exclude ARGLU1 as a new ID gene.
Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203.D. Prchalová: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M.
Hančárová: None. Š. Bendová: None. V. Stránecký:
None. Z. Sedláček:None.
P08.05B
Lethal neonatal stiffness and immobility caused bybiallelic variations in ATAD1
M. Villy
1, R. Bunod2, S. Whalen2, K. Maincent3,
D. Doummar3, N. Dorison3, M. Mayer3, A. Isapof3,
T. Billette3, A. Afenjar2, P. Léger4, I. Martin5, B. Keren6,
D. Héron1,2, C. Mignot1,2,6,7
1APHP, Département de génétique, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France,2APHP, Unité de génétique
clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,
3APHP, Unité de neuropédiatrie et pathologie du
développement, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,
4APHP, Réanimation néonatale et pédiatrique, Hôpital
Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,5APHP, Soins intensifs
de néonatalogie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris,France,
6Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de
Causes Rares, Paris, France,7INSERM, U 1127, CNRS
UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UPMC Université Paris06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière, ICM, Paris, France
ATAD1 encodes for thorase, a protein which regulates the
surface-expression of AMPA receptors. Thus, thorase plays
an essential role in neurotransmission. Biallelic loss-of-function or activating ATAD1 mutations have been recently
described in six patients from three different families. They
presented with severe encephalopathy characterized byneonatal stiffness, limited or absent mobility, poor eye
contact, feeding dif ﬁculties and respiratory distress.
Here, we report on two novel infants with this congenital
immobility and hypertonia syndrome. Patient #1 needed
intensive cares from birth because of secondary neonatal
respiratory distress. He had extreme stiffness of limbs andaxial hypotonia, immobility, absence of eye contact, limited
responsiveness to stimuli and weak sucking. He hadepileptic seizures at 5 months and died at 6 months. Patient
#2 had a similar disease course, except that he had no
epilepsy. He died at 4 months of cardio-respiratory failure.
Both patients had null auditory evoked potentials.
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) in patient #2 revealed
the previously reported c.1070_1071del p.(His357Argfs*15) ATAD1 homozygous variant. We rein-
terpreted WES data obtained ﬁve years ago for patient #1,
previously interpreted as normal, which highlighted thenovel c.383G>T p.(Gly128Val) homozygous variant in
ATAD1 .
The phenotype of these two patients was close to that of
published patients, associating neonatal stiffness with
immobility. We con ﬁrm the auditory involvement reported
once. The retrospective diagnosis of our patient #1 illus-trates that ATAD1 mutation is associated with a recogniz-
able clinical presentation, which is critical for genetic
counseling and potential targeted therapy.
M. Villy: None. R. Bunod: None. S. Whalen: None. K.
Maincent: None. D. Doummar: None. N. Dorison: None.
M. Mayer: None. A. Isapof: None. T. Billette: None. A.
Afenjar: None. P. Léger: None. I. Martin: None. B.
Keren: None. D. Héron: None. C. Mignot: None.
P08.06C
New candidate genes in autism spectrum disorder
F. Mari
1, C. Fallerini1, A. Curró1, D. Lopergolo1,
E. Benetti2, A. Giliberti1, M. Cannone1, F. Valentino1,
F. Ariani1, A. Pinto3, S. Furini2, R. Canitano4,
J. D. Buxbaum5, S. De Rubeis5, A. Renieri1
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
2Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy,3Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,4Child Neuropsychiatry,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,
5Department of Psychiatry, Ichan School of Medicine, at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States
Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a well-
known highly genetic heterogeneous entity.
Materials and Methods: In the context of an Interna-
tional project aiming at identifying the genetic causes of
ASD (Autism Sequencing Consortium, Mount Sinai), weperformed a whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis in a
cohort of 100 ASD patients, not harboring CNVs, attending
the Medical Genetics Unit of Siena.
Results: Mutations in already known ASD-related genes
were detected in 11% of cases, while either de novo or
inherited mutations in novel genes were identi ﬁed in 21% of
cases. The novel identi ﬁed genes can be pooled in three
categories: i-genes for which causative mutations have not1378been previously reported (eight genes), ii-genes for which a
likely association with ASD has been previously reported in
a single case (eg DRP2 etc) and iii-genes whose mutations
have been previously associated with intellectual disability
(ID) in only one (eg BCORL1 etc) or a few families (eg
BRD4 recently associated with a Cornelia De Lange-likephenotype etc).
Conclusions: Overall, our extensive approach goes
beyond safely con ﬁrming the pathogenic role of ASD/ID
candidate-genes and allows establishing the novel role of
ID-related genes in ASD. It delineates the impact of new
genes across neurodevelopmental dimensions, providingimportant new insights into functional pathways involved in
heterogeneous ASD phenotypes.
F. Mari: None. C. Fallerini: None. A. Curró: None. D.
Lopergolo: None. E. Benetti: None. A. Giliberti: None.
M. Cannone: None. F. Valentino: None. F. Ariani: None.
A. Pinto: None. S. Furini: None. R. Canitano: None. J.D.
Buxbaum: None. S. De Rubeis: None. A. Renieri: None.
P08.07D
Mutations in DLL1 cause variable neurodevelopmental
disorders
B. Fischer-Zirnsak
1, L. Segebrecht1,2, P. Charles3,
C. F. Boerkoel4, K. Brown5, T. Cartwright6, Y. Chen7,
C. Costin8, S. Fehr9, K. Foss10,T .H a11, G. Hildebrand1,
D. Horn1, S. Liu7, E. J. Marco12, M. McDonald13,
K. McWalter7, S. Race14, M. Schubach1,2,Y .C .S i7,
A. Slavotinek11, S. Stockler14, A. Telegra ﬁ7, E. Torti7,
A. C. Tsai5, X. Wang7, M. Zafar15, B. Keren3, U. Kornak1,
G. Mirzaa16,17, N. Ehmke1
1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
2Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany,
3Department of Genetics, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,
4Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,5Department of
Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States,
6Neuroscape Center, Departments of Neurology,
Pediatrics, Physiology, Radiology, and Psychiatry,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States,
7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,8Akron
Children ’s Hospital, Akron, OH, United States,9Praxis für
Humangenetik Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,10Division of
Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA,United States,
11Division of Genetics, Dept. Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States,
12Department of Child Neurology, Cortica Healthcare, San
Rafael, CA, United States,13Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University MedicalCenter, Durham, NC, United States,14Division of
Biochemical Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University
of British Columbia, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver,
BC, Canada,15Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States,16Center for
Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children ’s Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States,17Department of
Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States
The evolutionarily conserved Notch signaling pathway
operates in many different developmental, homeostatic anddisease processes. In vivo andin vitro studies have shown
an important role of the Notch ligand DLL1 in the
development of the nervous system and somites, amongothers.
We identi ﬁed 14 individuals from ten unrelated families
with heterozygous DLL1 variants by exome sequencing.
The most common features in our cohort were intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorder, seizures and variable
brain malformations. Four patients had scoliosis includingone with a vertebral segmentation defect. We identi ﬁed six
nonsense variants, two splice site variants, one missense
variant affecting a highly conserved cysteine in the DSLdomain, and one 122 kb deletion containing DLL1 . Ana-
lysis of the splice site variant NM_005618.4:c.54 +1G>A
showed an in-frame insertion of 12 bp near the sequencecoding for the signal peptide, possibly affecting proper
localization of the mutant DLL1 protein. The features in our
cohort resemble those of patients with overlapping terminaldeletions of 6q27 encompassing DLL1 , supporting the
previous hypothesis that haploinsuf ﬁciency of DLL1 is
causative of the phenotype in this deletion.
In conclusion, we identi ﬁed heterozygous mutations in
DLL1 in a cohort with a variable neurodevelopmental
phenotype and other multi-system features. Our clinical andmolecular data support haploinsuf ﬁciency as a mechanism
for the pathogenesis of DLL1 -related disorders and illustrate
the importance of DLL1 in human brain development.
Grants: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke (NINDS), award number K08NS092898; Jordan ’s
Guardian Angels.
B. Fischer-Zirnsak: None. L. Segebrecht: None. P.
Charles: None. C.F. Boerkoel: None. K. Brown: None. T.
Cartwright: None. Y. Chen: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. C. Costin: None. S. Fehr:
None. K. Foss: None. T. Ha: None. G. Hildebrand: None.
D. Horn: None. S. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. E.J. Marco: None. M. McDonald:
None. K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁ
cant; GeneDx. S. Race: None. M. Schubach: None.
Y.C. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDx. A. Slavotinek: None. S. Stockler: None. A.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1379Telegra ﬁ:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDx. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. A.C. Tsai: None. X. Wang: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. M.
Zafar: None. B. Keren: None. U. Kornak: None. G.
Mirzaa: None. N. Ehmke: None.
P08.08A
Exploring the phenotypical spectrum of BRD4 defects
N. N. Hauer1, C. Vogl1, B. Popp1, C. Büttner1, S. Uebe1,
H. Sticht2, A. B. Ekici1, P. Klinger3, C. Kraus1,
M. Krumbiegel1, A. Wiesener1, H. Dörr4, A. Reis1,
C. T. Thiel1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany,
2Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany,
3Department of Orthopaedic Rheumatology, Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen,Germany,
4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany
Bromodomain Protein 4 (BRD4) is a member of the
bromodomain protein family involved in binding tohyperacetylated genomic regions of promotors and enhan-
cers. BRD4 mediates CDK9 activity to in ﬂuence transcrip-
tion elongation by RNA polymerase II and thus regulatesgene expression, cell differentiation and cell cycle.
Recently, frameshift and missense variants were reported
with a Cornelia de Lange-like phenotype. In threeindependent families we identi ﬁed 2 missense and 1
frameshift heterozygous de novo variants in BRD4
(c.1856G>T; c.2513A>T; c.2728delC). The individualswith the c.1856G>T and the c.2728delC variants presented
with intellectual disability and Cornelia de Lange-like facial
gestalt. Short stature was present in all but the individualwith the frameshift variant. Protein structure modelling
indicates that variant c.1856G>T (p.Ser619Iso) likely
affects binding of BRD4 to its ligands. Expression analysisshowed that both missense variants, but not the frameshift
variant, lead to a reduced expression indicating a loss-of-
function effect of all three identi ﬁed variants. Immuno-
ﬂuorescence analysis from cells with the missense variants
conﬁrmed a reduced cellular growth and smaller cell size
compared to controls. Transcriptional pro ﬁling to assess the
effect of BRD4 on known effector proteins highlighted a
complex dysregulation in patient and CRISPR/Cas9
meditated BRD4 defect cell lines. We expand the clinicalspectrum of mutations in BRD4 from idiopathic short
stature without distinct facial gestalt to a Cornelia de Lange-like phenotype and propose a loss-of-function effect of
BRD4 mutations. The variability of the phenotype might in
part be explained be different effects on target
effector genes.
N.N. Hauer: None. C. Vogl: None. B. Popp: None. C.
Büttner: None. S. Uebe: None. H. Sticht: None. A.B.
Ekici: None. P. Klinger: None. C. Kraus: None. M.
Krumbiegel: None. A. Wiesener: None. H. Dörr: None.
A. Reis: None. C.T. Thiel: None.
P08.09B
Truncating CHD8 variants cause a Sotos-like syndrome
with autism
S. Douzgou
1, H. Liang2, K. Metcalfe1, S. Somarathi1,
M. Tischkowitz3, W. Mohamed4, U. Kini4, S. McKee5,
L. Yates6,7, M. Bertoli6, S. Lynch8, S. Holder9, -. the
Deciphering Developmental Disorders study10, S. Banka1
1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary ’s
Hospital, Manchester University Hospitals NHSFoundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom,
2Division of
Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of BiologicalSciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,
3Academic Department of Medical Genetics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge University HospitalsNHS foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,
4Oxford Centre for Genomic
Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS FoundationTrust, Oxford, United Kingdom,
55Northern Ireland
Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health and Social Care
Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom,
6West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, NHS Greater
Glasgow and Clyde, Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill
Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom,7KwaZulu-Natal
Research and Innovation Sequencing Platform (KRISP),
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa,
8Temple Street Children ’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,9North
West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Harrow, London,
United Kingdom,10Department of Medical Genetics,
Cambridge University Hospitals Foundation Trust,Cambridge, United Kingdom
Variants in the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding
protein 8 (CHD8) have been associated with intellectual
disability (ID), autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and
overgrowth and CHD8 is one of the causative genes for
OGID (overgrowth and ID). However, the phenotypic
spectrum of individuals heterozygous for CHD8 truncating
variants has not been clearly de ﬁned. We investigated 26
individuals with CHD8 protein truncating variants (PTVs),
including 10 previously unreported patients, and found a1380pattern of common features: macrocephaly (76%), tall
stature (65%), developmental delay and/or intellectual
disability (DD/ID, 81%), autism spectrum disorders (ASD,
81%), sleep dif ﬁculties (48%), gastrointestinal problems
(42%), and distinct facial features. The gestalt is reminiscent
of Sotos and Weaver syndromes. Most of the individuals inour cohort had moderate-to-severe intellectual disability,
and some had regression of speech (37%), seizures (27%)
and hypotonia (27%), and two individuals were also non-ambulant. Most individuals had ASD (81%), similarly to
previous studies, but we found a higher incidence of
comorbid neurodevelopmental delay/impairment. Our studyshows that haploinsuf ﬁciency of CHD8 is associated with a
Sotos-like syndrome with pronounced autistic traits.
S. Douzgou: None. H. Liang: None. K. Metcalfe: None.
S. Somarathi: None. M. Tischkowitz: None. W.
Mohamed: None. U. Kini: None. S. McKee: None. L.
Yates: None. M. Bertoli: None. S. Lynch: None. S.
Holder: None. -. the Deciphering Developmental Dis-
orders study: None. S. Banka: None.
P08.10C
Delineation of the clinical phenotype caused by de novo
CLTC variants
M. J. Nabais Sá
1, H. Venselaar2, L. Wiel3, A. Trimouille4,
E. Lasseaux4, S. Naudion4, D. Lacombe4, A. Piton5,
C. Vincent-Delorme6, C. Zweier7, A. Reis7, R. Trollmann8,
A. Ruiz9, E. Gabau10, A. Vetro11, R. Guerrini11,
S. Bakhtiari12, M. Kruer12, K. Crompton12, D. J. Amor13,
E. K. Bijlsma14, T. S. Barakat15, M. F. van Dooren15,
R. Pfundt1, C. Gilissen1, B. B. de Vries1,A .P .d e
Brouwer1, D. A. Koolen1
1Radboudumc/Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Center for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, RIMLS, Radboudumc,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Department of Human Genetics,
RILMS, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,5Institut de Genetique et de
Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, INSERM U964 & CNRS
UMR 7104, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,6Hôpital
Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France,7Institute of Human
Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,8Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Neuropediatrics, Friedrich-Alexander
University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany,
9Laboratori de Genètica, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic,
Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc
Tauli-UAB, Sabadell, Spain,10Corporació Sanitària Parc
Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Tauli-UAB, Sabadell,Spain,
11A. Meyer Children's Hospital, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy,12Phoenix Children's Hospital/University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, United States,
13Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's
Hospital & The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Australia,14Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,
15Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the CLTC gene have
been reported in 14 patients with intellectual disability (ID)
with or without epilepsy.
Methods: We describe 13 novel patients with a likely
pathogenic de novo CLTC variant, identi ﬁed by using
diagnostic exome sequencing or an ID gene panel.
Results: All individuals presented with intellectual dis-
ability (ID), ranging from mild to moderate/severe, with or
without additional neurologic, behavioral, craniofacial,
ophthalmologic and gastrointestinal features. The severeend of the clinical spectrum, including severe ID, epilepsy,
microcephaly and hypoplasia of corpus callosum was more
frequently observed in the group of individuals with mis-sense and in-frame variants than in those with nonsense and
frameshift variants, although this difference was not sig-
niﬁcant (Fisher ’s Exact Test; p-value>0.0125). A 3D model
of the CHC1 protein showed that the de novo missense
CLTC variants do not cluster in 3D dimensional proximity.
However, these variants may affect the interaction withother clathrin heavy and light chains as CHC1 interacts with
three light chains to form clathrin. The nonsense and fra-
meshift variants are all predicted to result in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Conclusion: Taken together, these results suggest that
missense and in frame variants exert a dominant negativeeffect (antimorph), whereas the nonsense and frameshift
variants would result in haploinsuf ﬁciency (hypomorph).
Consequently, the wide phenotypic variability observed inCLTC -related ID seems to be associated with allelic
heterogeneity.
M.J. Nabais Sá: None. H. Venselaar: None. L. Wiel:
None. A. Trimouille: None. E. Lasseaux: None. S. Nau-
dion: None. D. Lacombe: None. A. Piton: None. C.
Vincent-Delorme: None. C. Zweier: None. A. Reis: None.
R. Trollmann: None. A. Ruiz: None. E. Gabau: None. A.
Vetro: None. R. Guerrini: None. S. Bakhtiari: None. M.
Kruer: None. K. Crompton: None. D.J. Amor: None. E.
K. Bijlsma: None. T.S. Barakat: None. M.F. van Dooren:
None. R. Pfundt: None. C. Gilissen: None.
B.B. de Vries:
None. A.P. de Brouwer: None. D.A. Koolen: None.
P08.11D
Four further patients with bi-allelic CNTNAP2aberrationsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1381M. Rio1, C. Gitiaux2, M. Hully2, A. Munnich1,
N. Boddaert3, K. Poirier4, C. Besmond4, G. Barcia1
1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, paris, France,
2Department of neuropediatrics, Necker Hospital, paris,
France,3Department of radiology, Necker Hospital, paris,
France,4Imagine Institut, paris, France
Biallelic defects in CNTNAP2 gene were previously
described in an autosomal recessive disorder with severe
intellectual disability (ID), epilepsy and cortical dysplasia.
To date, 25 affected individuals have been reported. Most ofpatients have severe ID with absent or limited expressive
speech and limited verbal comprehension. Only two
patients with moderate ID and able to use sentences werereported. We described four children from three families
with novel homozygous or compound heterozygous
deleterious CNVs and mutations in CNTNAP2 gene. Motormilestones were mildly delayed in all patients, with a
walking age between 22 and 30 months. All patients had
ID. Two patients had severe ID with complete lack ofspeech. Two unrelated patients had mild ID with preserved
speech and good verbal comprehension. One of them was
able to write and read, while his brother had severeintellectual disability with no language. Epilepsy occurred
in all patients, with an age at onset between 3 and
24 months. One patient was seizure free for 4 years. Allpatients, except one, had cortical dysplasia. No speci ﬁc
facial dysmorphism was noted. Birth parameters and post-
natal growth were in the normal range. In conclusion, wereported four individuals from three families with biallelic
aberrations in CNTNAP2 causing ID and additional features
such as epilepsy and cortical dysplasia. In contrast toprevious reports, we observed moderate ID with preserved
speech and verbal comprehension in two children suggest-
ing clinical variability even in a same family.
M. Rio: None. C. Gitiaux: None. M. Hully: None. A.
Munnich: None. N. Boddaert: None. K. Poirier: None. C.
Besmond: None. G. Barcia: None.
P08.12A
Novel de novo 2q14.3 deletion disrupting CNTNAP5 in a
girl with intellectual impairment and microcephaly
E. G. Ludington
1, H. Bae1,S .Y u2, C. P. Barnett1
1Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide,
Australia,2SA Pathology at Women's and Children's
Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia
Introduction: Reports of small 2q14.3 deletions including
CNTNAP5 are rare and the clinical effect is currently
unknown. Here we present a case of an 838kb de novo2q14.3 deletion involving multiple exons of CNTNAP5 in a
child with developmental delay and microcephaly.
Materials and Methods: A 9-year-old girl with an
intellectual disability and microcephaly (OFC < 0.4th per-
centile) was seen in the genetics clinic. The girl had parti-
cular dif ﬁculties with visual-spatial tasks and she had very
low working memory and processing speed. An 850 kb
SNP array (Illumina Human CytoSNP-12 Beadchip) was
done which identi ﬁed the deletion. No other copy number
variations were identi ﬁed and detailed investigations for an
alternative cause were all normal. Parents were of normal
intelligence.
Results: An 838kb de novo 2q14.3 deletion was identi-
ﬁed (chr2: 125,204,264-126,042,867; hg19). There are few
reports of deletions involving CNTNAP5 but all have
involved multiple other genes or copy number variants. This
is the ﬁrst reported case of a de novo deletion disrupting
CNTNAP5 in an individual with intellectual disability and
microcephaly and no other CNVs identi ﬁed. CNTNAP5 is a
member of the neurexin family of multidomain transmem-
brane proteins involved in cell adhesion and intercellularcommunication, leading to our hypothesis that mutations in
CNTNAP5 result in abnormalities of neurodevelopment.
Conclusion: We hypothesise that CNTNAP5 is an
important gene in neurodevelopment and disruption of
CNTNAP5 causes neurodevelopmental disability. 2q14.3
deletions involving CNTNAP5 may constitute a new dele-
tion syndrome.
E.G. Ludington: None. H. Bae: None. S. Yu: None. C.
P. Barnett: None.
P08.13B
Linked homozygous CRADD and USP44 variants inintellectual disability
M. Koprulu
1, G. Nalbant1, Q. Zaman2, R. Muhamamad
Kamran Shabbir2, S. Malik2, A. Tolun1
1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan
Background: The global prevalence of intellectual dis-
ability is estimated to be around 1%; however, the
molecular basis remains unknown in most cases. We
studied a consanguineous Pakistani kinship with severeintellectual disability, mild lissencephaly, brain atrophy and
progressive decline in cognitive skills to identify the genetic
basis of the disease.
Materials and Methods: Homozygosity mapping was
performed and exome sequence ﬁle of one affected indivi-
dual was investigated for candidate variants.
Results: In a 3.9-Mb region of shared homozygosity, we
detected CRADD c.2T>G variant and novel USP441382c.873_884del and c.886delA variants. CRADD variant
alters the initiation codon (AUG ◊AGG; p.(M1?) or p.
(M1A)), and it is extremely rare (highest MAF =3.28E-05).
CRADD variant leads to premature translational
termination.
Discussion: Biallelic damaging variants in CRADD cause
recessive mental retardation 34 (MRT34) with mild to
moderate intellectual disability (ID) and in some cases
additional lissencephaly and megalencephaly. Only one IDfamily has been reported with an USP44 variant, which is a
deletion similar to ours. Phenotype of our patients, severe
intellectual disability and mild lissencephaly but no sei-zures, is different from phenotypes of patients with CRADD
orUSP44 mutations alone and is not as severe as would be
expected of an additive effect.
Conclusion: Familial linked homozygous variants are
very rare, and we found such variants in CRADD and
USP44 in two cousins with severe intellectual disability and
mild lissencephaly. This study also highlights that whole
exome sequencing rather than candidate gene approach can
uncover a novel molecular basis for a disorder.
M. Koprulu: None. G. Nalbant: None. Q. Zaman:
None. R. Muhamamad Kamran Shabbir: None. S.
Malik: None. A. Tolun: None.
P08.14C
Spatially clustering de novo variants in CYFIP2 ,
encoding the cytoplasmic FMRP interacting protein 2,
cause intellectual disability and seizures
M. Zweier
1, A. Begemann1,2, K. McWalter3, M. T. Cho3,
L. Abela4,2, S. Banka5,6, B. Behring7, A. Berger8,
C. W. Brown9,10, M. Carneiro11, J. Chen12,
G. M. Cooper13, Deciphering Developmental Disorders
(DDD) Study, C. R. Finnila13, M. J. Guillen Sacoto3,
A. Henderson14, U. Hüffmeier15, P. Joset1, B. Kerr5,6,
G. Lesca16,17, G. S. Leszinski18, J. H. McDermott5,
M. R. Meltzer19, K. G. Monaghan3, R. Mostafavi9,
K. Õunap20,21, B. Plecko4,2,22, Z. Powis23, G. Purcarin12,
T. Reimand20,21,24, K. M. Riedhammer18,25,
J. M. Schreiber19, D. Sirsi26, K. J. Wierenga12,27,
M. H. Wojcik28, S. M. Papuc1,29, K. Steindl1, H. Sticht30,
A. Rauch1,2
1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-
Schlieren, Switzerland,2Radiz –Rare Disease Initiative
Zurich, Clinical Research Priority Program for Rare
Diseases, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,
3GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,4Division of
Child Neurology, University Children ’s Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland,5Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, St Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester,Manchester, United Kingdom,6Division of Evolution &
Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty
of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom,7Department of Pediatrics,
Klinikum Nuremberg, Nuremberg, Germany,8Department
of Neuropediatrics, Klinikum Weiden, KlinikenNordoberpfalz AG, Weiden, Germany,
9Le Bonheur
Children ’s Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States,
10Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis,
TN, United States,11Department of Neuropediatrics, Lyon
University Hospital, Lyon, France,12University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
United States,13HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology,
Huntsville, AL, United States,14Northern Genetics Service,
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,15Institute of
Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-UniversitätErlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany,
16Department of Medical Genetics, Lyon University
Hospital, Lyon, France,17CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM
U1028, Claude Bernard Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France,
18Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
19Children ’s National Health System, Washington, DC,
United States,20Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute
of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
21Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,22Division of
General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics andAdolescent Medicine, Medical University Graz, Graz,
Austria,
23Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States,
24Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
25Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
26Department of Pediatrics, Neurology and
Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States,27Department of
Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL,
United States,28Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, United States,29Victor Babes National
Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania,30Institute of
Biochemistry, Emil-Fischer Center, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany
CYFIP2 , encoding the evolutionary highly conserved
cytoplasmic FMRP interacting protein 2, has previouslybeen proposed as a candidate gene for intellectual disability
and autism because of its important role linking FMRP-
dependent transcription regulation and actin polymerizationvia the WAVE regulatory complex (WRC). Recently, de
novo variants affecting the amino acid p.Arg87 of CYFIP2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1383were reported in four individuals with epileptic encephalo-
pathy. We here report 12 independent patients harboring a
variety of de novo variants in CYFIP2 broadening the
molecular and clinical spectrum of a novel CYFIP2 -related
neurodevelopmental disorder. Using trio whole-exome or
-genome sequencing, we identi ﬁed 12 independent patients
carrying a total of eight distinct de novo variants in CYFIP2
with a shared phenotype of intellectual disability, seizures,
and muscular hypotonia. We detected seven differentmissense variants, of which two occurred recurrently (p.
(Arg87Cys) and p.(Ile664Met)), and a splice donor variant
in the last intron for which we showed exon skipping in thetranscript. The latter is expected to escape nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay resulting in a truncated protein.
Despite the large spacing in the primary structure, thevariants spatially cluster in the tertiary structure and are all
predicted to weaken the interaction with WAVE1 or
NCKAP1 of the actin polymerization regulating WRC-complex. Preliminary genotype –phenotype correlation indi-
cates a profound phenotype in p.Arg87 substitutions and a
more variable phenotype in other alterations. This studyevidenced a variety of de novo variants in CYFIP2 as a
novel cause of mostly severe intellectual disability with
seizures and muscular hypotonia.
M. Zweier: None. A. Begemann: None. K. McWalter:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx,
Inc.M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; GeneDx, Inc.. L. Abela: None. S. Banka: None.
B. Behring: None. A. Berger: None. C.W. Brown: None.
M. Carneiro: None. J. Chen: None. G.M. Cooper: None.
C.R. Finnila: None. M.J. Guillen Sacoto: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx, Inc.. A. Hender-
son: None. U. Hüffmeier: None. P. Joset: None. B. Kerr:
None. G. Lesca: None. G.S. Leszinski: None. J.H.
McDermott: None. M.R. Meltzer: None. K.G. Mon-
aghan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDx, Inc.. R. Mostafavi: None. K. Õunap: None. B.
Plecko: None. Z. Powis: None. G. Purcarin:
None. T.
Reimand: None. K.M. Riedhammer: None. J.M.
Schreiber: None. D. Sirsi: None. K.J. Wierenga: None.
M.H. Wojcik: None. S.M. Papuc: None. K. Steindl:
None. H. Sticht: None. A. Rauch: None.
P08.15D
Diagnostic whole exome sequencing identi ﬁes new
causative variants in 1000 cases with intellectual
disability
R. Buchert1, M. Grimmel1, S. Beck-Wödl1, A. Bevot2,
A. Dufke1, M. Elgizouli3, T. Froukh4, D. Gauck1,
U. Grasshoff1, N. Kaiser2, M. Kehrer1, I. Krägeloh-
Mann2, H. Küpper2, A. Kuechler3, L. Laugwitz1,2,
J. Magg2, U. Moog5, A. Müller1, B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz6,A. Rieß1, K. Schäferhoff1, S. Spranger7, M. Sturm1,
A. Weichselbaum2, O. Rieß1, T. B. Haack1
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,2Department of
Neuropediatrics and Neurometabolic Laboratory,Children's Hospital of the University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany,
3Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany,4Dept. of
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Philadelphia
University, Amman, Jordan,5Institute of Human Genetics,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany,
6Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik Homburg/Saar,
Homburg, Germany,7Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen,
Germany
We performed diagnostic Whole Exome Sequencing (WES)
in 1037 cases with intellectual disability (ID) and ﬁltered for
pathogenic variants as well as pathogenic CNVs in genes
previously reported in ID. In 234 cases we ran Trio analysis;
in another 79 cases we sequenced more than one affectedindividual per family. With this approach we could identify
pathogenic variants or CNVs in 31% of the cases and
prioritize candidate variants of unclear signi ﬁcance in
another 17.6% of the cases.
About 66% of the pathogenic variants occurred de novo
or were transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner,while 21% of the variants were autosomal recessive. Only a
minority of 11% was X-chromosomal and less than 1%
occurred in mitochondrial DNA.
Among these we identi ﬁed several cases with pathogenic
variants in HNRNPH2, NBEA ,PUS3 ,RHOBTB2 ,TBCK
and TBC1D23 , genes that have been associated with ID
very recently. Besides identifying pathogenic variants in
genes previously associated with ID, we were also able to
identify 22 new candidate genes such as BCL11B ,FBXO11
andKMT2E .
Taken these results together we could reveal causative
variants in about 31% of cases and identify potentiallycausative variants in another 17% of cases in a study
comprising more than 1000 individuals with intellectual
disability.
R. Buchert: None. M. Grimmel: None. S. Beck-Wödl:
None. A. Bevot: None. A. Dufke: None. M. Elgizouli:
None. T. Froukh: None. D. Gauck: None. U. Grasshoff:
None. N. Kaiser: None. M. Kehrer: None. I. Krägeloh-
Mann: None. H. Küpper: None. A. Kuechler: None. L.
Laugwitz: None. J. Magg: None. U. Moog: None. A.
Müller: None. B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz: None. A. Rieß:
None. K. Schäferhoff: None. S. Spranger: None. M.
Sturm: None. A. Weichselbaum: None. O. Rieß: None. T.
B. Haack: None.1384P08.16A
Language impairment with a partial duplication of
DOCK8
A. Benítez-Burraco1, M. Fernández-Urquiza2, S. Jiménez-
Romero3
1Faculty of Philology, Seville, Spain,2Faculty of
Humanities, Oviedo, Spain,3Faculty of Psychology,
Córdoba, Spain
In this talk we will report on a boy with a microdeletion in
8p23.1 (arr[hg19] 8p23.1 (7169490-7752586) and a micro-
duplication in 9p24.3 (arr[hg19] 9p24.3 (266045-459076).
Our proband exhibits a moderate language delay, mostlyaffecting the expressive domain, as well as cognitive delay
and behavioural de ﬁcits, including attentional problems and
aggressiveness. Whereas the microdeletion in chromosome8 is reported as benign, the microduplication in chromo-
some 9 is hypothesized as pathogenic, affecting the body of
the gene DOCK8 . We will discuss the role of this gene in
brain development and function, focusing on the functional
links of the DOCK8 protein with CDC42, in turn associated
to nearly 30 candidates for language disorders and/orlanguage evolution, including SLIT1, SLIT2, and ROBO1,
which play a key role in the externalization of language
(speech). We will also present results of a targeted wholetranscriptome sequencing analysis (RNA-seq) aimed to
determine changes in the expression levels in the blood of
DOCK8 , its functional partners with a known role in
language development, impairment, and/or evolution
(ABL1, DCDC2, DOCK4, MAPK1, MET, ROBO1 , and
SLIT2 ), and several other robust candidate genes for
language disorders and/or language evolution ( AUTS2,
BAZ1B, BMP2, CMIP, CNTNAP2, DLX1, ELP4, FLNA,
FOXP1, FOXP2, GRIN2A, POU3F2, RUNX2 , and SOX9 ).
We will conclude that the phenotype exhibited by our
proband might result from a severe de ﬁcit in working
memory (mostly impacting on language structure and use),seemingly resulting from a reduced dosage of DOCK8 and
the subsequent alteration of a CDC42-regulated network
important for language development.
A. Benítez-Burraco: None. M. Fernández-Urquiza:
None. S. Jiménez-Romero: None.
P08.17B
Biallelic variants in DYNC1I2 cause syndromic
microcephaly with intellectual disability, globaldevelopmental delay and dysmorphic facial features
E. E. Davis
1, M. Ansar2, F. Ullah1,3, S. A. Paracha4,
D. J. Adams5, A. Lai6, L. Pais7, J. Iwaszkiewicz8,
F. Millan9, M. T. Sarwar4, Z. Agha10, S. F. Shah11,A. A. Qaisar12, E. Falconnet2, V. Zoete8,13, E. Ranza2,14,15,
P. Makrythanasis2,16, F. A. Santoni2,17, J. Ahmed4,
N. Katsanis1, C. Walsh6, S. E. Antonarakis2,14,18
1Center for Human Disease Modeling, Durham, NC, United
States,2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,3Human
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology
Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and GeneticEngineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan,
4Institute of
Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University,
Peshawar, Pakistan,5Atlantic Health System, Goryeb
Children's Hospital, Morristown, NJ, United States,
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Division of Genetics
and Genomics, Children's Hospital Boston, and Neurologyand Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School Center for Life
Sciences, Boston, MA, United States,
7Medical and
Population Genetics Program and Center for MendelianGenomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, United States,
8Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, Molecular Modeling Group, BatimentGenopode, Unil Sorge, Lausanne, Switzerland,
9GeneDx,
Gaithersburg, MD, United States,10Department of
Biosciences, COMSATS University, Islamabad, Pakistan,
11Department of Medicine, KMU Institute of Medical
Sciences, Kohat, Pakistan,12Radiology Department, Lady
Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan,13Department of
Fundamental Oncology, Lausanne University, Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research, Epalinges, Switzerland,
14Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,15Medigenome, The Swiss
Institute of Genomic Medicine (current address), Geneva,
Switzerland,16Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece,17Department of
Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University
Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,18iGE3
Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland
Cargo transport along the cytoplasmic microtubular network
is essential for neuronal function, and cytoplasmic dynein-1
is an established molecular motor critical for neurogenesisand homeostasis. We performed whole exome sequencing,
homozygosity mapping, and chromosomal microarray
studies in ﬁve individuals from three independent pedigrees
and identi ﬁed likely pathogenic variants in DYNC1I2
(Dynein Cytoplasmic 1 Intermediate Chain 2), encoding a
component of the cytoplasmic dynein 1 complex. In aconsanguineous Pakistani family with three affected indivi-
duals presenting with microcephaly, severe intellectual
disability, cerebral malformations and dysmorphic facialfeatures, we identi ﬁed a homozygous splice donor site
variant (NM_001378.2:c.607 +1G>A). We report twoAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1385additional cases with similar neurodevelopmental de ﬁcits
and craniofacial features who harbor deleterious variants: an
individual bearing a p.(Tyr247Cys) change in trans with a
374 kb deletion encompassing DYNC1I2 ; and an unrelated
case harboring compound heterozygous variants p.
(Gln290*) and p.(Tyr247Cys). F0 zebra ﬁsh larvae with
CRISPR/Cas9 gene disruption or transient suppression of
dync1i2a displayed signi ﬁcantly altered craniofacial pattern-
ing with concomitant reduction in head size. We monitoredcell death and cell cycle progression in dync1i2a zebra ﬁsh
models and observed signi ﬁcantly increased apoptosis,
likely due to prolonged mitosis caused by abnormal spindlemorphology, offering initial insights into the cellular basis of
microcephaly. Additionally, complementation studies in
zebra ﬁsh demonstrate that the p.(Tyr247Cys) attenuates
gene function, consistent with protein structural analysis.
Our genetic and functional data indicate that the DYNC1I2
dysfunction likely causes an autosomal recessive micro-cephaly syndrome, and highlight further the critical roles of
the dynein-1 complex in neurodevelopment.
E.E. Davis: None. M. Ansar: None. F. Ullah: None. S.
A. Paracha: None. D.J. Adams: None. A. Lai: None. L.
Pais: None. J. Iwaszkiewicz: None. F. Millan: None. M.
T. Sarwar: None. Z. Agha: None. S.F. Shah: None. A.A.
Qaisar: None. E. Falconnet: None. V. Zoete: None. E.
Ranza: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. F.A. Santoni:
None. J. Ahmed: None. N. Katsanis: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Rescindo Therapeutics. C. Walsh:
None. S.E. Antonarakis: None.
P08.18C
9q34.3 microduplications lead to NeurodevelopmentalDisorders through EHMT1 overexpression
A. Sironi
1,2, M. T. Bonati3, C. Castronovo2, D. Zimbalatti2,
M. Crippa1,2, I. Bestetti1,2, J. A. Rosenfeld4, D. A. Scott4,
P. Stankiewicz4, A. Novelli5, S. Loddo5, J. Taylor6,
F. Devillard7, L. Larizza2, P. Finelli1,2
1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational
Medicine, Milan, Italy,2Lab. of Medical Cytogenetics and
Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano,
Cusano Milanino, Milan, Italy,3Clinic of Medical Genetics,
San Luca Hospital, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano,Milan, Italy,
4Dep. of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
5Lab. of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Rome, Italy,6Genetic Health Service New
Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand,7Département de
Génétique et Procréation, CHU Grenoble-Alpes, Grenoble,FranceBoth copy number losses and gains occur within
subtelomeric 9q34 region wi thout common breakpoints.
The microdeletions cause Kleefstra syndrome (KS),
whose responsible gene is EHMT1 (euchromatin histone
methyltransferase 1). A 9q34 duplication syndrome
(9q34DS) had been reported in literature, but it has neverbeen characterized by a molec ular point of view. At the
best of our knowledge, we report on the two patients
carrying the smallest 9q34. 3 duplications containing
EHMT1 as the only relevant gene. We compared them
to 21 described patients carrying 9q34.3 duplications
encompassing the entire gene and extending within 3Mb~. By surveying the available clinical and molecular
cytogenetic data, we could ﬁnd out that similar neurode-
velopmental disorders (NDDs ) were shared by patients
carriers of even very differen t sized duplications. More-
over, some facial features of the 9q34DS were more
represented than those of KS. However, an accurate in
silico analysis of the genes mapped in all the duplications
allowed us to support EHMT1 as being suf ﬁcient to cause
a NDD phenotype. Wider patient cohorts are needed todisentangle whether the rearrangements have full causa-
tive role or simply confer the susceptibility to NDDs and
possibly to identify the cognitive and behavioral pro ﬁle
associated to the EHMT1 increased dosage.
A. Sironi: None. M.T. Bonati: None. C. Castronovo:
None. D. Zimbalatti: None. M. Crippa: None. I. Bestetti:
None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. D.A. Scott: None. P. Stan-
kiewicz: None. A. Novelli: None. S. Loddo: None. J.
Taylor: None. F. Devillard: None. L. Larizza: None. P.
Finelli: None.
P08.19D
Epha7 haploinsuf ﬁciency is associated with
neurodevelopmental delay
J. Levy, C. Dupont, H. Nasser, E. Yvon-Chaou,
M. Rachid, M. Lopez, B. Benzacken, E. Pipiras,
A. Verloes, A. Tabet
AP-HP, Paris, France
Interstitial 6q15-q16.1 deletions are rare and few cases have
been reported in the literature. Genotype-phenotype correla-
tion is complex because of incomplete penetrance andvariable expressivity, various size and breakpoints of the 6q
deletions. We report 6 additional patients from two families
with 6q16.1 deletion encompassing or disrupting EPHA7
gene. All patients presented a neurodeveloppemental
disorder. SNP array analysis of family 1 (patient 1 to 5)
showed a 4,5 Mb deletion at 6q16.1 disrupting exons 10-17ofEPHA7 (OMIM *602190) in all affected children and
also inherited from the affected father. For family 2 (patient13866), SNP array analysis revealed a 3,1 Mb deletion at
6q15q16.1 encompassing only one OMIM gene: EPHA7 .
The ephrin receptor A7 ( EPHA7 , mapped in 6q16.1) encode
a member of ephrin receptor subfamily of the protein-
tyrosine kinase family. EPH and EPH-related receptors have
been implicated in mediating developmental events,particularly in the nervous system. EphA7 play a role in
cortical domains formation, determine brain size and shape,
and is involved in development of the central nervoussystem. We provide further evidence for EPHA7 haploin-
sufﬁciency role in neurodevelopmental disorder and
delineate clinical phenotype. Interestingly, one patient(patient 3) had a 6q16.1 deletion encompassing
EPHA7 and a 1,4 Mb 7q11.23 microdeletion associated
with more severe symptoms than those observed inWilliams-Beuren syndrome. EPHA7 deletion could also
contribute to the most severe neurodevelopmental pheno-
type as a second hit.
J. Levy: None. C. Dupont: None. H. Nasser: None. E.
Yvon-Chaou: None. M. Rachid: None. M. Lopez: None.
B. Benzacken: None. E. Pipiras: None. A. Verloes: None.
A. Tabet: None.
P08.20A
A deleterious synonymous SLC25A12 variant in a boy
with severe epileptic encephalopathy
J. Hentschel
1, F. Distelmaier2, D. Klee3, H. Zöllner3,
M. Nastainczyk-Wulf1, T. Bartolomaeus1, E. Jäger4,
D. Wieczorek5, S. Redler6, R. Jamra1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical
Center, Leipzig, Germany,2Department of General
Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology,
University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany,3Department of Diagnostic and
Interventional Radiology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine
University, Düsseldorf, Germany,4Rheumatology Unit,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Leipzig,Leipzig, Germany,
5Institute of Human Genetics, University
Clinic Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany,6Heinrich ‐Heine ‐
University, Medical Faculty, Institute of Human Genetics,Düsseldorf, Germany
Background: SLC25A12 encodes a mitochondrial mem-
brane protein ARALAR/AGC1 that contributes to the
exchange of aspartate/glutamate. Biallelic pathogenic var-
iants lead to decreased availability of N-acetyl aspartate inthe brain, leading to early infantile epileptic encephalopathy
(OMIM #612949) with global cerebral hypomyelination,
developmental regression, apnea, seizures, and muscularhypotonia.Case presentation: Here we report on a boy with pro-
found developmental and motor delay, drug-resistant epi-
lepsy starting at 7 months and recurrent episodes of status
epilepticus. Trio-exome sequencing revealed the compound
heterozygous variants in SCL25A12; c.225del; p.(Glu76-
Serfs*17) and c.1747C>A; p.( =), which are absent in public
databases. As the phenotype was overlapping and the
synonymous variant was predicted to alter the splicing, we
performed mRNA analysis on blood of the patient thatrevealed a loss of full-length cDNA. Western blot on
muscle biopsy of the patient con ﬁrmed these results. Brain
MRI including MR-spectroscopy further supported thegenetic ﬁndings since choline/myoinositol were found to be
elevated in the medullary layer, whereas NAA was reduced.
Conclusion: The clinical presentation as well as char-
acteristic MR-spectroscopy pattern combined with the loss
of mRNA/protein expression in patient´s tissues con ﬁrmed
the pathogenicity of both variants. Thus, we could set thediagnosis of EIEE39. However, at our lab and as far as we
know at other laboratories, synonymous (and many spli-
cing) variants are not well characterized. Bioinformaticstools for splicing are often not well integrated and following
mRNA analyses is hampered by technical and economical
obstacles. Hence, improvements are urgently needed toidentify causative synonymous and splicing variants.
J. Hentschel: None. F. Distelmaier: None. D. Klee:
None. H. Zöllner: None. M. Nastainczyk-Wulf: None. T.
Bartolomaeus: None. E. Jäger: None. D. Wieczorek:
None. S. Redler: None. R. Jamra: None.
P08.21B
Somatic instability of CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene is
a factor in symptom severity in Fragile X syndromepatients
D. V. Yudkin
1, I. V. Grishchenko1, A. A. Tulupov2,3,
Y. M. Rymareva2,3, Y. V. Maksimova4,5, A. R. Shorina5
1FBRI SRC VB “Vector ”, Rospotrebnadzor, Koltsovo,
Novosibirsk region, Russian Federation,2International
Tomography Center Siberian Branch of Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,
4Novosibirsk State Medical University, Novosibirsk,
Russian Federation,5Novosibirsk Clinical City Hospital
No. 1, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
Introduction: Fragile X syndrome is a main cause of
inherited intellectual disability in humans. The molecular
basis of the disorder is a CGG-repeat expansion in the
FMR1 gene. Normal repeat lengths are fewer than 50
triplets; the full mutation repeat size is more than 200
triplets. It has been shown that carriers of a large alleleAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1387exhibit repeat size somatic instability. This instability was
suggested to be linked to symptom severity. Here, we
present a study of the relationship between somatic
instability in patients with changes in their brains and the
severity of their psychiatric symptoms.
Materials and Methods: Measurements of the repeat
size were carried out by fragment analysis on an ABI
3130XL Genetic Analyzer, and the MRIs were performed
on an Achieva scanner with a magnetic ﬁeld strength of 1.5
T. Patients were diagnosed by genetic and psychiatric
assessments at NCCH No. 1.
Results: The ef ﬁciency of PCR in repeat sizing does not
allow the calculation of the instability index by the quan-
titation of each allele, as has been done previously in mouse
studies. We developed a novel approach for evaluatingsomatic instability in humans based on repeat sizes and the
number of alleles. A strong correlation between somatic
instability and changes in brain-region connectivity wasfound in Fragile X syndrome patients and in some brain
regions of the patients ’healthy mothers. Additionally,
somatic instability signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuenced the psychiatric
and behavioral symptoms of Fragile X syndrome patients.
The study is supported by Russian Science Foundation
Grant 18-15-00099.
D.V. Yudkin: None. I.V. Grishchenko: None. A.A.
Tulupov: None. Y.M. Rymareva: None. Y.V. Maksi-
mova: None. A.R. Shorina: None.
P08.22C
PRiSM, a functional genomics screen to assess the
pathogenicity of candidate variants of
neurodevelopmental disorders
G. M. van Woerden, Y. Elgersma
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, NetherlandsNext generation sequencing (NGS) has become the method
of choice to identify the presence of pathogenic mutationsin children with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Recent
studies suggested that a possible pathogenic genetic
mutation can be identi ﬁed in the majority of individuals
with intellectual disability. However, many of the identi ﬁed
variants are genetic variants of unknown signi ﬁcance
(VUS). To establish whether these variants are pathogenic,independent con ﬁrmation is needed. The PR iSM (
Pipeline
forRapid in silico/in vitro/in vivo Screening of Mutations)
is developed as a functional genomics screen to test thepathogenicity of such variants. (see: www.functiona
lgenomics.nl ). Although we can make use of many speci ﬁc
biochemical read-outs to establish the pathogenicity of avariant ( eg, kinase assays, ubiquitin assays) the core assays
of the PR iSM screen are hypothesis-free: biologicalinformation about the protein is not a prerequisite to assess
the pathogenicity of the variant. This allows us to assess
whether variants in protein domains for which the precise
function is unknown or cannot be assessed biochemically,
are pathogenic. Moreover, we can test variants in proteins
for which no biological information is available at all.During the presentation an overview will be given on the
number of mutations tested until now using the PR iSM
screening and their outcomes, discussing amongst others thesensitivity and speci ﬁcity as well as the strengths and the
weaknesses of this screen. Taken together, we have now
setup a functional genomics screen which has alreadyproven its value at the diagnostic as well as the
scienti ﬁc level.
G.M. van Woerden: None. Y. Elgersma: None.
P08.23D
GATAD2B -Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder
(GAND), further delineation of the phenotype in a series
of 10 patients
G. Vera
1, A. Sorlin2, G. Delplancq2, F. Lecoquierre1,
F. Petit3, T. Smol3, A. Ziegler4, D. Bonneau4, S. Mercier5,
P. Edery6, G. Lesca7, N. Chatron7, B. Duban-Bedu8,
C. Colson9, B. Gerard10, B. Durand10, Y. Capri11,
T. Frebourg1, A. Lebre12, G. Nicolas1, P. Saugier-Veber1,
A. Guerrot1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 76000,Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, Rouen,
France,
2Centre de Génétique, CHU Dijon Bourgogne,
Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique
des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, INSERM 1231,
Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, UniversitéBourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,
3CHU Lille,
Clinique de Génétique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, F-
59000 and EA7364 RADEME, Université de Lille, F-59000,Lille, France,
4Department of Biochemistry and Genetics,
University Hospital, 49933 Angers Cedex 9 ; UMR CNRS
60154-INSERM 1083 and Mitovasc Institute, University ofAngers, 49933, Angers, France,
5Service de génétique
médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France,6Service de
génétique clinique, Centre de Référence Anomalies duDéveloppement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud Est- HCL ;
Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, GENDEV,
Inserm U1028, UMR CNRS 5292, UCBL1, Lyon, France,
7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Genetic Department and
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Centre de Biologie Est,
Bron, F-69677, France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,F-69100, Villeurbanne, Lyon, France,
8Cytogenetics
Service, Saint Vincent de Paul Catholic Hospitals1388Association of Lille, Free Faculty of Medicine, Lille,
France,9Service de Génétique, CHU de Caen - Hôpital
Clémenceau, Caen, France,10Laboratoire de Diagnostic
Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France,11Department of Genetics, APHP-
Robert DEBRE University Hospital, Denis Diderot Schoolof Medicine, Paris University, Paris, France,
12Department
of Genetics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the GATAD2B gene
have recently been associated with a syndromic neurode-
velopmental disorder (GAND) characterized by severeintellectual disability (ID), impaired speech, childhood
hypotonia, and dysmorphic features. The majority of
reported patients harbored de novo loss of function (LoF)
variants. To date, the phenotype of only four patients has
been precisely described in the literature, contrasting with
the relative frequency of detection of such LoF GATAD2B
variants. Here, we describe 10 patients with con ﬁrmed LoF
GATAD2B variants and further delineate the clinical
phenotype.
Methods: Patients were included by contacting referent
clinicians from several French genetics departments.
Results: Developmental delay was severe with a median
age of 2.4 years (range [2-5]) for independent walking and
of 2.75 years (range [1-4]) for ﬁrst spoken words. They
showed very little subsequent progress, one patientremaining non-verbal at age 30 years. ID was mostly
moderate, with only one severe and one mild case, which
differs from the original description of severe ID. Mostcommon dysmorphic features included broad forehead,
deeply set eyes, hypertelorism, downturned mouth and,
anomalies of the extremities. Conversely, prenatal compli-cations, non-cerebral organ malformations, epilepsy and
autistic behaviour were very rare. One patient presented
asthma and recurrent respiratory infections, another onepresented severe feeding dif ﬁculties and developed acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and IgG de ﬁciency.
Conclusions: NGS-based approaches for sequencing will
improve the detection of GATAD2B variations. Better
knowledge of the clinical phenotype is essential for a cor-
rect interpretation of the molecular results and for anaccurate management of these patients.
G. Vera: None. A. Sorlin: None. G. Delplancq: None.
F. Lecoquierre: None. F. Petit: None. T. Smol: None. A.
Ziegler: None. D. Bonneau: None. S. Mercier: None. P.
Edery: None. G. Lesca: None. N. Chatron: None. B.
Duban-Bedu: None. C. Colson: None. B. Gerard: None.
B. Durand: None. Y. Capri: None. T. Frebourg: None.
A. Lebre: None. G. Nicolas: None. P. Saugier-Veber:
None. A. Guerrot: None.P08.24A
Mutations in PIGU , impairing the function of the GPI
transamidase complex cause severe intellectual
disability, epilepsy, and brain anomalies
A. Knaus1, F. Kortüm2, T. Kleefstra3, A. Stray-Pedersen4,
D.Đukić1, T. Gerstner5, D. Horn6, M. Hempel2,
P. M. Krawitz1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute of
Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
3Department of Human
Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,4Norwegian National Unit for Newborn
Screening, Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,5Department of
Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Arendal, Norway,6Institute
of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-
Universitätsmedizin Berlin,, Berlin, Germany
The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor links over
150 proteins to the cell surface and is present on every cell
type. Many of these proteins play crucial roles in neuronaldevelopment and function. Mutations in 18 of the 29 genes,
implicated in the biosynthesis of the GPI anchor, have been
identi ﬁed as the cause of GPI biosynthesis de ﬁciencies
(GPIBDs) in humans associated with intellectual disability
and seizures as the cardinal features. PIGU is an essential
component of the GPI transamidase complex along withPIGK ,PIGS ,PIGT , and GPAA1 that links GPI anchored
proteins (GPI-APs) onto the GPI anchor in the ER. Here, we
report two homozygous missense mutations(NM_080476.4:c.209T>A and c.1149C>A) in ﬁve indivi-
duals from three unrelated families. All individuals
presented with global developmental delay, severe toprofound intellectual disability, muscular hypotonia, sei-
zures, brain anomalies, scoliosis, and mild facial dysmorph-
ism. Using ﬂow cytometry, a characteristic pro ﬁle for GPI
transamidase de ﬁciency consisting of reduced cell surface
expression of FLAER, CD16, and CD24, but not CD55 and
CD59 on granulocytes and free GPI anchor detected by T5antibody on B-cells, was determined. Moreover, computer-
assisted facial analysis of different GPIBDs revealed a
shared characteristic facial gestalt between individuals withmutations in PIGU andGPAA1 . Our ﬁndings strengthen the
role of the GPI transamidase complex in the development of
nervous and skeletal systems and expand the clinicalspectrum of disorders belonging to the group of inherited
GPI anchor de ﬁciencies.
A. Knaus: None. F. Kortüm: None. T. Kleefstra: None.
A. Stray-Pedersen: None. D.Đukić:None. T. Gerstner:Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1389None. D. Horn: None. M. Hempel: None. P.M. Krawitz:
F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; FDNA Inc..
P08.25B
Cryptic unbalanced translocations causing intellectual
disability or congenital malformations can besurprisingly large
K. Cremer
1, M. Kreiß1, R. C. Betz1, J. Buchholz2,
E. Mangold1, H. Lüdicke2, J. Maric-Biresev1, E. Engels1,
H. Hundertmark1, J. Becker1, H. Engels1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,2Heinrich-Meng-Institut gGmbH,
Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum Rhein-Erft-Kreis, Kerpen,Germany
Unbalanced reciprocal translocations are a frequent cause of
intellectual disability (ID) and are usually diagnosed by
conventional cytogenetic diagnostics. However, some of
them are only detectable by e.g. FISH, MLPA orchromosomal microarrays (CMA) and are thus cryptic.
Here, we present three unbalanced translocations detected
after cytogenetic analyses with normal results at our insti-tute in the last year. In Patient 1, a 10-year old girl with i.a.
ID and dysmorphisms, CMA detected a 5.0Mb terminal
gain of 2q and a 3.6Mb terminal loss of 21q. Surprisingly,the terminal imbalances in patients 2 and 3 were quite large:
CMA detected an 11.4Mb loss of 10p and an 8.9Mb gain of
13q in Patient 2, a 10-month old boy with i.a. growthretardation, VSDs and choanal atresia. In Patient 3, a 15-
year old boy with i.a. ID, short stature, microcephaly, sei-
zures and renal agenesis, CMA detected a 10.4Mb loss of9p and an 11.4Mb gain of 12p. FISH demonstrated unba-
lanced translocations in all patients and balanced maternal
translocations for patients 1 and 2. For Patient 3, parentalmaterial was unavailable.
Especially patients 2 and 3 are instructive examples with
imbalances greater than 10Mb which theoretically should bedetectable by GTG-banding. However, the affected regions
were very similar in size and banding patterns and thus
escaped detection by banding methods. Our observationsemphasize the importance of CMA not only in the detection
of microdeletions and -duplications, but also of large
chromosomal imbalances in patients with ID or congenitalmalformations.
K. Cremer: None. M. Kreiß: None. R.C. Betz: None. J.
Buchholz: None. E. Mangold: None. H. Lüdicke: None.
J. Maric-Biresev: None. E. Engels: None. H. Hundert-
mark: None. J. Becker: None. H. Engels: None.P08.26C
Exome sequencing of 100 patients with intellectual
disability
O. Levchenko
1, E. Dadali1,2, L. Bessonova1, N. Demina1,
G. Rudenskaya1, G. Matyushchenko1, T. Markova1,
I. Anisimova1, N. Semenova1, O. Schagina1,
O. Ryzhkova1, R. Zinchenko1,2, V. Galkina1, V. Voinova3,
A. Lavrov1,2
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Department of Molecular and Cellular
Genetics, Biomedical Faculty, Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation,
3The Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named
after Academician Yuri Veltischev of the Pirogov Russian
National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) is a widespread
group of diseases with a frequency of 1% to 3%. Nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) technologies signi ﬁcantly
reduced the time of diagnostics compared to single-gene
sequencing. Optimal method of NGS is a whole (WES) orclinical (CES) exome sequencing.
Materials and Methods: The study included 100 patients
with various forms of ID. All cases were submitted fromgeneticists. Martin-Bell, Rett syndromes and chromosomal
pathology were excluded, the patients had no traumatic and
infectious brain damage. WES was performed for 69patients. CES (panel of 6500 HGMD genes) was performed
for 31 patients. Founded gene variants were con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing in trios.
Results: We diagnosed syndromes (Kabuki, Cohen,
Cowden, Nicolaides-baraitser, ZTTK, Smith-Magenis,
Helsmoortel van der Aa, Cornelia de Lange-like, multiplecongenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome 1),
metabolic diseases (MPS III type), early epilepsy ence-
phalopathy (type 4 and 7), mental retardation autosomaldominant (7, 8, 35, 36, 49 types, ID with a mutation in the
GRIA1 ), mental retardation X-linked (98 and 102 types),
mesomelic dysplasia with a mutation in the AFF3 . Several
new candidate genes were identi ﬁed. As a result, 21
pathogenic variants, 3 probably pathogenic and 12 variants
of unknown signi ﬁcance were found.
Conclusions: The total diagnostic value of the exome
sequencing is 24% (20% for WES; 29% for CES). Many
nonspeci ﬁc clinical signs in ID make it dif ﬁcult to establish
precise diagnosis without molecular genetic testing. In these
cases, exome sequencing is a method of ﬁrst choice.
O. Levchenko: None. E. Dadali: None. L. Bessonova:
None. N. Demina: None. G. Rudenskaya: None. G.
Matyushchenko: None. T. Markova: None. I.1390Anisimova: None. N. Semenova: None. O. Schagina:
None. O. Ryzhkova: None. R. Zinchenko: None. V.
Galkina: None. V. Voinova: None. A. Lavrov: None.
P08.27D
Whole exome sequencing in a cohort of adults patientswith intellectual disability
I. Marey
1,2, S. Heide1,2, C. Mignot1,2, S. Whalen1,2,
A. Afenjar1,2, J. Buratti3, V. Olin3, E. Lejeune3,
S. Karagic3, C. Nava3, M. Spentchian1,2, D. Heron1,2,
B. Keren3, P. Charles1,2
1APHP, Genetic Department, Medical Genetic UF,
Armand-Trousseau and Pitié Salpêtrière Hospitals, Paris,France,
2Reference Center for Intellectual disability of Rare
Causes, Paris, France,3Developmental Genomic UF,
Genetic Department, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital,Paris, France
Intellectual disability (ID) is frequent (about 2% of the
population, i.e. 1.3 million of persons). Etiologies are
numerous and heterogeneous. We developed since 2005, as
part of the Reference Center for ID of Rare Causes, aspeciﬁc multidisciplinary consultation (neurologist, geneti-
cist and social worker) for adults with ID which main
objectives are diagnosis, genetic counseling, management,follow-up, phenotypic characterization, evolutionary pro ﬁle
and natural evolution of different genetic syndromes in
adults. Many adults with ID have no diagnosis because theycould not bene ﬁt from the latest high-throughput sequen-
cing techniques. We focused on adults patients (older than
15 years) with isolated or syndromic ID without diagnosis.These patients were from pediatric departments (40%),
adults ’medical departments (30%) (whose neurological
departments 20%) or referred from their general practitioneror practitioner of their institution (30%). 222 of these
patients underwent high throughput sequencing in trios
(patient and 2 parents) consisting in TruSight One genepanel (TS1, 51 trios, Illumina*) or whole exome sequencing
(171 trios). We established a diagnosis in 21.6% of them
with TS1 and 43% with WES. Whole exome sequencingdiagnosis yield is comparable with series published in
literature. In most of cases we found de novo mutations. We
also found candidate genes needing validation with ongoinggene matching procedures. Identifying genetic causes is
crucial for relatives ’genetic counseling and to describe
natural evolution of known syndromes with valuableinformation on evolutionary pro ﬁle in adults.
I. Marey: None. S. Heide: None. C. Mignot: None. S.
Whalen: None. A. Afenjar: None. J. Buratti: None. V.
Olin: None. E. Lejeune: None. S. Karagic: None. C.Nava: None. M. Spentchian: None. D. Heron: None. B.
Keren: None. P. Charles: None.
P08.28A
Involvement of FMN2 in nonsyndromic autosomal-
dominant intellectual disability
D. T. Babikyan, S. Midyan, A. Hovhannisyan,
T. Sargsyan
Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care,
Yerevan, Armenia
We report genetic analysis of a non-consanguineous
Armenian family exhibiting extended history of non-syndromic intellectual disability (NSID) in four-generation
pedigree, including affected six males (three sibs, father and
two paternal uncles) and three females (daughter, paternalgrand-mother and grand-grand-mother) with mild to
moderate ID and with normal karyotype. Molecular
karyotyping analysis of all affected relatives using IlluminaHumanOmniExpress BeadChip identi ﬁed only benign
CNVs and no extended region of LOH. Assuming apparent
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of the clinicthrough four generations, all living affected six male and
one female relatives were analysed by Whole Exome
Sequencing analysis using Illumina´s SureSelect 62MbEnrichment Kit and HiSeq2000 platform. Further variant
calling and annotation by ANNOVAR revealed only one
heterozygous genetic variation in all affected relatives: aputative exonic 33 bp non-frameshift deletion in FMN2
gene (NM_020066:c.2802_2834del) predicting a deletion
of amino acids 934-945. The heterozygous variant wasconﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing in all affected relatives and
was not detected in any of the healthy relatives (mother and
sibs). FMN2 encodes a protein of the formin family of actincytoskeleton nucleation factors which is highly expressed in
the maturing brain. FMN2 as a candidate gene for ID had
been speculated in reports of two sporadic cases withinterstitial deletions involving FMN2 and suggesting the
mechanism of haploinsuf ﬁciency which was contradicted to
the further report of homozygous truncating mutations inFMN2 as cause of autosomal-recessive NSID in two
consanguineous families. This is the ﬁ
rst report of FMN2
intragenic mutation causing autosomal-dominant formof NSID.
D.T. Babikyan: None. S. Midyan: None. A. Hovhan-
nisyan: None. T. Sargsyan: None.
P08.30C
Telling the untold story: The economic and psychosocialimpacts on families affected by intellectual disabilityAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1391D. Scho ﬁeld1, O. Tan1, R. Shrestha1, R. Rajkumar1,
N. Kasparian2,3, M. Rice1, L. Rynehart1, S. West1,
J. Boyle4, L. Christie4, M. Lef ﬂer4, L. Murray4,
T. Roscioli5,6, M. Field4,7
1GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic
Medicine, Macquarie Park, Australia,2Faculty of
Medicine, University of New South Wales, Randwick,
Australia,3Heart Centre for Children, the Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia,4Genetics of
Learning Disability (GoLD) Service, Newcastle, Australia,
5Neuroscience Research Australia, University of New South
Wales, Randwick, Australia,6Sydney Children ’s Hospital,
Randwick, Australia,7Department of Clinical Genetics,
Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Australia
Introduction: Data on the ﬁnancial and psychosocial costs
incurred by families affected by intellectual disability (ID)is scarce, thus limiting the capacity to value the bene ﬁts of
diagnosing and preventing ID through the application of
genomic testing. We report on the ﬁrst large, in-depth study
exploring the economic, psychosocial and potential repro-
ductive impacts of whole genome sequencing (WGS)
for ID.
Materials and Methods: A survey instrument was
developed to assess quality of life, psychosocial impacts,
education, employment, income, wealth, welfare depen-dency, living arrangements and family out-of-pocket costs.
Eligible families had WGS. Data on 175 individuals with
ID (100 households) has been collected.
Results: Preliminary data showed combined costs to the
Australian and State Governments, and private households
totalled $13.1million per household up to the age of 69.Families bore a signi ﬁcantﬁnancial burden ($4.8million per
household) mainly due to lost income and out-of-pocket
expenses. Families were under enormous psychosocialstrain and most carers reported having a poor quality of life.
Costs to Governments were $10.7million per household,
with the main costs being for special education, residentialcare and welfare. Among the families who have had WGS
results returned, 44% have had a diagnosis with a further
12% having a potential diagnosis. Most families wouldconsider using assistive technologies such as prenatal
diagnosis and IVF with preimplantation genetic diagnosis in
future pregnancies.
Conclusions: Families affected by ID experience a sig-
niﬁcant ﬁnancial and psychosocial burden. This data is
important for benchmarking the potential bene ﬁts of WGS
in familial ID.
D. Scho ﬁeld:None. O. Tan: None. R. Shrestha: None.
R. Rajkumar: None. N. Kasparian: None. M. Rice:
None. L. Rynehart: None. S. West: None. J. Boyle: None.L. Christie: None. M. Lef ﬂer:None. L. Murray: None. T.
Roscioli: None. M. Field: None.
P08.31D
The bene ﬁts of whole exome sequencing data reanalysis
in Intellectual disability
Z. Fattahi, M. Babanejad, F. Peymani, M. Beheshtian,
F. Larti, K. Kahrizi, H. Najmabadi
Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Nowadays, whole exome sequencing has become a wide-
spread tool in studying Mendelian disorders. The diagnosticyield is assumed around 25-40% and the negative cases are
due to WES limitations. Besides the technical issues such as
low coverage in speci ﬁc regions or random failure in
hybridization reaction, inaccuracies in different data
analysis steps play a signi ﬁcant role. These can be resolved
by updates in bioinformatics tools, algorithms, databases
and literature, improving the diagnostic yield of at least 10-
20% in different studies. Recently, we have published the
results of a large cohort of patients presenting intellectualdisability in which the diagnostic yield of 54% was
achieved. In present study, 172 negative cases from
previous cohort were selected aiming to improve diagnosticyield by re-sequencing and/or re-analysis. So far, the
analysis of 68 patients is accomplished of which, the
possible causative variant is detected in 12%. These resultsare ascertained through three main strategies. First,
extensive clinical follow up, re-sampling and re-
interpretation of previous WES data led to identi ﬁcation
of one known and two novel candidate genes; ASPM ,TTI1
andGPR126 . Second; WES-reanalysis applying improved
algorithms and ﬁltering strategies in addition to updates of
disease-causing genes revealed two possible candidates;
AKTIP ,MAZ , and two known genes; CDK10 ,FSCN1 .
Third; re-sequencing revealed another candidate gene;CCDC58 possibly by expanding the coverage. In conclu-
sion, this project has shown 12% improve in diagnostic
yield so far, also introduced ﬁve possible novel candidate
genes and provided a second report for the recently
identi ﬁed genes; CDK10 andFSCN1 .
Z. Fattahi: None. M. Babanejad: None. F. Peymani:
None. M. Beheshtian: None. F. Larti: None. K. Kahrizi:
None. H. Najmabadi: None.
P08.32A
Mutation in C1orf131 , encoding a novel nucleolar
protein, causes intellectual disability in a large Pakistanifamily1392A. I. A. Khayyat1,2,3, S. M. Baig4, U. Abdullah4,
E. U. Haq4, Z. Ali4, N. A. Malik4, M. Tariq4, B. Budde1,
A. A. Noegel2,5, P. Nürnberg1,5, M. S. Hussain1,2,5
1Cologne center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany,
2Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,3Biochemistry Department,
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Human
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health BiotechnologyDivision, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic
Engineering (NIBGE), PIEAS, Faisalabad, Pakistan,
5Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC),
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) is characterized by
substantial limitations in both intellectual functioning and
adaptive behavior. 50% of ID cases have genetic basis. It
can also be categorized as syndromic intellectual disability(S-ID) and non-syndromic intellectual disability (NS-ID).
Worldwide prevalence of this disorder is estimated to range
from 1% to 3%.
Material and Methods: For genomic analyses, homo-
zygosity mapping was coupled with whole-exome sequen-
cing (WES) whereas immuno ﬂuorescence, confocal
microscopy, pulldown assays and mass spectrometry ana-
lyses were performed for biochemical analyses.
Results: We studied a Pakistani family of NS-ID and
identi ﬁed linkage regions with a maximum possible LOD
score of 2.4 at chromosomes 1, 2, 15 and 21. WES con-
ducted on DNA of two affected members revealed a mis-sense mutation (NM_152379.3:c.112G>A,p. Asp38Asn) in
C1orf131 , encoding the uncharacterized protein C1orf131,
as a likely cause of ID. The mutation replaces a highlyconserved aspartic acid by asparagine and is predicted to be
pathogenic by Mutation Taster and Polyphen-2. We show
here that C1orf131 is a novel nucleolar component andrelocates to the chromosomal periphery during mitosis.
Mutant primary ﬁbroblasts exhibit reduced and distorted
nucleoli, micronuclei and misshapen nuclei. Similar effectsare seen upon overexpression of mutant protein or knock-
down by siRNA. Our data also show that C1orf131 interacts
with several nucleolar and centrosomal proteins.
Conclusion: We conclude that C1orf131 is a novel gene
associated with ID and that its protein product plays a
crucial role in maintaining the structural integrity of thenucleolus. It is also an essential component for normal brain
functions.
A.I.A. Khayyat: None. S.M. Baig: None. U. Abdullah:
None. E.U. Haq: None. Z. Ali: None. N.A. Malik: None.
M. Tariq: None. B. Budde: None. A.A. Noegel: None. P.
Nürnberg: None. M.S. Hussain: None.P08.33B
Genetic diagnosis of intellectual disability: results of
trio-based whole exome sequencing in a cohort of 818
patients
T. Courtin
1,2, C. Nava1,2, C. Mignot1, J. Buratti1,
C. Estrade1, S. Karagic1,A .L a ﬁtte1, E. Lejeune1,
C. Mach1,V .O l i n1, A. Afenjar3, D. Doummar3,
M. Moutard3, T. Billette de Villemeur3, M. Nougues3,
L. Burglen3, S. Valence3, B. Héron-Longé3, D. Rodriguez-
Levi3, S. Whalen3, D. Haye1, S. Heide1, P. Charles1,
C. Depienne1, I. Marey1, D. Héron1, B. Keren1,4
1Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,2Sorbonne
Universités, Paris, France,3Hôpital Trousseau, Paris,
France,4Sorbonnes Universités, Paris, France
Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) is a clinically and
genetically heterogeneous condition affecting 1 to 3% of
population worldwide. Recent improvements of new
generation sequencing are transforming medical practice.We present the clinical and genetical characteristics of a
large cohort of patients suffering from ID and had a trio-
based whole exome sequencing (WES).
Patients and Methods: 818 patients were recruited
through clinical genetic and/or neuro-pediatric consulta-
tions. ID was assessed based on neuropsychological testswhen available, DSM-5 classi ﬁcation was used otherwise.
Prior to WES, a DNA micro-array, a search for Fragile-X
syndrome and a targeted-gene analysis in case of highsyndromic suspicion were performed. If negative, trio-based
WES was proposed. Molecular results were discussed in
multidisciplinary team meetings before feed-back to patient.
Results: The global diagnostic yield was 42% across all
patients (338/818 patients). 41 mutations were found in
candidate genes and contributed to their validation as “ID
genes ”, rising the potential diagnostic yield to 47% (379/
818 patients). Dominant mutations were pre-eminent (81%)
and most of them were de novo (95%) affecting 224 unique
genes. Interestingly, severity of ID had no statistically sig-
niﬁcant effect on diagnostic rate (mild ID, 66/180, 37% -
moderate to profound ID, 108/419, 44%, p-value =
0.1997). Epilepsy and family history of ID were not iden-
tiﬁed neither as cofounding factors (p-value =0.132 and
0.516).
Conclusion: This study emphasizes the considerable
genetic heterogeneity of ID and con ﬁrms the ef ﬁciency of
trio-based WES for its exploration and delineation in agenotype- ﬁrst approach.
T. Courtin: None. C. Nava: None. C. Mignot: None. J.
Buratti: None. C. Estrade: None. S. Karagic: None. A.
Laﬁtte: None. E. Lejeune: None. C. Mach: None. V.
Olin: None. A. Afenjar: None. D. Doummar: None. M.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1393Moutard: None. T. Billette de Villemeur: None. M.
Nougues: None. L. Burglen: None. S. Valence: None. B.
Héron-Longé: None. D. Rodriguez-Levi: None. S.
Whalen: None. D. Haye: None. S. Heide: None. P.
Charles: None. C. Depienne: None. I. Marey: None. D.
Héron: None. B. Keren: None.
P08.34C
Haploinsuf ﬁciency of PHF21A due to frameshift and
nonsense mutations causes syndromic autism including
intellectual disability, craniofacial anomalies, epilepsy,
hypotonia, and neurobehavioral problems
H. Kim1, J. A. Rosenfeld2, D. A. Scott2, G. Bénédicte3,
J. D. Labonne4, J. Brown4, M. McGuire5, S. Mahida6,
S. Naidu6, J. Gutierrez2, G. Lesca7, V. D. Portes7,
A. Bruel8, A. Sorlin9, F. Xia2, Y. Capri10, E. Muller11,
D. McKnight12, E. Torti12, L. C. Layman4, D. Ryu13,
I. Kong14, S. Madan-Khetarpal15,C .K i m16
1Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, Doha, Qatar,
2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
3Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France,4Augusta
University, Augusta, GA, United States,5Baylor Genetic
Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States,6Kennedy
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States,7Lyon
University Hospital, Lyon, France,8INSERM, Dijon,
French Southern Territories,9Centre de Génétique, Dijon,
France,10Service de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France,
11Stanford Children ’s Health at CPMC, San Francisco, CA,
United States,12GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
13Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, United States,
14Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea, Republic
of,15Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States,16Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
Korea, Republic of
PHF21A encodes a protein that speci ﬁcally binds unmethy-
lated H3K4 as part of a histone demethylase complex thatparticipates in suppression of neuronal gene expression. It
had been associated with intellectual disability and
craniofacial anomalies, based on its deletion in Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS) interval at 11p11.2 and its
disruption in three patients with balanced translocations.
However, until now, individuals who carry deleterioussequence variants within PHF21A have not been identi ﬁed.
Moreover, the identity of a novel gene underlying
hypotonia or neurobehavioral phenotype at 11p11.2remained cryptic. Here, we describe seven individuals
who carry heterozygous intragenic sequence variants in
PHF21A: a missense variant, which alters the last
nucleotide of an exon, four frameshift variants, and two
identical nonsense variants. These variants are predicted totrigger nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) or generate
a truncated version of PHF21A. This con ﬁrms that
haploinsuf ﬁciency of PHF21A causes not only intellectual
disability and craniofacial anomalies, but also epilepsy,
language delay, hypotonia, and neurobehavioral problems.
We also found that PHF21A is profoundly expressed inhuman fetal brain and skeletal muscle. This emphasizes the
role of PHF21A in early human development, which is
consistent with developmental delay, autism, ADHD,epilepsy, and hypotonia observed at an early age in our
patients. These ﬁndings de ﬁnitely provide proof of the
pathogenicity of this gene in a syndromic form ofintellectual disability. Furthermore, our studies suggest
additional features, in particular autism, which extend the
phenotypic spectrum attributable to PHF21A mutations.
H. Kim: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. D.A. Scott: None.
G. Bénédicte: None. J.D. Labonne: None. J. Brown:
None. M. McGuire: None. S. Mahida: None. S. Naidu:
None. J. Gutierrez: None. G. Lesca: None. V.D. Portes:
None. A. Bruel: None. A. Sorlin: None. F. Xia: None. Y.
Capri: None. E. Muller: None. D. McKnight: None. E.
Torti: None. L.C. Layman: None. D. Ryu: None. I.
Kong: None. S. Madan-Khetarpal: None. C. Kim: None.
P08.35D
RNFT2 ,a novel gene causing intellectual disability;
functional evidence in
Drosophila melanogaster
R. Ataei1, M. Haddadi2, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1
1University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2University of Zabol,
Zabol, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) as the most
prevalent disability in the world and a heterogeneousdisease is one of the major unsolved issues in health care.
The advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) technol-
ogy has resulted in an exponential increase in decipheringof novel ID-causing genes. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) in a part of large cohort study on 404 Iranian
consanguineous families with autosomal recessive intellec-tual disability (ARID) led to the identi ﬁcation of a novel
likely pathogenic missense variant (cT1150C; p.C384R) in
RNFT2 gene. This variant is located in highly conserved
zincﬁnger domain that may change the protein structure in
a way to reduce the zinc
2+afﬁnity to protein active site and
consequently leading to possible alteration in the DNAbinding site. To provide functional evidence for the effect of
this gene on cognition, we used transgenic
Drosophila model.
Material and Methods: Using Gal4/UAS genetic tool
RNFT2 -ortholog gene (CG13605) in Drosophila1394melanogaster was down-regulated in the ﬂy brain by RNAi
mechanism. Then the impact of this gene manipulation on
learning ability and short-term memory of the ﬂies were
studied using olfactory conditioning assay.
Results: Remarkable decrease in olfactory memory per-
formance indices were observed in the ﬂies underwent
CG13605 down regulation when compared to control gen-
otype ( P< 0.05).
Conclusion: Ourﬁnding suggested the possible role for
RNFT2 in functionality of Drosophila brain in terms of
learning and short-term memory which support its probable
role in inducing human cognitive impairment.
R. Ataei: None. M. Haddadi: None. K. Kahrizi: None.
H. Najmabadi: None.
P08.36A
Biallelic variants in IQSEC1 cause intellectual disability,
developmental delay and short stature
M. Ansar1, A. Al-Otaibi2, H. Chung3,4, M. N. Elagabani5,
S. A. Paracha6, R. Scholz7, T. A. Magid2, M. T. Sarwar6,
S. F. Shah8, A. A. Qaisar9, P. Makrythanasis1,10,
E. Falconnet1, E. Ranza1,11,12, F. A. Santoni1,13,
J. Ahmed6, A. Al-Asmari14, H. Kornau5,7, H. Bellen3,4,15,16,
S. E. Antonarakis1,11,17
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,2King Fahad
Medical City, National Neuroscience Institute, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,3Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States,4Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research
Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, UnitedStates,
5Neuroscience Research Center (NWFZ), Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,6Institute of
Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University,Peshawar, Pakistan,
7Center for Molecular Neurobiology
(ZMNH), University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany,
8Department of Medicine, KMU Institute of Medical
Sciences, Kohat, Pakistan,9Radiology department, Lady
reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan,10Biomedical
Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens,Greece,
11Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals
of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,12current address,
Medigenome, The Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine,Geneva, Switzerland,
13Department of Endocrinology
Diabetes and Metabolism, University hospital of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,14King Fahad Medical City,
Pediatric Department Medical Genetics division, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,15Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Houston, TX, United States,16Department of Neuroscience
and Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College ofMedicine, Houston, TX, United States,17iGE3 Institute of
Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
We analyzed two consanguineous families with intellectual
disability in which homozygous missense likely pathogenic
variants were identi ﬁed in the IQSEC1 (NM_001134382.3)
gene. In the ﬁrst family with two affecteds from Pakistan,
theIQSEC1 missense segregating variant was (c.1028C>T:
p.(Thr343Met)) while in the second family of threeaffecteds from Saudi Arabia, the missense variant was
(c.962G>A:p.(Arg321Gln)). Five affected individuals from
the two families manifested a similar phenotype thatincludes intellectual disability, developmental delay, short
stature, aphasia/speech problems, and hypotonia. Affected
individuals with the Arg321Gln biallelic variant also haveearly onset epilepsy. The X-linked paralog IQSEC2 has
previously been linked with intellectual disability and
epilepsy. Mice with a conditional Iqsec1 deletion in cortical
neurons exhibited an increased density of dendritic spines
with an immature morphology. The Drosophila ortholog of
IQSEC1 is schizo(siz). Sizis broadly expressed in CNS and
PNS from embryo to adult. RNAi knockdown of sizin
neurons does not affect viability, whereas glial speci ﬁc
knockdown exhibits severe pupal lethality, suggesting thatsiz has a critical role in glia rather than neurons. The
identi ﬁedIQSEC1 missense variants behave as severe loss-
of-function alleles in ﬂy given that ubiquitous expression of
human IQSEC1 is toxic to the ﬂy so that we failed to obtain
viable ﬂies, whereas expression of the two missense
variants consistently produced viable animals. The pheno-typic similarity of the patients in the two families, and the
functional experiments in mice and Drosophila suggest that
IQSEC1 pathogenic variants cause intellectual disability,
developmental delay and shot stature, in the autosomal
recessive manner.
M. Ansar: None. A. Al-Otaibi: None. H. Chung: None.
M.N. Elagabani: None. S.A. Paracha: None. R. Scholz:
None. T.A. Magid: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. S.F. Shah:
None. A.A. Qaisar: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. E.
Falconnet: None. E. Ranza: None. F.A. Santoni: None. J.
Ahmed: None. A. Al-Asmari: None. H. Kornau: None.
H. Bellen: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None.
P08.37B
Deletion of KCNK9 , an imprinted gene on 8q24.3 with
maternal expression, is associated with dysmorphic
features and developmental delays
P. T. Bhola1, T. Young2, D. Stavropoulos2, P. Sabatini3,
M. T. Geraghty4
1Regional Genetics Program, Children ’s Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ontario, Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 13952Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
ON, Canada,3Laboratory Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada,4Metabolics, Pediatrics, Children's
Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Introduction: KCNK9 imprinting (Birk-Barel) syndrome
(MIM 612292) is a rare syndrome characterized by
congenital hypotonia, dysmorphic features, developmental
delay and intellectual disability. It is caused by pathogenicvariants in KCNK9 , which is an imprinted gene located on
8q24.3 and is normally expressed on the maternally
inherited chromosome. To date, the small number ofreported cases of KCNK9 imprinting syndrome have been
attributed to 3 missense variants. There is no known
phenotype associated with a deletion of KCNK9 .
Methods and Results: We describe the case of a 5 year
old male who presented at age 3 with global developmental
delay and dysmorphic features including prominentsupraorbital ridges and a prominent nasal root. A chromo-
somal microarray revealed a 0.014 Mb deletion on 8q24.3
of uncertain signi ﬁcance, encompassing 1 OMIM gene,
KCNK9 . This deletion was maternally inherited. Notably,
the proband ’s mother had similar dysmorphic features and
intellectual disability. It was determined by SNP microarraythat the proband ’s mother herself had a de novo maternal
deletion on 8q24.3.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of a clinically
affected mother and child with deletion of the imprinted
region 8q24.3, encompassing the gene KCNK9 . Further
studies will contribute to our understanding of themechanism and spectrum of KCNK9 associated disorders.
P.T. Bhola: None. T. Young: None. D. Stavropoulos:
None. P. Sabatini: None. M.T. Geraghty: None.
P08.39D
MED12 missense mutation in a three-generation family:further evidences for a fourth distinct phenotype
E. Rubinato
1, S. Rondeau2, F. Giuliano3, M. Kossorotoff4,
M. Parodi5, S. Gherbi1, J. Steffan2, L. Jonard1,2,
S. Marlin1,6
1Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence des Surdités
Génétiques, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP,
Paris, France,2Service de génétique moléculaire, Groupe
hospitalier Necker Enfants malades, AP-HP, Paris, France,
3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nice, Hôpital
l'Archet 2, Nice, France,4Service de Neurologie
pédiatrique, Centre National de Référence AVC de l ’enfant,
Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France,
5Otorhinolaryngologie pédiatrique, Centre de Référence
des Surdités Génétiques, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris,France,6INSERM, UMR-1163, Institut Imagine, Paris,
France
Mutations in MED12 gene have been described in
association with syndromic et non-syndromic X-linked
intellectual disability (XLID). Up to date at least threedistinct XLID syndromes have been described: FG
syndrome, Lujan-Fryns syndrome (LS) and Ohdo syndrome
(OSMKB). In the last years, thanks to the massive use ofnext generation sequencing techniques (NGS) it has been
possible to discover at least 13 others MED12 mutations
and to expand the phenotype of MED12 -related disorders.
Here we report three subjects from a large non-
consanguineous family presenting with a mild to severe
ID, important speech delay, behavior problems, dysmorphicfacial features and hearing loss. NGS allows us to detect the
MED12 missense variant c.3883C>T (p.R1295C) carried by
the three patients. This variant has been reported in 2016 byHuet al in one family from a big cohort of XLID
unresolved families. The clinical and phenotypic variability
between the patients described by the different authorsthrough the last years is very wide, and it could be
explained by the multiple functions of the MED12 protein
in complex pathways. This clinical report contributes toexpanding the phenotype associated with MED12
mutations.
E. Rubinato: None. S. Rondeau: None. F. Giuliano:
None. M. Kossorotoff: None. M. Parodi: None. S.
Gherbi: None. J. Steffan: None. L. Jonard: None. S.
Marlin: None.
P08.40A
Functional delineation of de novo heterozygousintragenic deletion in MED13L
E. Siavrien ė
1, V. Mik štienė1,2,Ž. Mald žienė1,2,
G. Petraityt ė1, T. Ran čelis1,2, A. Utkus1,2,
E. Preik šaitien ė1,2,V .K u činskas1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Center for Medical
Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos,
Vilnius, Lithuania
Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in
MED13L (MIM #608771) gene cause intellectual disability
and distinctive facial features with or without cardiacdefects (MIM #616789). This complex neurodevelopmental
disorder is characterized by various phenotypic features
including plagiocephaly, strabismus, clubfoot, poor speech,and developmental delay, which are present in our proband.1396Materials and Methods: SNP-CGH followed by func-
tional genome analysis was conducted for the proband. In
order to elucidate the pathogenicity of the intragenic
MED13L gene deletion, proband ’s total blood RNA was
isolated and cDNA was synthesized. Subsequently, a
quantitative RT-PCR using TaqMan gene expression assaysdesigned for MED13L gene was performed. Lastly,
MED13L gene was sequenced in patient's cDNA sample by
Sanger method.
Results: Ade novo 97.88 kb deletion in the cytoband
12q24.21 including 3
rdand 4thexons of MED13L gene was
detected. Further quantitative expression analysis of severalMED13L exons disclosed the deletion of exons 3-4 but
excluded the deletion of exons 1-2 and 16-17. The borders
of the deletion in the coding region were narrowed bySanger sequencing. The deletion spanning from the exon 3
rd
to 9thwas determined. In silico , the deletion was predicted
to result in truncated protein NP_056150:p.(Val104-Glyfs*5) partly altering Med13_N domain and losing
medPIWI and Med13_C domains.
Conclusions: Based on these ﬁndings, heterozygous
deletion results in partial haploinsuf ﬁciency of the MED13L
gene in the affected patient due to the premature termination
of the protein translation.
The work was funded by the Research Council of
Lithuania (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179, Ingenes
project).
E. Siavrien ė:None. V. Mik štienė:None. Ž. Mald žienė:
None. G. Petraityt ė:None. T. Rančelis: None. A. Utkus:
None. E. Preik šaitienė:None. V. Kučinskas: None.
P08.41B
The clinical phenotype of ANKLE2 -related
microcephaly in 4 families
R. D. Clark
1, A. Thomas2,3, S. Michels4, L. Mizerick2,3,
L. Robak2,3, G. J. Demmler2,3, H. T. Chao2,3, G. Mirzaa5,6
1Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda,
CA, United States,2Texas Children's Hospital, Houston,
TX, United States,3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX, United States,4Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA,
United States,5University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States,6Center for
Integrative Brain Research, Seattle, WA, United States
Few patients with autosomal recessive ANKLE2 -related
congenital microcephaly have been described since Yama-moto ’s report in 2014. We describe four families (6
children) with ANKLE2 -related microcephaly, including
the boy from the original report (Family 1). In Family 1,two Hispanic siblings have ANKLE2 variants: c.2344C>T
(p.Q782X); c.1717C>G (p.L573V). The male had low birthweight (BW), HC -5.9 SD, sloped forehead, scalp rugae,
and hyper- and hypopigmented macules (HHPM). At age
13, he has spastic quadriparesis, partial complex seizures,
short stature, and severe intellectual disability without
speech. He is fed by gastrostomy tube. His microcephalic
sister with HHPM, died hours after birth. In Family 2, twomicrocephalic Iraqi sisters, with consanguineous parents,
have a homozygous ANKLE2 variant: c.686T>G (p.
V229G). They have HC -8-10 SD, scalp rugae, shortstature (-2-3 SD), and HHPM. Both walk and talk with
severe neurodevelopmental delay. In Family 3, a Northern
European girl with HC -6 SD, without scalp rugae orpigmentation, has two ANKLE2 variants: c.325G>C (p.
A109P); c.1421-1G>C. She walks & talks with mild-
moderate neurodevelopmental delay. In Family 4, anIndian/Filipino girl has low birth weight (-7.08 SD),
microcephaly (HC -7.08 SD), HHPM and two ANKLE2
variants: c.706C>T (p.R236*); c.1606C>T (p.R536C). Shehas a closed anterior fontanel and normal neurologic exam
at 2 weeks. All affected children have severe microcephaly,
simpli ﬁed cortical gyri and variable developmental delay.
Frontal lobe foreshortening, corpus callosal dysgenesis,
scalp rugae, and HHPM are common but not universal. The
triad of severe congenital microcephaly, scalp rugae andHHPM suggests this diagnosis.
R.D. Clark: None. A. Thomas: None. S. Michels: None.
L. Mizerick: None. L. Robak: None. G.J. Demmler:
None. H.T. Chao: None. G. Mirzaa: None.
P08.42C
Neurochondrin missense variant associated with
autosomal recessive intellectual disability and epilepsy
A. Fatima
1, J. Schuster1, J. Hoeber1, J. Klar1, L. Laan1,
R. Fadoul1, Z. Ali2, M. A. Ali3, C. Castillejo-López1,
S. M. Baig2, N. Dahl1
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,Sweden,
2Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory; Health
Biotechnology Division, National Institute for
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE),Fsisalabad, Pakistan,
3Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala Uinversity,
Uppsala, Sweden
Introduction: The NCDN gene encodes neurochondrin,
predominantly expressed in neural tissues where it mediatesneural outgrowth, synaptic plasticity and signal transduc-
tion. Neurochondrin acts as an endogenous modulator of
glutamate receptor mGluR5 and in mice, depletion of Ncdn
causes epileptic seizures, depressive-like behaviors and
impaired spatial learning.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1397Material and Methods: We identi ﬁed a consanguineous
Pakistani family segregating mild intellectual disability and
seizures in three children. Whole-exome sequencing was
performed on samples from two affected siblings. Human
neuroblastoma line SH-SY5Y and CRISPR/Cas9 editing
was used to model loss of NCDN in vitro .
Results: We identi ﬁed a rare homozygous NCDN mis-
sense variant (NM_001014841.1:c.1246G>C) in the three
affected family members. Electroencephalography (EEG) oftwo affected siblings revealed epileptic pattern whereas
brain MRI was normal. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we then
generated NCDN knockout (KO) in SH-SY5Y cells. The
KO cells exhibited signi ﬁcantly reduced neurite outgrowth
as compared to w.t. cells. Neurochondrin modulates the
activation of mGluR5 of importance for ERK1/2-phos-phorylation and we then examined the phosphorylation of
ERK1/2 at position threonine 202. The ERK1/2-phosphor-
ylation was reduced in NCDN KO cells when compared to
w.t. SH-SY5Y cells. Conversely, phosphorylation increased
when NCDN was overexpressed in both w.t. and KO SH-
SY5Y cells.
Conclusion: NCDN loss of function in SH-SY5Y cells
revealed impaired neurite outgrowth and reduced mGlu5R
dependent ERK1/2-phosphorylation. Our data support arole for neurochondrin in neurodevelopment and show that
aNCDN missense variant is associated with autosomal
recessive intellectual disability and epilepsy. This study wassupported by Swedish Research Council (2015-02424) and
Hjärnfonden (FO2018-0100) to ND.
A. Fatima: None. J. Schuster: None. J. Hoeber: None.
J. Klar: None. L. Laan: None. R. Fadoul: None. Z. Ali:
None. M.A. Ali: None. C. Castillejo-López: None. S.M.
Baig: None. N. Dahl: None.
P08.43D
Genotype-Phenotype correlation of 11 new Spanishpatients with Bainbridge Ropers syndrome
I. Valenzuela
1, E. Gabau2, C. Pardo-Domínguez3,
J. Moreno-Ruiz3, P. Tirado-Requero4, F. Santos-
Simarro5,6, S. García-Miñaur5,6, M. Palomares-Bralo5,6,
M. Serrano7, A. Cueto1, T. Vendrell1, A. Cordero1,
M. Carcas1, I. Paramonov1, URDCAT consortium,
E. Tizzano1, I. Cusco1,6
1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics. Hospital
Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,2Clinical Genetics,
Pediatrics Department, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari,Institut d'Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí., Sabadell,
Spain,
3Department of Pediatrics. Hospital Costa del Sol,
Marbella (Málaga), Spain,4Neurología Infantil Hospital
La Paz, Madrid, Spain,5Instituto de Genética Médica y
Molecular (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario LaPaz, Madrid, Spain,6CIBERER, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid,
Spain,7Neurología Pediátrica y Medicina Genética.
Instituto Pediátrico de Enfermedades Raras. Hospital Sant
Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Bainbridge-ropers syndrome (BRPS) is a
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in
ASXL3 . Patients with BRPS show delayed psychomotor
development, intellectual disability, speech alterations,
hypotonia, poor growth and dysmorphic features. It is
categorized as a syndromic cause of Autism spectrumdisorder (ASD). Nowadays, 33 patients with BRPS have
been reported. Our work expands the mutational spectrum
of the ASXL3 with the genotype-phenotype characterizing
11 new patients.
Material and Methods: In a collaborative initiative we
have identi ﬁed 11 patients with neurodevelopmental dis-
orders and ASD phenotype with loss of function(LoF)
mutations in the ASXL3 gene. Exome sequencing was used
as a diagnostic tool and Sanger sequencing was used forfamilial segregation. The mutational spectrum of ASXL3
was revised in public_data (PubMed, Clinvar, SFARI).
Results: We identi ﬁed 10 new ASXL3 LoF variants and
one recurrent mutation (c.3106C>T;p.Arg1036Ter). The
main clinical characteristics of our patients included
moderate-severe intellectual disability with ASD traits andneuroconductual disorder including aggressively behavior
in adolescence. Dysmorphic features highly suggestive of
ASXL3 were delineated eyebrows and the skeletal pheno-
type. So far, 77 different LoF mutations (48 frameshifts, 28
Stop Gain, 1 splicing) have been identi ﬁed including our
present results. There are 3 recurrent mutations and 73unique variants.
Conclusions: The inclusion of new patients with BRPS
increases the knowledge of mutational spectrum of ASXL3
and is essential to further delineate the phenotype of this
syndrome. The recognition of this syndrome in the context
of a neurodevelopmental disorder is indispensable for theorientation of molecular diagnosis.
Grant: FIS_FEDER_PI16/00369; PERIS SLT002/16/
00174
I. Valenzuela: None. E. Gabau: None. C. Pardo-
Domínguez: None. J. Moreno-Ruiz: None. P. Tirado-
Requero: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. S. García-
Miñaur: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Serrano:
None. A. Cueto: None. T. Vendrell: None. A. Cordero:
None. M. Carcas: None. I. Paramonov: None. E. Tiz-
zano: None. I. Cusco: None.
P08.44A
Neurodevelopmental disorders: a next generation1398M. R. F. Reijnders1, T. Kleefstra2, L. E. L. M. Vissers2,
H. G. Brunner1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,2Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center,Nijmegen, Netherlands
Since 2010 whole exome sequencing (WES) discovered a
large numbers of novel genes and neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDDs), denoted here as ‘next-generation NDDs ’.
Yet, ~40% of NDD patients remain undiagnosed. There-fore, we previously established a cohort of 826 patients with
unexplained ID, a subtype of NDD, for whom trio-based
WES was performed. ID severity ranged from mild (27%)to severe (27%) and 32.2% of patients had other NDD-
subtypes. We identi ﬁed pathogenic variants in known NDD
genes in 28.6% of patients and 386 patients (46.7%) had atleast one de novo mutation in a gene not previously
associated with NDDs. Between 2014 and 2018, we have so
far con ﬁrmed seven of 586 genes as next-generation NDD-
gene ( SON,TLK2 ,RAC1 ,RHEB ,USP9X ,RAB11B ,WAC ).
Matchmaking was successful for all but one ( RHEB ),
resulting in a maximum of 35 additional patients ( TLK2 )
and underscoring the need for data-sharing for next-
generation NDDs. Additionally, mutations in these genes
together only diagnosed ~1% of patients of our initialcohort, illustrating the rarity of next-generation NDDs. Of
note, for USP9X ,WAC and TLK2 , most patients were
mildly affected. Further systematic analysis of our cohortshowed that overall a similar percentage of de novo
mutations in known NDD genes was present in patients
with mild ID (27.9%) compared to more severe ID (27.2%),indicating that WES should not be restricted to patients with
more severe phenotypes. Finally, we observed a challenge
to translate the discovered next-generation NDDs to clinic.To improve patient care, we propose an organizational
model, in which parents have a key role.
M.R.F. Reijnders: None. T. Kleefstra: None. L.E.L.M.
Vissers: None. H.G. Brunner: None.
P08.45B
Genetic Interaction screen for severe
neurodevelopmental disorders reveals a functional link
between Ube3a andMef2 inDrosophila melanogaster
J. Straub, T. Sauerer, A. Fliedner, L. Distel, C. Suchy,
A. B. Ekici, F. Ferrazzi, A. Gregor, C. Zweier
Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, GermanyNeurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are clinically and
genetically extremely heterogeneous. Shared phenotypes
are often caused by mutations in genes involved in the same
networks, complexes or pathways. Mutations in TCF4,
MEF2C, UBE3A, ZEB2 orATRX cause overlapping,
syndromic forms of severe NDDs with epilepsy, thussuggesting molecular and functional commonalities.
Transcriptome analysis on RNA from patients ’peripheral
blood (mutations in either TCF4 ,MEF2C ,ZEB2
orATRX )
revealed common transcriptional targets as pairwise com-
parisons of deregulated genes showed signi ﬁcant overlap.
Among these we found enrichment for GO terms such asRNA-related and ubiquitin ligase-related processes and
signiﬁcant enrichment of known NDD associated genes,
indicating central roles in neurodevelopment.
Next, we screened for genetic interactions in Drosophila
melanogaster by inducing ubiquitous or tissue speci ﬁc
knockdown or overexpression of each single gene and inpairwise combinations. We assessed parameters such as
lethality, wing and eye morphology, neuromuscular junc-
tion morphology and bang sensitivity and climbing beha-viour. We observed robust genetic interaction between
Ube3a andMef2 by multiple phenotype modi ﬁcations upon
simultaneous dosage manipulation in different tissuesincluding glia, wing and eye. E.g. single overexpression of
either Ube3a orMef2 resulted in mild eye phenotypes
(rough surface or reduced bristles), respectively, whilecombined overexpression led to a severe eye size reduction
and disorganized ommatidia structure, indicating synergistic
interaction.
Assessment of genes implicated in clinically overlapping
NDDs revealed commonly deregulated target genes and
genetic interactions between Ube3a andMef2 in the Dro-
sophila model system, suggesting that such perturbed
interactions contribute to the underlying pathomechanisms
also in humans.
J. Straub: None. T. Sauerer: None. A. Fliedner: None.
L. Distel: None. C. Suchy: None. A.B. Ekici: None. F.
Ferrazzi: None. A. Gregor: None. C. Zweier: None.
P08.46C
Exome Sequencing and functional follow up revealMAB21L1 and PPP1R21 loss of function causes
distinctive syndromal neurodevelopmental phenotypes
M. Naja ﬁ
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, NetherlandsIntroduction: Next-generation sequencing has been instru-
mental in solving the genetic basis of rare inheriteddiseases, especially neurodevelopmental syndromes. A
large number of novel genes has been identi ﬁed in the lastAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1399years, however those account for only 50%-70% of all
cases. Further, functional workup is essential for precise
phenotype de ﬁnition and to understand the underlying
disease mechanisms.
Materials and Methods: Using exome sequencing (ES),
we have analysed a cohort of 100 Iranian individualsaffected by developmental delay/ intellectual disability.
Results: While 49% carried causative mutations in genes
previously associated with neurodevelopmental disorders inhuman, we identi ﬁed novel candidate genes in 29%. 22%
remained unsolved. Amongst novel genes, we identi ﬁed
MAB21L1 loss of function resulting in cerebellar, ocular,
facial and genital features (COFG syndrome) and PPP1R21
loss of function causing hypotonia, neurodevelopmental
delay, facial dysmorphism, eye sight loss, loss of whitematter and thinning of the corpus callosum as well as
hepatosplenomegaly in some cases. We further established
that PPP1R21 was absent in ﬁbroblasts of an affected
individual and consistent with the subcellular expression
pattern and the clinical phenotype exhibiting features of
storage diseases, we found patient ﬁbroblasts exhibited a
delay in clearance of transferrin-488 while uptake was
normal. This suggests a role of PPP1R21 within the endo-
somal sorting process or endosome maturation pathway.
Conclusions: Our data demonstrates ES is an ef ﬁcient
diagnostic method for neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In
addition, we delineate novel neurodevelopmental syn-dromes and show that bi-allelic PPP1R21 loss of function
variants affect the endosomal sorting process or endosome
maturation pathway.
M. Naja ﬁ:None.
P08.47D
NONO- related syndromic intellectual disability: ﬁve new
patients and carrier mothers with novel features
T. M. Yates
1, M. Splitt2, M. Holder3, A. Kumar4,
C. L. Mercer5, D. S. Johnson1
1Clinical Genetics Dept, Shef ﬁeld Children's NHS
Foundation Trust, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,2Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,
3Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London,
United Kingdom,4Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,
United Kingdom,5University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the X-linked NONO
gene are associated with intellectual disability, abnormal
corpus callosum, left ventricular non-compaction, slender
build, macrocephaly and dysmorphism in males. Onlyseven patients have previously been reported. Here, wepresent ﬁve new male patients with pathogenic variants in
NONO , with several novel features.
Methods: All patients were ascertained after routine
referral to their local Clinical Genetics service. Samples
from three individuals underwent exome sequencing as part
of the Wellcome Trust Deciphering Developmental Dis-orders study. One patient had whole genome sequencing
performed as part of the 100,000 Genomes Project, and one
had service trio exome analysis.
Results: Four patients had truncating pathogenic variants
inNONO , and one splice site. All were maternally inherited.
All patients had signi ﬁcant developmental delay and
hypotonia. Three required gastrostomy tube placement,
which has been reported in only two patients previously.
Two had relative macrocephaly. None of the patients in ourseries have left ventricular non-compaction. All had
abnormal cranial MRI scans. Novel features include peri-
ventricular leukomalacia, mild aortic root dilatation, andEbstein anomaly. Recognizable shared dysmorphic features
include frontal bossing, infra-orbital grooves and long
ﬁngers.
Discussion: Our series further expands and delineates the
phenotypic spectrum associated with variants in NONO .
This should prove useful to Geneticists, particularly ininterpretation of genomic data.
T.M. Yates: None. M. Splitt: None. M. Holder: None.
A. Kumar: None. C.L. Mercer: None. D.S.
Johnson: None.
P08.49B
Improved delineation of the clinical spectrum and
identi ﬁcation of previously unreported respiratory
problems in a large participatory cohort study ofKoolen-deVries syndrome through the GENIDA project
F. P. Colin
1, D. A. Koolen2, N. Collot1, T. Mazzucotelli1,
P. Parrend3, J. L. Mandel1
1IGBMC, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,2Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3iCube
laboratory, Strasbourg, France
Introduction: About 50 recurrent CNVs and 800 genes are
implicated in genetic forms of intellectual disability (ID)
with or without autism (ASD). The extreme heterogeneityof these neurodevelopmental disorders and the rarity of
identi ﬁed cases for many of the implicated genes renders the
goal of de ﬁning the clinical spectrum, comorbidities and
natural history a daunting task. We reasoned that a
participatory approach would be a relevant alternative and
used the Koolen-deVries syndrome (KdvS - 17q21.31del /KANSL1mut) for a proof-of-concept.1400Methods and Results: We initiated GENIDA, a partici-
patory online cohort study for speci ﬁc genetic causes of ID/
ASD ( https://genida.unistra.fr ), whereby clinical informa-
tion is entered and updated by the family of the proband
using a structured online questionnaire currently available
in 5 languages, with answers from 650 participatingfamilies. The KdVS cohort is the largest, with 179 partici-
pating families. Results obtained for the frequency of
behavioral problems, epilepsy or other previously reportedcomorbidities are consistent with published data. Our
approach allowed us to re ﬁne frequencies of speci ﬁc man-
ifestations and their perceived severity. Inclusion of pro-bands from a wide age range generates data on natural
history. A major ﬁnding is the identi ﬁcation of recurrent
respiratory problems in 40% of patients, including asthma(30 cases) and pneumonia (17 cases, mostly before 10y)
that appear uncorrelated with reported laryngo/tracheoma-
lacia or immunologic problems.
Conclusion: Data comparisons show that parents of
patients can adequately answer the questionnaire, and
validate our participatory approach. The ﬁnding of novel
and relevant comorbidities has now to be translated in
improved healthcare.
F.P. Colin: None. D.A. Koolen: None. N. Collot: None.
T. Mazzucotelli: None. P. Parrend: None. J.L.
Mandel: None.
P08.50C
Novel de novo mutations in PHF6: two unrelated
females with Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome
A. Pagliazzi
1, R. Artuso2, G. Tra ﬁcante2, L. Giunti2,
A. Provenzano1, G. Forzano1, F. Peluso1,F .D i
Giovanni1, G. Contrò1, E. Bosi1, A. La Barbera1,
S. Bargiacchi2, S. Stagi3, G. Merla4, S. Guarducci2,
M. Pantaleo2, B. Lucherini2, S. Giglio5
1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence,
Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University
Hospital, Florence, Italy,3Division of Pediatric
Endocrinology, Meyer University Children's Hospital,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy,4Division of
Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,5Medical Genetics
Unit, University of Florence, Meyer Children's UniversityHospital, Florence, Italy
We report two unrelated female patients with variable
cognitive impairment and distinctive facial appearance. The
ﬁrst patient showed severe developmental delay, thin corpus
callosum (CC), prominent supraorbital ridges withsynophrys, deep set eyes and ﬂeshy earlobes: in order to
validate our clinical suspicion of Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS), we performed PHF6 muta-
tional analysis that revealed a de novo missense mutation
within the PHD-type 2 domain; X-inactivation analysis
showed skewed X-inactivation in blood lymphocytes. The
second patient had severe delayed language development,
intellectual disability (ID), hypermetropia, strabismus,linear skin hyperpigmentation and increasing obesity:
PWS-AS test and array-CGH resulted normal. Whole-
exome sequencing (WES), surprisingly, disclosed a de novo
missense mutation in PHF6 , in the same functional domain
as our ﬁrst patient; in this case, X-inactivation analysis
showed normal X-inactivation in blood lymphocytes. BFLSis an X-linked recessive disease, characterized by ID,
epilepsy, hypogonadism, hypometabolism, obesity and a
typical facial gestalt; female carriers usually not show anyﬁndings or present only mild symptoms. To date, de novo
aberrations in PHF6 were reported in 13 females with a
variable phenotype, characterized by ID, characteristicfacial features, ﬁngers and dental anomalies, only partially
overlapping with BFSL as described in males. Molecular
genetics has opened a new path to understand thecomplexity of ID, mostly in female patients, where we
would tend to exclude a priori a known as X-linked
recessive condition. However, in cases with heterogeneousID phenotypes, WES is the instrument to address the exact
diagnosis, as suggested in our second case.
A. Pagliazzi: None. R. Artuso: None. G. Tra ﬁcante:
None. L. Giunti: None. A. Provenzano: None. G. For-
zano: None. F. Peluso: None. F. Di Giovanni: None. G.
Contrò: None. E. Bosi: None. A. La Barbera: None. S.
Bargiacchi: None. S. Stagi: None. G. Merla: None. S.
Guarducci: None. M. Pantaleo: None. B. Lucherini:
None. S. Giglio: None.
P08.51D
Elucidation of the phenotypic spectrum and geneticlandscape in primary and secondary microcephaly
P. Boonsawat
1, P. Joset1, K. Steindl1, B. Oneda1,
L. Gogoll1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, F. Sheth2, C. Datar3,
I. Verma4, R. Dua Puri4, M. Zollino5, R. Bachmann-
Gagescu1, D. Niedrist1, M. Papik1, J. Figueiro-Silva1,
R. Masood1, M. Zweier1, D. Kraemer1, S. Lincoln6,
L. Rodan6,7, Undiagnosed Diseases Network (UDN),
S. Passemard8,9, S. Drunat9, A. Verloes9, A. Horn10,
H. Sticht10, R. Steinfeld11, B. Plecko11,12, B. Latal13,
O. Jenni13, R. Asadollahi1, A. Rauch1,14,15
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren-Zürich,
Switzerland,2FRIGE's Institute of Human Genetics, FRIGE
House, Satellite, Ahmedabad, India,3Sahyadri Medical
Genetics and Tissue Engineering Facility, Kothrud, Pune
and Bharati Hospital and Research Center Dhankawadi,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1401Pune, India,4Institute of Medical Genetics & Genomics, Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital, Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi, India,
5Institute of Genomic Medicine, Catholic University,
Gemelli Hospital Foundation, Rome, Italy,6Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,
7Department of Neurology, Boston Children ’s Hospital,
Boston, Boston, MA, United States,8Service de
Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Universitaire Robert Debré,APHP, Paris, France,
9Département de Génétique, Hôpital
Universitaire Robert Debré, APHP, Paris, France,
10Division of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany,11Division of Pediatric Neurology,
University Children ’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,
12Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
Division of General Pediatrics, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria,13Child Development Center, University
Children ’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,
14Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland,15Zurich Center of Integrative Human
Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Introduction: Microcephaly is a sign of many genetic
conditions but has been rarely systematically evaluated. We
therefore comprehensively studied the clinical and genetic
landscape of an unselected cohort of patients withmicrocephaly.
Materials and Methods: We performed clinical assess-
ment, high-resolution chromosomal microarray analysis,exome sequencing and functional studies in 62 patients
(58% with primary microcephaly (PM), 27% with second-
ary microcephaly (SM), and 15% of unknown onset).
Results: We found severity of developmental delay/
intellectual disability correlating with severity of micro-
cephaly in PM, but not SM. We detected causative variantsin 48.4% of patients and found divergent inheritance and
variant pattern for PM (mainly recessive and likely gene-
disrupting (LGD)) versus SM (all dominant de novo andevenly LGD or missense). While centrosome-related path-
ways were solely identi ﬁed in PM, transcriptional regula-
tion was the most frequently affected pathway in both SMand PM. Unexpectedly, we found causative variants in
different mitochondria-related genes accounting for ~5% of
patients, which emphasizes their role even in syndromicPM. Additionally, we delineated novel candidate genes
involved in centrosome-related pathway (SPAG5, TEDC1),
Wnt signaling (VPS26A, ZNRF3) and RNA traf ﬁcking
(DDX1).
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings enable improved evaluation
and genetic counseling of PM and SM patients and furtherelucidate microcephaly pathways.P. Boonsawat: None. P. Joset: None. K. Steindl: None.
B. Oneda: None. L. Gogoll: None. S. Azzarello-Burri:
None. F. Sheth: None. C. Datar: None. I. Verma: None.
R. Dua Puri: None. M. Zollino: None. R. Bachmann-
Gagescu: None. D. Niedrist: None. M. Papik: None. J.
Figueiro-Silva: None. R. Masood: None. M. Zweier:
None. D. Kraemer: None. S. Lincoln: None. L. Rodan:
None. S. Passemard: None. S. Drunat: None. A. Verloes:
None. A. Horn: None. H. Sticht: None. R. Steinfeld:
None. B. Plecko: None. B. Latal: None. O. Jenni: None.
R. Asadollahi: None. A. Rauch: None.
P08.52A
New patient with de novo
nonsense PRR12 variant
supports role of this gene in neurodevelopmentaldisorder and helps to de ﬁne phenotypic spectrum
associated with PRR12 haploinsuf ﬁciency
S. Bendova
1, A. Baxova2, M. Hancarova1, D. Prchalova1,
V. Stranecky3, Z. Sedlacek1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,2Department of Biology
and Medical Genetics, Charles University 1st Faculty of
Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and
Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st
Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital,Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic
The PRR12 gene (19q13.33) encodes a large (2036
residues) proline-rich nuclear protein suspected to partici-
pate in neural development. The protein interacts with
FMRP and the gene has high constraint to loss-of-functionvariation (gnomAD: 0 variants observed / 58 expected).
Three de novo loss-of-function PRR12 variants and one
translocation disrupting the gene have been reported in theliterature in patients showing global developmental delay,
intellectual disability, neuropsychiatric problems, eye and
vision abnormalities, dysmorphic features, hypotonia,skeletal abnormalities, sleep problems and anxiety. Three
other de novo PRR12 variants have been identi ﬁed in large
studies in additional patients from whom no or only limitedphenotype information is available.
We describe a 3-year-old boy referred for developmental
delay, failure to thrive and congenital hypotonia. His facial
features included short forehead, bilateral epicanthal folds,
hooded upper eyelids, malar hypoplasia, and borderline
small asymmetric low-set ears. He also showed anxiety andautistic traits, and had pes planus and tapered digits. Exome
sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous PRR121402nonsense variant NM_020719.2(PRR12):c.3958C>T, p.
(Arg1320*) which was absent from all databases. The facial
phenotype was consistent with previously reported cases,
except that no signi ﬁcant abnormalities in structure and
function of the eyes were present.
Our ﬁndings support the role of PRR12 haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency in a rare neurodevelopmental disorder, and show, in
accord with several other cases, that the eye phenotype
originally described as a part of the typical presentation maybe absent. Additional patients will further specify the phe-
notype associated with de novo PRR12 variants.
Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203.S. Bendova: None. A. Baxova: None. M. Hancarova:
None. D. Prchalova: None. V. Stranecky: None. Z.
Sedlacek: None.
P08.53B
Genotype ﬁrst approach in four patients with three rare
autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorders
M. Vlckova
1, M. Hancarova1, J. Haberlova2,
L. Rennerova3, P. Fuchsova2, M. Paclikova2, S. Bendova1,
D. Prchalova1, V. Moslerova1, M. Kudr2, V. Stranecky4,
M. Havlovicova1, Z. Sedlacek1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University HospitalMotol, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department of Paediatric
Neurology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,
3Paediatric Neurology, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic,
4Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
Diagnostic and Research Unit for Rare Diseases, CharlesUniversity 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
Neurodevelopmental disorders are a heterogeneous group of
very rare conditions which make up a signi ﬁcant part of
agenda of medical geneticists. Targeted diagnostic methodshave a limited chance to reveal their aetiology. Global
"genotype ﬁrst" approaches such as exome sequencing (ES)
have a better diagnostic yield. However, their results andthe genotype-phenotype correlation must be thoroughly
revised to prevent misdiagnosis due to the lack of
experience with rare conditions. We present four patientswith three such conditions diagnosed by ES. In all cases the
neurological impairment was dominant, and dysmorphic
and other features were unspeci ﬁc or absent. Patient 1 was a
girl with progressive spastic tetraplegia, dysarthria and
intellectual disability (ID). ES identi ﬁed variants p.
(Trp1253*) and p.(Lys849*) in ALS2 . Phenotype revision
supported the diagnosis of juvenile primary lateral sclerosis
(MIM205100). Patient 2 was a girl with short stature,microcephaly, moderate ID, spastic paraplegia, aggressive
behaviour and convergent strabismus. ES revealed variants
p.(Pro648Ser) and p.(Ile403Thrfs*80) in ALDH18A1 . Her
phenotype corresponded to autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia type 9B (MIM616586). Patients 3 and 4, a sister
and brother with similar neurological impairment, showedhypotonia and moderate ID. ES revealed variants p.
(Ser893Arg) and p.(Leu311Trp) in PIGN , associated with
multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrometype 1 (MIM614080). All three conditions belong to very
rare diseases unlikely to be diagnosed solely based on
clinical evaluation and targeted testing. Careful evaluationof variants identi ﬁed using ES, detailed phenotype re-
evaluation and thorough genotype-phenotype correlation is
needed to prevent misinterpretation of ﬁndings in such
cases. Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203.
M. Vlckova: None. M. Hancarova: None. J. Haber-
lova: None. L. Rennerova: None. P. Fuchsova: None. M.
Paclikova: None. S. Bendova: None. D. Prchalova: None.
V. Moslerova: None. M. Kudr: None. V. Stranecky:
None. M. Havlovicova: None. Z. Sedlacek: None.
P08.54C
SETD1A Loss of function causes a distinct
neurodevelopmental disorder in human and impaired
memory in Drosophila further highlighting a conserved
role of H3K4 methylation in brain function
J. Kummeling
1, D. Stremmelaar2, N. Raun3,
M. Reijnders4, C. Man5, M. Schepens5, R. Pfundt2,
J. Kramer3, T. Kleefstra1
1Department of Human Genetics Radboudumc and Donders
Centre of Medical Neuroscience, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Department of Human Genetics Radbdoudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Department of Biology, Western University,
London, ON, Canada,4Department of Clinical Genetics,
MUMC +, Maastricht, Netherlands,5Department of Human
Genetics Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Defects in histone methyltransferases (HMTs) are a major
contributing factor to Neurodevelopmental disorders(NDDs). Loss-of-function (LoF) variants of SETD1A
(KMT2F ), one of the genes involved in histone 3 Lysine
4 (H3K4) methylation, have been identi ﬁed in several
individuals from large schizophrenia cohort studies. Inter-
estingly, dominant gene mutations were also identi ﬁed in
children with developmental delay. To provide furtherinsight in the somatic and behaviour pro ﬁle, we further
characterized the SETD1A associated Mendelian syndrome
by collecting the molecular and clinical features of 15 so farunpublished individuals with SETD1A mutations via a
GeneMatcher collaboration. Furthermore, to gain insightAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1403into the role of SETD1A in fundamental learning and
memory processes, we studied a Drosophila knock down of
the orthologue Set1.
The cohort mainly comprised de novo variants that pre-
dict a loss of function with c.4582-2_4582delAG being a
recurrent mutation resulting in intron retention. The pre-dicted LoF of SETD1A leads to a distinct set of symptoms
comprising global developmental or intellectual disability,
subtle facial features, behaviour and psychiatric problems.In the Drosophila Set1 knock down, short- and long-term
courtship memory were signi ﬁcantly reduced.
While the precise biological pathogenic mechanisms have
yet to be clari ﬁed, disturbed H3K4 methylation likely
underlies this disorder, underscribing the role of H3K4
methyltransferases in memory, developmental disability orneuron function in general.
J. Kummeling: None. D. Stremmelaar: None. N. Raun:
None. M. Reijnders: None. C. Man: None. M. Schepens:
None. R. Pfundt: None. J. Kramer: None. T.
Kleefstra: None.
P08.55D
Clinical and laboratory management of the largest
cohort of Spanish individuals with Phelan McDermidsyndrome
J. Nevado
1,2, M. Palomares1,2, S. García-Miñaúr1,2,
M. Mori1,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Vallespín1,2, P. Barrúz1,
J. A. Tenorio1,2, C. Bel-Fenellós3, E. Guillén-Navarro4,5,
J. Rosell6,7, M. Milá8,9, M. Del Campo10, G. Obregón11,
C. Orellana12, H. Pachajoa13, E. Galán14,
J. C. Cigudosa15, C. Saleme16, S. Castillo17,18, E. Gabau19,
S. Borrego20, P. Tirado21, A. Barcia20, L. Pérez-Jurado22,
R. Mena1, A. Moresco11, P. García-Murillo23, J. Suela15,
Á. Pérez-Granero24, V. López-González4, M. J. Ballesta4,
L. Rodríguez-Revenga8, R. Lleuger1, L. Armengol22,
C. Peña1, S. Martín1, R. Martín-Arenas1, V. Fernández-
Montaño1, V. Gómez del Pozo1, B. Fernández1,2,
E. Mansilla1,2, I. P. Vallcorba1, Asociación Síndrome
Phelan McDermid-España, P. D. Lapunzina1,2
1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain,2CIBERER, Madrid,
Spain,3Dpto. Investigación y Psicología en Educación,
Fac. de Educación. UCM, Madrid, Spain,4Hospital Virgen
de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,5CIBERER, Murcia, Spain,
6Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain,
7CIBERER, Palma de Mallorca, Spain,8Hospital Clinic,
Barcelona, Spain,9CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain,10Hospital
Vall D´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,11Hospìtal Juan P.
Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina,12Hospital La Fé,
Valencia, Spain,13Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia,
14Hospital Materno-Infantil Infanta Cristina, Badajoz,
Spain,15NIM-Genetics, Madrid, Spain,16Maternity NuestraSeñora de la Merced, Tucumán, Argentina,17Hospital
Clínico Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile,
18Clínica Alemana, Santiago de Chile, Chile,
19Corporación Sanitaria Parc Taulí,, Sabadell, Spain,
20Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain,21Hospital
Universitario La Paz. Servicio de Neuropediatría, Madrid,Spain,
22Q-Genomics Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain,
23Unidad de Genética, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo,
Spain,24Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de mallorca, Spain
Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS; OMIM 606232),
results either from the loss of genetic material at the distalregion of the long arm of chromosome 22 that including
SHANK3 gene, or by point mutations in thisgene. SHANK3
codes for a structural protein, which plays a central role inthe formation of the postsynaptic terminals, as well as in the
maintenance of synaptic structures. So far, more than 1,200
cases have been already reported; a non-speci ﬁc phenotype
has emerged including global developmental delay (>98%),
absent to severely delayed speech (>98%), severe neonatal
hypotonia (>98%), normal to accelerated growth (95%),and minor dysmorphic features, among others. We here
present the largest cohort of Spanish patients with PMS;
181 (mainly from Spain (151) and Latin-America (30cases). Patients were characterized by means of deep
phenotyping, chromosomal microarrays, and other genetic
approaches (including MLPA, FISH and Karyotype). Wecompare clinical, genetic and follow-up characteristics with
previous published series of patients with PMS. In addition,
we present clinical-molecular data from this cohort; most ofthem, with deletions at 22q13.3 band, including SHANK3
and described 5 new point mutations in this gene associated
to PMS. This study set up clinical and laboratory manage-ment for the establishment of possible genotype-phenotype
correlations. Based on our data and other previously
published we propose at ﬁrst time a complete laboratory
management algorithm to verify all the genetic aspects in
PMS individuals and related, as well as a correct genetic
counselling.
J. Nevado: None. M. Palomares: None. S. García-
Miñaúr: None. M. Mori: None. F. Santos: None. E.
Vallespín: None. P. Barrúz: None. J.A. Tenorio: None.
C. Bel-Fenellós: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None. J.
Rosell: None. M. Milá: None. M. Del Campo: None. G.
Obregón: None. C. Orellana: None. H. Pachajoa: None.
E. Galán: None. J.C. Cigudosa: None. C. Saleme: None.
S. Castillo: None. E. Gabau: None. S. Borrego: None. P.
Tirado: None. A. Barcia: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: None.
R. Mena: None. A. Moresco: None. P. García-Murillo:
None. J. Suela: None. Á. Pérez-Granero: None. V.
López-González: None. M.J. Ballesta:
None. L. Rodrí-
guez-Revenga: None. R. Lleuger: None. L. Armengol:
None. C. Peña: None. S. Martín: None. R. Martín-1404Arenas: None. V. Fernández-Montaño: None. V. Gómez
del Pozo: None. B. Fernández: None. E. Mansilla: None.
I.P. Vallcorba: None. P.D. Lapunzina: None.
P08.56A
Functional analysis of a novel c.899 +1G>A variant in
SLC9A6 gene
G. Petraityt ė1, E. Siavrien ė1, V. Mik štienė1,2,Ž.
Mald žienė1,2, T. Ran čelis1,2, A. Utkus1,2,
E. Preik šaitien ė1,2,V .K u činskas1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Center for Medical
Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos,
Vilnius, Lithuania
Introduction: SLC9A6 (MIM# 300231) is a causative gene
for Christianson type syndromic mental retardation, also
known as Christianson syndrome, which is inherited in X-linked dominant manner (MRXSCH; MIM# 300243). We
provide the results of the functional analysis of a splice site
variant c.899 +1G>A in the SLC9A6 gene identi ﬁed to three
affected individuals in one family.
Materials and Methods: SCL9A6 gene variant
NC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899 +1G>A was pre-
viously detected by whole exome sequencing in two
affected brothers and their mother. To justify the patho-
genicity of the variant total blood RNA of one affected malewas isolated, template cDNA was synthesized and
sequencing of SLC9A6 gene exons 5-8 was performed by
Sanger method.
Results: SLC9A6 gene donor splice site variant
NC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899 +1G>A was
examined by computational algorithms and predicted toaffect mRNA splicing. Sanger sequencing of cDNA
revealed that c.899 +1G>A produces skipping of exon 6. In
silico , this leads to a frameshift in cDNA and results in a
premature stop codon NP_001036002.1:p.(Val264Alaf-
sTer3). The truncated protein lacks several transmembrane
helices and a C-terminal domain.
Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that SLC9A6 gene
splice site variant NC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899
+1G>A affects mRNA splicing and leads to a truncated
protein product, which is the cause of Christianson syn-
drome in affected family members.
The work was funded by the Research Council of
Lithuania (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179, Ingenes
project).
G. Petraityt ė:None. E. Siavrien ė:None. V. Mik štienė:
None. Ž. Mald žienė:None. T. Rančelis: None. A. Utkus:
None. E. Preik šaitienė:None. V. Kučinskas: None.P08.57B
Identi ﬁcation of compound heterozygous SNX14
variants in a Portuguese SCAR20 family by a
combination of deep phenotyping, exome sequencingand targeted quantitative PCR
N. Maia
1,2, G. Soares3, T. Temudo4, I. Marques1,2,
B. Rodrigues1,2, A. M. Fortuna3,2, R. Santos1,2,A .d e
Brouwer5, P. Jorge1,2
1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética
Médica Jacinto de Magalh ães (CGMJM), Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto,
Portugal,2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigaç ão
Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas AbelSalazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
3Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética Médica
Jacinto de Magalh ães (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, Portugal,
4Serviço de Neurologia Pediátrica, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, Portugal,
5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Pathogenic variants in the SNX14 gene are implicated in
Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar Ataxia 20 (SCAR20),a rare condition characterized by intellectual disability, lack
of speech, ataxia with progressive cerebellar hypoplasia,
coarse facies and macrocephaly. We describe a Portuguesefamily with two siblings presenting similar clinical features
caused by compound heterozygous variants in SNX14 .A
heterozygous nonsense variant c.1195C>T p.(Arg399*) wasinitially identi ﬁed by exome sequencing. Due to phenotypic
similarity with previously published SCAR20 patients,
further investigation led to the identi ﬁcation of the second
heterozygous variant c.(612 +1_613-1)_(1171 +1_1172-1)
del using targeted quantitative PCR. Reverse transcriptase
PCR con ﬁrmed the frameshift r.613_1171del p.
(Val205Argfs*47). Breakpoint characterization is underway
but preliminary results indicate that the underlying
mechanism appears to be Alu-induced non-allelic homo-logous recombination. Our results describe the ﬁrst non-
consanguineous SCAR20 family carrying compound het-
erozygous pathogenic variants in the SNX14 . In conclusion,
this case emphasizes the role of Sorting nexin-14 in
neurodevelopment and cognitive impairment, and high-
lights the value of detailed clinical evaluation and deepphenotyping to disclose the molecular defect underlying a
highly heterogeneous disease such as intellectual disability.
Funding: UMIB is supported by National Funds through theFCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portuguese
national funding agency for science, research andAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1405technology) in the frameworks of the UID/Multi/0215/2016
project - Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedi-
cine - UMIB/ICBAS/UP.Nuno Maia received a research
grant 2015 DEFI-CHUP, E.P.E.
N. Maia: None. G. Soares: None. T. Temudo: None. I.
Marques: None. B. Rodrigues: None. A.M. Fortuna:
None. R. Santos: None. A. de Brouwer: None. P.
Jorge: None.
P08.58C
Two de novo and one familiar cases of TLK2 -associated
intellectual disability con ﬁrm disease variable
expressivity
L. Pavinato1, E. Giorgio1, V. Antona2, D. Carli3,
K. Ranguin4, C. Colson4, S. De Rubeis5,6,7, T. Pippucci8,
P. Dimartino9, M. Scaramuzzino1, S. Cardaropoli3,
A. Ciol ﬁ10, C. Radio10, J. Buxbaum5,6,7, M. Tartaglia10,
A. Brusco1
1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy,2Department of Sciences for Health Promotion
and Mother and Child Care "G. D'Alessandro", University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy,3Department of Pediatrics and
Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy,4Centre de référence Maladies rares et
Anomalies du développement, Service de génétique, Caen,France,
5Seaver Autism Center for Research and
Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, United States,6Department of Psychiatry, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United
States,7The Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NewYork, NY, United States,
8Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic
Sant'Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy,
9Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,10Genetics and Rare Diseases
Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,
Rome, Italy
Introduction: The Tousled-Like Kinase 2 (TLK2) gene has
recently been associate with “Mental Retardation Auto-
somal Dominant 57 ”(MIM:618050), a neurodevelopmental
disorder characterized by a highly variable phenotype,
including mild to moderate intellectual disability, beha-vioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly,
epilepsy and skeletal anomalies. The role of TLK2 in brain
is still unknown. Within the Autism Sequencing Con-sortium (ASC) project, we identi ﬁed new patients with
variants in the TLK2 gene by whole-exome
sequencing (WES).
Methods: DNA samples from trios were sequenced at the
Broad Institute on Illumina HiSeq sequencers as previouslydescribed (De Rubeis et al., 2014); variant calling was
performed using a bioinformatics pipeline adapted for dif-
ferent patterns of inheritance.
Results: We identi ﬁed one patient with a de novo likely
pathogenic TLK2 variant (p.Asp529Gly) and a family with
three siblings who inherited a nonsense variant from anaffected mother (p.Glu453*). Finally, we report a de novo
39-kb deletion encompassing the TLK2 and MRC2 genes.
Clinical phenotypes partially overlapped with known cases:facial dysmorphisms were present in all patients, while
intellectual disability and microcephaly were not identi ﬁed
in the patient with the 39-kb deletion, where the skeletalanomalies were predominant.
Conclusion: Our study describes 6 new cases from 3
families with TLK2-associated disease. Our data support therecent report that haploinsuf ﬁciency of this gene is involved
in heterogeneous forms of intellectual disability.
L. Pavinato: None. E. Giorgio: None. V. Antona: None.
D. Carli: None. K. Ranguin: None. C. Colson: None. S.
De Rubeis: None. T. Pippucci: None. P. Dimartino:
None. M. Scaramuzzino: None. S. Cardaropoli: None. A.
Ciolﬁ:None. C. Radio: None. J. Buxbaum: None. M.
Tartaglia: None. A. Brusco: None.
P08.59D
Intellectual disability: Identi ﬁcation of novel genes and
expansion of genetic and phenotype spectrum bymulticentercollaboration
J. Stephen
1, S. Nampoothiri2, J. D. Burke1, K. Steindl3,
N. Balanda4, P. Joset3, A. Shukla5, Undiagnosed Diseases
Network members, T. Ben-Omran6, K. M. Girisha5,
R. Ali6, A. Rauch3, J. A. Martinez-Agosto7,
F. S. Alkuraya8,9, W. A. Gahl1,4,10, M. V. Malicdan1,4,10
1Section of Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States,
2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India,
3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich,
Schlieren-Zurich 8952, Switzerland and radiz –“Rare
Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical Research Priority
Program for Rare Diseases University of Zurich ”, Zurich,
Switzerland,4NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program,
NHGRI and the Common Fund, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States,5Department of
Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, ManipalAcademy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,
6Clinical
and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad
Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar,7Department of Human
Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, United States,8Department of1406Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,9Department of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,10Ofﬁce of the Clinical Director,
National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
Intellectual disability (ID), a group of neurodevelopmental
disorders with a global prevalence approximating 2-3%with severe ID occurring 0.5-1%, is a frequent reason for
referral to pediatric genetics clinics. ID is genetically and
phenotypically heterogeneous and can be categorized intosyndromic and non-syndromic forms. Although next
generation sequencing technologies have uncovered more
than a thousand underlying genetic causes, many casesremain undiagnosed. From our cohort of patients with
varying degrees of ID, we genetically evaluated 26 families
whose probands manifested with syndromic intellectualdisability, global developmental delay, and brain malforma-
tions. Likely pathogenic variants in known genes were
identi ﬁed in 57% (15/26), novel genetic causes in 20% (5/
26) and no pathogenic variants were found in 23% (6/26).
For three novel genes of unknown function, matchmaking
platforms and multi-center collaboration identi ﬁed an
additional 14 families. One novel gene is TMEM94, in
which bi-allelic truncating variants were identi ﬁed in 10
probands from 6 families; all had syndromic ID, speechdelay, facial dysmorphisms and congenital heart defects.
We have shown that Tmem94 is essential for neurologic
and cardiovascular development in mice. We also demon-strated that, in human cells, TMEM94 is a novel protein
localized in the centrosome, and may very well have
important roles involved in cell division and metabolism. Inconclusion, the identi ﬁcation of novel ID genes is facilitated
by matchmaking platforms and collaborative interactions.
Efﬁcient analyses using cell and model organisms provide
supporting data for diagnosis and understanding of gene
function.
J. Stephen: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. J.D. Burke:
None. K. Steindl: None. N. Balanda: None. P. Joset:
None. A. Shukla: None. T. Ben-Omran: None. K.M.
Girisha: None. R. Ali: None. A. Rauch: None. J.A.
Martinez-Agosto: None. F.S. Alkuraya: None. W.A.
Gahl: None. M.V. Malicdan: None.
P08.60A
A homozygous loss-of-function variant in the
TRAPPC2L gene causes a neurodevelopmental disorderoverlapping TRAPPC9-related disorder
M. Abaji
1, C. Ravix2, F. Riccardi1,2, B. Chabrol3,
L. Villard1,2, N. Philip1,21Department of Medical Genetics, La Timone Hospital, AP-
HM, Marseille, France,2Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM,
MMG, Marseille, France,3Department of Neuropediatrics,
La Timone Hospital, AP-HM, Marseille, France
Pathogenic variants in genes encoding proteins belonging to
Trafﬁcking Protein Particle (TRAPP) complex have
recently been described in several human diseases including
intellectual disability.
We report two siblings with a clinical presentation over-
lapping TRAPPC9 -related disorder (MIM #613192). Preg-
nancy and delivery was uneventful. First medical concernsappeared before one year of age due to hypotonia and poor
contact. Patients then developed severe intellectual dis-
ability with neither independent walking nor speech atcurrent age of 11 and 8 yo. They also had stereotypic hand
movements as well as MRI abnormalities, such as thin
corpus callosum and cortical atrophy. They had no seizures.Extensive metabolic screening, CGH-array and Intellectual
Disability gene panel sequencing were normal. Whole
exome sequencing revealed that both affected siblings car-ried a novel homozygous variant (c.367C>T (NM_016209),
p.(Gln123*), hg19:chr16:88926373C>T) in the TRAPPC2L
gene. The variant was inherited from heterozygous con-sanguineous parents.
This is the ﬁrst description of a homozygous loss-of-
function variant in the TRAPPC2L gene. Only biallelic
missense variants in TRAPPC2L (*610970) have been
previously reported in three patients with global develop-
mental delay, microcephaly, dystonia, tetraplegia, rhabdo-myolysis, encephalopathy and epilepsy (Sacher et al. 2018,
Milev et al. 2018). TRAPPC2L (Traf ﬁcking Protein Particle
Complex 2-Like) and TRAPPC9 proteins belong to thehuman TRAPPII complex, involved in vesicle traf ﬁcking in
the secretory pathway by mediating contacts between
vesicles and target membranes. Our ﬁndings suggest that
loss-of-function variants in these two genes may cause
similar phenotypes. Additional cases are needed to con ﬁrm
ourﬁndings and better delineate the clinical spectrum of this
TRAPPopathy.
M. Abaji: None. C. Ravix: None. F. Riccardi: None. B.
Chabrol: None. L. Villard: None. N. Philip: None.
P08.61B
Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of TRIT1 mutatins,
a cause of severe autosomal recessive microcephaly
T. Smol
1,2, P. Brunelle1, O. Boute-Benejean3,2,
J. A. Basseti4, M. Figeac5, L. Faivre6,7, F. Petit3,2,
C. Thauvin-Robinet6,7, Q. Thomas6, F. Tran-Mau-
Them6,7, S. Manouvrier-Hanu3,2, J. Ghoumid3,2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 14071CHU Lille, Institut de Genetique Medicale, Lille, France,
2Université de Lille, EA7464 RADEME "Research team on
rare developmental and metabolic diseases", Lille, France,
3CHU Lille, Clinique de Genetique, Lille, France,4Weill
Cornell Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, New-York,
NY, United States,5Université de Lille, Functional
Genomics Platform, Lille, France,6CHU Dijon, Centre de
Génétique, Dijon, France,7Centre de Référence Maladies
Rares "Anomalies du Développement et SyndromesMalformatifs de l'Interrégion Est", Dijon, France
Introduction: Deciphering genetic basis and identifying
new candidate genes in autosomal recessive microcephaly
require high throughput sequencing strategies and data
sharing. We identi ﬁed compound heterozygous variants in
TRIT1 gene, encoding a protein involved in i
6A37 tRNA
modiﬁcation. The purpose of our work was to characterize
the clinical and molecular spectrum that result frompathogenic TRIT1 variants. Patients and methods: We used
the matchmaking exchange platforms, PhenomeCentral and
GeneMatcher to recruit patients with TRIT1 pathogenic
variants. Clinical and molecular data were assessed and
compared to the four previously published families.
Results: We identi ﬁed three new patients with compound
heterozygous variants in TRIT1 gene. All variations were
inherited from a healthy parent in heterozygous state.
Taking into account published cases, all patients presentedmoderate to severe ID, seizures and severe microcephaly.
Cerebral atrophy or dysplasia of corpus callosum could be
noted in half of patients. In most of cases, each compoundstate associated one missense and one truncating variation.
Loss of function variants, considered as pathogenic, pre-
sented a mean allele count of 75 in GnomAD database. Allbut one involved variant were reported many times in het-
erozygous state in GnomAD [range 2 - 139].
Conclusions: Haplo-insuf ﬁciency of TRIT1 causes an
emerging clinical syndrome characterized by moderate to
severe ID, microcephaly and epileptic encephalopathy.
Allele counts for each known pathogenic variation inGnomAD raise the issue of an underdiagnosed cause of
microcephaly and/or rapidly lethal associations.
T. Smol: None. P. Brunelle: None. O. Boute-Benejean:
None. J.A. Basseti: None. M. Figeac: None. L. Faivre:
None. F. Petit: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Q.
Thomas: None. F. Tran-Mau-Them: None. S. Man-
ouvrier-Hanu: None. J. Ghoumid: None.
P08.62C
Functional investigation for Variant of Unknown
signiﬁcance in intellectual disability genes NLGN3,
PQBP1 and DYRK1AJ. Courraud
1, A. Quartier1, I. Boujelbene1,
V. Kalscheuer2, J. Mandel1, A. Piton1
1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France,2Max Planck Institute,
Berlin, Germany
Intellectual Disability (ID) is a neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by signi ﬁcant genetic contribution and
heterogeneity. While exome sequencing has revolutionizedthe identi ﬁcation of novel ID genes and pathogenic variants,
a huge challenge that remains is the interpretation of the
vast number of Variants of Unknown Signi ﬁcance (VUS).
A combination of genetic, clinical and functional arguments
is essential for best interpreting these VUS. Development of
functional tests to characterize VUS effects are important tomake a diagnosis but also to dissect the function of the
concerned proteins. We illustrate this question by present-
ing functional studies performed to reclassify VUS in threeID genes. We ﬁrst looked at expression and localization of
mutant proteins by overexpressing them. For NLGN3, we
used the unfolded protein response (UPR) as a read-out asthe initial pathogenic variants identi ﬁed was shown to cause
endoplasmic reticulum stress. For DYRK1A, which require
an autophosphorylation to be activated, we study the abilityof mutant proteins to autophosphorylate themselves. As it
was shown that DYRK1A and PQBP1 might regulate gene
expression and splicing, we analyzed transcriptomic pro ﬁles
in patients ’cells or by loss-of-function of the genes in
human neuronal precursors to sort out molecular signatures.
We have been able to reclassify two-thirds of VUS into thepathogenic categories and we are currently developing
novel approaches to characterize the effect of the last third.
The better comprehension of mechanisms involved inmonogenic forms of ID and the development of functional
tests for missense variants will be useful to improve
diagnosis of patients.
J. Courraud: None. A. Quartier: None. I. Boujelbene:
None. V. Kalscheuer: None. J. Mandel: None. A.
Piton: None.
P08.63D
Pathogenic WDFY3 variants cause neurodevelopmental
disorders and opposing effects on brain size
D. Le Duc
1, C. Giulivi2, S. M. Hiatt3, E. Napoli2,
A. Panoutsopoulos2, A. De Crescenzo2, U. Kotzaeridou4,
S. Syrbe4, E. Anagnostou5, M. Azage6, R. Bend7,
A. Begtrup8, N. J. Brown9, B. Büttner1, M. T. Cho8,
G. M. Cooper3, J. H. Doering4, C. Dubourg10,
D. B. Everman7, M. S. Hildebrand9, F. J. Reynoso
Santos11, B. Kellam12, J. Keller-Ramey8, J. R. Lemke1,
S. Liu8, D. Niyazov13, K. Payne14, R. Person8, C. Quélin10,
R. E. Schnur8, B. T. Smith7, J. Strober15, S. Walker12,1408M. Wallis16, L. Walsh14, S. Yang8, R. Yuen12, A. Ziegler4,
H. Sticht17, M. C. Pride2, V. Martínez-Cerdeño2,
J. Silverman2, S. W. Scherer12, K. S. Zarbalis2, R. Abou
Jamra1
1University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany,
2University of California at Davis, Davis, CA, United
States,3HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology,
Huntsville, AL, United States,4University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,5University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada,6Ochsner Health System and
University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia,
7Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United
States,8GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
9University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
10University Rennes, Rennes, France,11Joe DiMaggio
Children ’s Hospital, Hollywood, CA, United States,12The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,
13Ochsner Health System and University of Queensland,
Queensland, CA, United States,14Riley Hospital for
Children, Indianapolis, IN, United States,15UCSF Benioff
Children ’s Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States,
16Austin Health Clinical Genetics Service, Heidelberg,
Australia,17Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany
Introduction: The underpinnings of mild to moderate
neurodevelopmental delay (NDD) remain elusive often
leading to late diagnosis and interventions.
Materials and Methods: We present data on exome-,
genome-sequencing, and array analysis of thirteen indivi-
duals that point to pathogenic, heterozygous, mostly de
novo variants in WDFY3 (signi ﬁcant de novo enrichment
p=0.0007) as a monogenic cause of mild and non-
speciﬁcN D D .
Results: Nine variants were protein-truncating and four
missense. Overlapping symptoms included NDD, intellec-
tual disability (ID), macrocephaly, and psychiatric disorders
(ASD/ADHD). One proband presented with an opposingphenotype of microcephaly and the only missense-variant
located in PH-domain of WDFY3. Findings of this case are
supported by previously published data demonstrating thatpathogenic PH-domain variants can lead to microcephaly
via canonical Wnt-pathway up-regulation.
We previously reported that Wdfy3 is required for cere-
bral cortical size regulation in mice, by controlling proper
division of neural progenitors. Here, we show that pro-
liferating cortical neural progenitors of human embryonicbrains highly express WDFY3, further supporting a role in
regulation of prenatal neurogenesis. We present data on
Wnt-pathway dysregulation in Wdfy3-haploinsuf ﬁcient
mice, which display macrocephaly and de ﬁcits in motor
coordination and associative learning, recapitulating thehuman phenotype. Consequently, we propose that in
humans WDFY3 loss-of-function variants lead to macro-
cephaly via down-regulation of the Wnt-pathway.
Conclusion: We present WDFY3 as a novel gene linked
to mild to moderate NDD and ID and conclude that variants
putatively causing haploinsuf ﬁciency lead to macrocephaly,
while an opposing pathomechanism due to variants in PH-
domain of WDFY3 leads to microcephaly.
D. Le Duc: None. C. Giulivi: None. S.M. Hiatt: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; HudsonAlpha
Institute for Biotechnology. E. Napoli: None. A. Panout-
sopoulos: None. A. De Crescenzo: None. U. Kotzaeridou:
None. S. Syrbe: None. E. Anagnostou: None. M. Azage:
None. R. Bend: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Greenwood Genetic Center. A. Begtrup: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. N.J. Brown: None. B.
Büttner: None. M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; GeneDX. G.M. Cooper: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology.
J.H. Doering: None. C. Dubourg: None.
D.B. Everman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Greenwood Genetic Center. M.S. Hildebrand: None. F.J.
Reynoso Santos: None. B. Kellam: None. J. Keller-
Ramey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Gen-
eDX. J.R. Lemke: None. S. Liu: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; GeneDX. D. Niyazov: None. K.
Payne: None. R. Person: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; GeneDX. C. Quélin: None. R.E. Schnur:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. B.T.
Smith: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Greenwood Genetic Center. J. Strober: None. S. Walker:
None. M. Wallis: None. L. Walsh: None. S. Yang: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. R.
Yuen: None. A. Ziegler: None. H. Sticht: None. M.C.
Pride: None. V. Martínez-Cerdeño: None. J. Silverman:
None. S.W. Scherer: None. K.S. Zarbalis: None. R. Abou
Jamra: None.
P08.64A
Triple diagnosis of Wiedemann-Steiner, Waardenburg
and DLG3-related intellectual disability association
found by WES. A case report
T. Matis1, V. Michaud1, J. Van-Gils1,2, V. Raclet1,
C. Plaisant1, P. Fergelot1, E. Lasseaux1, B. Arveiler1,2,
A. Trimouille1,2
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France,2INSERM U1211 –Maladies Rares,
Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, FranceAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1409Thank to performance of whole exome sequencing (WES)
or whole genome sequencing, it is now possible to identify
multiple pathogenic variants in patients with rare disease,
where a single disease has until now been suspected. We
report the simultaneous discovery of three pathogenic
variants in KMT2A ,PAX3 , and DLG3 genes, for a 8-year-
old patient. He has a developmental delay, behavioral
disorders, associated dysmorphic features, such telecanthus,
blue coloring of the irises and cubital hypertrichosis. A triobased exome sequencing found three deleterious variants:
KMT2A: c.9068delA ;p.Gln3023Argfs*3 de novo, PAX3:
c.530C>G ;p.Ala177Gly de novo and DLG3: c.127delG ;p.
Asp43Metfs*22 hemizygous inherited from the mother.
KMT2A mutations are involved in Wiedemann-Steiner
syndrome, and PAX3 mutations are responsible for
Waardenburg syndrome. DLG3 mutations are described in
a non-syndromic X-related intellectual disability. This
frameshift variant is located on the speci ﬁce x o n1o f
transcript NM_020730.2 of DLG3 mostly expressed in
brain. Considering the dysmorphic features and intellectual
disability presented by this patient, these three variants weretherefore imputed as pathogenic and their association
responsible for his phenotype. Several multiple molecular
diagnosis were already found by WES. Yang et al. reported
dual diagnosis on 4 patients (6%)
[1], Posey et al. within 6
patients (7%)[2], and Rossi &a l. within 4 patients (9.5%)
[3]. However none triple diagnosis has been reported in
literature. This demonstrates and reminds us of the
importance of analyzing exomes in a rigorous and
exhaustive manner because it can explain in some cases(<10%) superimposed traits or blended phenotypes.
T. Matis: None. V. Michaud: None. J. Van-Gils: None.
V. Raclet: None. C. Plaisant: None. P. Fergelot: None. E.
Lasseaux: None. B. Arveiler: None. A. Trimouille: None.
P08.65B
Diagnostic Yield and Novel Candidate Genes by Exome
Sequencing in 104 Omani Families
G. Al-Kasbi, F. Al-Murshedi, N. A-Hashmi, K. Althihli,
A. Al-Kindi, A. AlSaegh, A. Al-Futaisi, W. Al-Mamari,
A. Al-Yahyaee, M. Al-Nabhani, S. Al-Rashdi, S. Al-Yahyaee, A. Al-Maawali
Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, OmanBackground: Autosomal recessive inherited neurodevelop-
mental disorders are highly heterogeneous, and manycausative genes are still unknown. Whole exome sequen-
cing (WES) becomes the most ef ﬁcient test to identify
disease-causing variants in monogenic disorders. Aim: Topromote the identi ﬁcation of disease genes through WES,hence to estimate the diagnostic yield of WES and to select
novel candidate genes for future functional studies.
Materials and Methods: The institutional ethics com-
mittee approved this study. 168 patients (104 families) with
neurodevelopmental disorders were enrolled and all eval-
uated by clinical geneticists. For WES; DNA was barcodedand enriched using Agilent SureSelect-V6-60 MB and
sequenced using HiSeq4000 or NovaSeq6000. Raw data
and Variant Calling Files (VCF) processing and annotationwas carried out at the Department of Genetics, SQU.
Results: A database of clinical phenotypes for 104
families was established. In-house pipeline for ﬁltration and
prioritization of WES data was standardized and validated.
Prioritized variants found were as following 1) disease-
causative variants (de ﬁnite cause) in 21/104 families (20%),
2) possible disease-causing variants (VUSs) with supportive
segregations results in 28 families (27%), and 3) variants in
novel genes (new genes not implicated in human diseasebefore) in 19/104 families (18%). While in 36 families
(35%), we detected no abnormality.
Conclusion: the diagnostic rate achieved in our cohort is
20% when considering pathogenic variants only and up to
47% with VUSs. Nineteen candidate genes that are con-
vincing to be causative of neurodevelopmental syndromesidenti ﬁed. Further functional studies to be completed to
conﬁrm causation.
G. Al-Kasbi: None. F. Al-Murshedi: None. N. A-
Hashmi: None. K. Althihli: None. A. Al-Kindi: None. A.
AlSaegh: None. A. Al-Futaisi: None. W. Al-Mamari:
None. A. Al-Yahyaee: None. M. Al-Nabhani: None. S.
Al-Rashdi: None. S. Al-Yahyaee: None. A. Al-
Maawali: None.
P08.66C
Variants in the transcriptional corepressor BCORL1 are
associated with an X-linked disorder of intellectualdisability, dysmorphic features, and behavioral
abnormalities
A. Shukla
1, K. M. Girisha1, P. H. Somashekar1,
S. Nampoothiri2, R. McClellan3, H. J. Vernon3,4
1Kasturba Medical College and Hospital, Manipal, India,
2Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre,
Kochi, India,3Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD,
United States,4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
United States
Introduction: BCORL1 , a transcriptional corepressor, is
involved in negative gene regulation through associations
with several protein complexes including Class II histonedeacetylases (HDACs). Acquired somatic mutations in
BCORL1 have been implicated in the pathogenesis of1410several malignancies, but germline mutations of BCORL1
have not been associated with a speci ﬁc genetic syndrome.
However, a hemizygous variant, c.2459A>G [p.(Asn820-
Ser)] in BCORL1 was reported in 2 brothers with severe
intellectual disability, coarse facial features, and hypotonia
previously.
Materials and Methods: Five individuals from 3 pedi-
grees with phenotypes including intellectual disability,
behavioral dif ﬁculties, and dysmorphic features were
investigated by whole exome sequencing. Our case series
was built via collaborations assisted by GeneMatcher.
Results: Three missense variants c.2345 T>A, c.1487
C>T and c.95C>T were observed in hemizygous state in
BCORL1 . Two of the three BCORL1 variants, c.95C>T [p.
(Pro32Leu)] and c.1487C>T [p.(Ser496Phe)] are notreported in gnomAD and the third variant, c.2345T>A [p.
(Val782Glu)] is reported in one individual in hemizygous
state. The amino acids, proline at 32nd and serine at 496thposition are highly conserved with a GERP score of 5.42
and 5.69 respectively. The amino acid, valine at 782th is
moderately conserved with a GERP score of 2.7.
Conclusions: Hemizygous pathogenic variants in
BCORL1 underlie a new X-linked epigenetic syndrome of
variable degrees of intellectual disability, seizures, beha-vioral abnormalities, and dysmorphisms including tall
forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures,
and long ﬁngers. This newly described syndrome should be
considered in males with the above described features,
especially in the setting of an X-linked familial inheritance
pattern.
A. Shukla: None. K.M. Girisha: None. P.H. Soma-
shekar: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. R. McClellan:
None. H.J. Vernon: None.
P09.001D
The rare 13q33-q34 microdeletions - eight new patientsand review of the literature
I. Maya
1, Y. Goldberg1, A. Peleg2, R. Sukenik-Halevy1,
E. Sofrin-Drucker3, Z. Appelman4, S. Josefsberg Ben-
Yehoshua4, S. Ben-Shachar5, L. Sagi-Dain2
1Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,2Carmel
Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,3Schneider Children's
Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel,4Kaplan
Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel,5Sourasky Medical Center,
Tel Aviv, Israel
Introduction: Deletions of 13q33-q34 cytoband are rare
chromosomal aberrations, and literature evidence describing
the clinical characteristics is scarce. Our objective was toshed light on the phenotype and inheritance pattern of this
unique microdeletion.Methods: Cases with deletions involving the 13q33.1-
q34 cytoband were retrieved using local databases of two
largest Israeli centers performing CMA analysis. In addi-
tion, literature search in PubMed database and DECIPHER
database was performed.
Results: Local database search yielded eight new patients
with 13q33.3-q34 microdeletions, three of which had
additional copy number variants. Combined with 15 cases
detected by literature search, and additional 23 casesreported in DECIPHER database, overall 43 patients with
isolated 13q33.3-q34 microdeletions are described. Devel-
opmental delay and/or intellectual disability were noted inthe vast majority of affected individuals (93.2%), and in all
cases extending beyond the 13q34 cytoband (n =27). Of the
20 deletions involving the 13q34 cytoband only, in threecases developmental delay and/or intellectual disability was
not reported. Interestingly, in two of these cases (66.7%) the
deletions did not involve the terminal CHAMP1 gene, as
opposed to 3/17 (17.6%) of patients with 13q34 deletions
and neurocognitive disability. Facial dysmorphism and
microcephaly were reported in about half of the cases, whileconvulsions and heart anomalies were noted in one ﬁfth of
the patients. None of the 13q33-q34 deletions were inher-
ited from a reported healthy parent.
Discussion: 13q33-q34 microdeletions are associated
with high risk for neurodevelopmental disability. The rarity
of this chromosomal aberration necessitates continuousreporting and collection of available evidence.
I. Maya: None. Y. Goldberg: None. A. Peleg: None. R.
Sukenik-Halevy: None. E. Sofrin-Drucker: None. Z.
Appelman: None. S. Josefsberg Ben-Yehoshua: None. S.
Ben-Shachar: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None.
P09.002A
New name? CD59-related immune-mediated
polyneuropathy with/without hemolytic anemia?
A. Aydin Gumus, H. Gerik Celebi, D. Gun Bilgic,
E. Genis, S. Cam
Manisa Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey
Introduction: Hemolytic anemia, CD59-mediated, with or
without immune-mediated polyneuropathy is a very rare
autosomal recessive disease, adding to chronic hemolyticanemia, infantile-onset polyneuropathy attacks often trig-
gered by an acute infection. Here, a previously de ﬁned
mutation in a few cases in the literature will be discussed.
Methods: The girl ’s DNA was analyzed by tru sight one
sequencing. Target sequence analysis was performed to her
patient brother and healthy parents.
Results: A 14-year-old girl applied to us with neurologic
attacks as muscle weakness especially in the right side,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1411decreased vision, painful eye movements after acute infec-
tion started at the age of 4. Her 11-year-old brother had
neurologic attacks that began at the age of 15 months, with
lower extremity muscle weakness, tenderness sleep,
walking-standing up dif ﬁculty. During the attacks, MRI
ﬁndings were consistent with ADEM/transverse myelitis;
hematuria and mild anemia with negative direct-indirect
coombs tests was found only once. They bene ﬁted from
IVIG and steroid treatments. In their physical examination;ptosis, atrophy, decreased deep tendon re ﬂexes, super ﬁcial
sensory loss in the right side of the girl ’s body and face;
decreased muscle strength, super ﬁcial sensory loss, absence
of deep tendon re ﬂexes in the boy's lower extremities were
detected. Homozygous pathogenic c.146delA (p.
Asp49Valfs * 3) mutation was detected in the girl ’s CD59
gene. The same mutation was found as homozygous in her
brother, heterozygous in their parents who had a con-
sanguineous marriage.
Conclusions: This family presents new data to the lit-
erature because of the beginning age, shape of neurological
attacks and absence of chronic hemolysis.
A. Aydin Gumus: None. H. Gerik Celebi: None. D.
Gun Bilgic: None. E. Genis: None. S. Cam: None.
P09.003B
Aﬁrst report of homozygous missense mutation in the
ADCY5 gene related to an autosomal dominantDyskynesia syndrome
L. Sagi-Dain, L. Shemer, G. Larom, V. Adir, J. Haddah-
Halloun, A. Peleg
Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, IsraelBackground: ADCY5-Related Dyskinesia is a diverse
group of movement disorders, characterized by dystonia,myoclonus or chorea, with variable disability. The disorder
is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; however,
recently two siblings with generalized dystonia andmyoclonus have been reported, associated with compound
heterozygous mutations in ADCY5 gene.
Patient: We describe girl, born to consanguineous par-
ents ( ﬁrst cousins) following an uneventful delivery at term.
At the age of 1 year and 9 months she presented a severe
global developmental delay, and was unable to speak, sit orstand. Her neurologic examination showed markedly
increased tonus and episodic dystonic postures in trunk,
extremities and face, exacerbated by voluntary movement.In addition, spontaneous events of ocular convergence
spasm and orofacial dystonia were observed. However,
during sleep a signi ﬁcant decrease in the tonus was noted,
with ﬁll range of joint movements. She had recurrent epi-
sodes of hyperthermia and hyperhidrosis. Magneticresonance imaging was suggestive of delayed myelination,
and metabolic workup was non-directive.
Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel
homozygous c. 1406G>A (p. Ser469Asn) mutation in the
ADCY5 gene (OMIM 600293). The variant was not found
in GnomAD or ExAC browsers, was classi ﬁed as dama-
ging/disease causing by in-silico prediction programs, and
the residue Ser469 was shown to be highly conserved
throughout evolution. Both parents, reported as healthy,were found to be heterozygous carriers.
Conclusion: To our best knowledge, we present a second
family with biallelic mutations in ADCY5 gene, associatedwith a severe neurologic presentation of ADCY5-Related
Dyskinesia spectrum.
L. Sagi-Dain: None. L. Shemer: None. G. Larom:
None.
V. Adir: None. J. Haddah-Halloun: None. A.
Peleg: None.
P09.005D
Polygenic risk score improves prediction of alcohol-
related morbidities
T. T. J. Kiiskinen1, N. J. Mars1, T. Palviainen1,
J. T. Rämö1, P. Ripatti1, J. Koskela1, J. Kaprio1,
V. Salomaa2, P. Mäkelä2, A. S. Havulinna1,2,
S. Ripatti1,3,4, GWAS & Sequencing Consortium of
Alcohol and Nicotine use
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM),
HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki,Finland,
2National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland,3Department of Public
Health, Clinicum, Faculty of Medicine, University ofHelsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland,
4The Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA, Cambridge, MA, United States
Alcohol drinking is a major contributor to global health
burden. Affected by genetic factors, genome-wide associa-tion studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed multiple loci asso-
ciated with alcohol consumption. To quantify the prognostic
information of this polygenic burden, we derived apolygenic risk score (PRS) for alcohol consumption and
tested its association with alcohol use disorder, alcohol-
related morbidities and mortality.
We created 21 major alcohol-induced health events using
nationwide hospital discharge, cause-of-death and pre-
scription drug purchase registries. Using the largest GWASsummary statistics on alcohol consumption (GSCAN,
n=527,282 non-Finns), we built a genome-wide PRS and
tested its prediction on alcohol-related events in prospectivecohorts (total n =39,243).1412Per 1SD increase, the PRS was associated with a 11.2g
(0.93 drinks) increase in weekly alcohol intake (95%
CI=9.85-12.58g, p =2.3*10-58) and a 27% increase in
alcohol-induced events (cases =874, HR =1.27,1.19-1.36,
p=1.7*10-12) while the difference between the risk of the
lowest and highest PRS-quintiles was 102% (HR =2.02,
1.62-2.52, p =5.4x10-10). Controlling for self-reported
alcohol-consumption-estimate, socioeconomical status,
smoking, and GGT, this increase was 17%/SD (1.17, 1.09-1.25, p =8.9*10
-6). For DSM-IV AUD, a similar increase
was observed (cases =713, OR =1.20, 1.11-1.31,
p=2.29*10-5). Adding the PRS over age and sex increased
the C-index 2% (p =0.017) and self-reported consumption
and socioeconomic factors increased the C-index further by
13% (p =3.1*10-11) with the C-index for a model including
all being 84.9%.
In conclusion, increased polygenic risk for alcohol con-
sumption was associated with alcohol-related morbiditiesalso when controlling for self-reported alcohol consumption
and other covariates thus showing potential in utilizing
genetic information for prediction of alcohol-related harms.
T.T.J. Kiiskinen: None. N.J. Mars: None. T. Palviai-
nen: None. J.T. Rämö: None. P. Ripatti: None. J. Kos-
kela: None. J. Kaprio: None. V. Salomaa: None. P.
Mäkelä: None. A.S. Havulinna: None. S. Ripatti: None.
P09.006A
Telomere length and mitochondrial DNA copy number
changes as a biomarker in ALS
B. A. Fekete, A. Illes, D. Csaban, H. Zeke, V. Molnar,
I. J. Jimoh, P. Balicza, Z. Grosz, M. J. Molnar
Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: Telomere length was previously shown to be
decreased in several neurodegenerative disorders while
mitochondrial DNA copy number changes were reported toshow con ﬂicting results. mtDNA copy numbers and
telomere length are reported to be correlated. Bigger sample
sizes, simultaneous measurements and detailed data ondisease severity is lacking.
Materials and Methods: ALS patients (n =99) were
staged based on the King ’s clinical staging system (Stage I-
IV.). mtDNA copy numbers and telomere lengths were
measured with real-time PCR technique.
Results: Stage I ALS patients have an average telomere
length of 200.6 (kB) (SD: 69.5), mtDNA copy number of
300.3 (SD: 90.3), while stage II telomere length is 164.9
(SD: 77.9) and mtDNA copy number is 280.7 (SD: 85.9)and stage III telomer lengths is 114.1 (SD: 40.5) whilemtDNA copy number is 256.5 (SD: 93.9). We did not have
any stage IV patients.
Conclusions: Both telomere length and mitochondrial
copy number decreased with disease severity. No signi ﬁcant
difference between sporadic and familial forms have been
found. Changes in the telomere length are signi ﬁcant
(p<0.05) and telomere length appears to be a better bio-
marker in late stages. Grant: NTP-NFTÖ-17-B-0595
B.A. Fekete: None. A. Illes: None. D. Csaban: None. H.
Zeke: None. V. Molnar: None. I.J. Jimoh: None. P.
Balicza: None. Z. Grosz: None. M.J. Molnar: None.
P09.007B
Next Generation Exome Sequencing in a Large Sample
of Alzheimer ’s Patients
D. Grozeva
1, S. Saad1, C. Bresner1, A. Frizzati1,
M. Bareford1, T. Morgan1, R. Raybould1, E. Rees1,
N. Denning1, A. Meggy1, R. Marshall1, W. Nash1,
C. Davies1, J. Morgan1, B. Hitchings1, G. Leonenko1,
G. Menzies2, N. Badarinarayan1, V. Escott-Price2,
ARCCA Cardiff University, D. Ivanov2, R. Sims1,
J. Williams1,2
1Institute of Psychological Medicine & Clinical
Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United
Kingdom,2UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom
Introduction: Both early- and late-onset types of Alzhei-
mer’s disease (EOAD and LOAD) have a substantial
genetic component. Despite the high genetic heritability, a
large proportion of the risk has not been explained thus far.A considerable proportion of the missing heritability is
likely to be accounted for by rare, low frequency and
functional variants. Here we apply whole exome sequencing(WES) to identify rare genetic variants that in ﬂuence
disease risk.
Methods: We are currently sequencing a large cohort of
both EOAD (2000 individuals) and LOAD patients (3000)
and healthy elderly controls (1100). WES is performed
using Illumina HiSeq 4000 at a median coverage 40x. TheGATK pipeline is utilised for variant discovery. The quality
control and statistical analyses are performed within the
Hail framework. We will perform single-variant associationanalyses as well as gene burden analyses. In addition, we
will check if there are rare variants in the genes previously
associated with rare forms of dementia.
Results: We will present our ﬁrst large scale genomic
analysis results based on the WES data for the cohort at the
ESHG2019.
Conclusions: To identify novel genetic causes of AD, we
are sequencing a large cohort of both EOAD and LOADAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1413patients. Our analysis will utilise this well powered sample
to identify novel low frequency loci in addition to func-
tional variation that have been potentially missed by
GWAS. Identi ﬁcation of these loci will further elucidate the
genetic architecture of EOAD and LOAD and will implicate
functional variants for molecular investigation and potentialdrug targets.
D. Grozeva: None. S. Saad: None. C. Bresner: None.
A. Frizzati: None. M. Bareford: None. T. Morgan: None.
R. Raybould: None. E. Rees: None. N. Denning: None. A.
Meggy: None. R. Marshall: None. W. Nash: None. C.
Davies: None. J. Morgan: None. B. Hitchings: None. G.
Leonenko: None. G. Menzies: None. N. Badarinarayan:
None. V. Escott-Price: None. D. Ivanov: None. R. Sims:
None. J. Williams: None.
P09.008C
Effect of APOE on cognitive function and dementia in a
longitudinal cohort of 13,131 healthy elderly individuals
M. Riaz
1, R. Sebra2, A. Huq3,4, J. Ryan1, R. Wolfe1,
J. E. Lockery1, S. G. Orchard1, C. M. Reid5,
M. R. Nelson6, J. D. Williamson7, T. T. Chong8,
B. Kirpach9, C. Burns9, R. Woods1, E. Store1,
R. C. Shah10, A. Murray9, ASPREE Investigator Group,
E. Schadt2, J. McNeil1, P. Lacaze1
1Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine,
School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia., Melbourne, Australia,
2Icahn Institute and Dept. of Genetics & Genomic Sciences
at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United
States, NewYork, NY, United States,3Department of
Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public
Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia, Melbourne, Australia,4Department
of Genetic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia, Melbourne, Australia,5the School of
Public Health, Curtin University, Perth, Australia,
6Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of
Tasmania, Hobart, Hobart, Australia,7Sticht Center on
healthy Aging and Alzheimer ’s Prevention, Section on
Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, Winston-Salem, NC, United States,87.
Monash Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neurosciences,
Monash University, Victoria, 3800, Australia, Melbourne,
Australia,9Berman Center for Outcomes and Clinical
Research, Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute
Minneapolis, MN, USA, Minneapolis, MN, United States,
10Department of Family Medicine and Rush Alzheimer ’s
Disease Center, 2468 Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA, Chicago, IL, United StatesIntroduction: Apolipoprotein E (APOE ) is associated with
cognition, longevity, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer ’s
disease (AD) and all-cause mortality. Homozygosity for the
Ɛ4 allele increases AD risk, with homozygotes estimated
having up to 60-70% lifetime risk (penetrance), withaverage age of onset ~70 years. Some Ɛ4 homozygotes
live >75 without AD, suggesting protective factors, yet are
rarely ascertained. We sought to test APOE haplotypes
against cognitive function/dementia in a longitudinal study
and identify Ɛ4 homozygotes aged >75 years without AD.
Methods: We sequenced 13,131 healthy elderly partici-
pants in the ASPREE study. At baseline, participants had no
history of cardiovascular disease or dementia, and passed a
general cognition screen (Modi ﬁed Mini-Mental State
Examination ≥78), average age 74 years. We administered
different cognitive tests (general cognition, verbal learning/
memory, verbal ﬂuency, processing speed) over ﬁve-years.
We collected clinical outcome data on a range of endpoints,
and associated each APOE haplotype with speci ﬁc cogni-
tive functions and dementia.
Results: APOE frequencies aligned with other cohorts
(Ɛ3/Ɛ3=62.3%, Ɛ3/Ɛ4=21.0%, Ɛ2/Ɛ3=12.5%, Ɛ2/
Ɛ2=0.6%, Ɛ4/Ɛ4=1.5%). Yet we observed notable differ-
ences in cognitive function (verbal learning/ memory), after
controlling for demographic and clinical risk factors. We
quanti ﬁed the effect of each APOE haplotype on dementia
risk and age-of-onset. We identi ﬁed 200 Ɛ4 homozygous, of
whom after median 4.7 years follow-up, only 14 reached the
dementia endpoint (7% penetrance). The average age of theremaining 186 individuals was 78 years, suggesting an
enrichment of unaffected individuals in this study.
Conclusion: This uniquely ascertained population pro-
vides a platform for discovery of protective genetic factors
M. Riaz: None. R. Sebra: None. A. Huq: None. J.
Ryan: None. R. Wolfe: None. J.E. Lockery: None. S.G.
Orchard: None. C.M. Reid: None. M.R. Nelson: None. J.
D. Williamson: None. T.T. Chong: None. B. Kirpach:
None. C. Burns: None. R. Woods: None. E. Store: None.
R.C. Shah: None. A. Murray: None. E. Schadt: None. J.
McNeil: None. P. Lacaze: None.
P09.009D
Evaluation of a novel variant in CR1 in patients with
Alzheimer's disease
J. Szymanski1,2, F. Cardona1,2,3, J. Pérez Tur1,2,3
1Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientí ﬁcas, Valencia, Spain,2Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre EnfermedadesNeurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain,
3Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain1414Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurode-
generative dementia in the elderly. According to the World
Alzheimer ’s Report 2018, 50 million people are living with
dementia and its total estimated cost is US$1 trillion
worldwide. This poses a signi ﬁcant burden to the aging
population.
Previous studies have identi ﬁed genes that increase the
risk of the late onset form of the disease (LOAD). Amongthem CR1, a gene encoding a receptor in the complement
system. By sequencing of exomes of Spanish family
members affected by AD, we identi ﬁed a novel variant of
CR1 gene encoding for a truncated protein caused by a
single nucleotide variant (SNV). Allele speci ﬁc PCR
revealed the presence of this SNV in 3 members of thefamily, affected by AD but not the unaffected member nor
192 controls examined nor any public database. These
results together with the implication of the gene in thedisease, indicates possible pathogenic signi ﬁcance. Plasmid
constructs of two most common isoforms and the novel
variant of CR1 fused with Flag epitope were used in an
assay to determine whether the variant mRNA is degraded
by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Also whether,
if translated, the stability of the protein is affected. Pre-liminary results suggest the novel variant in CR1 is degra-
ded by NMD as the inhibition of this pathway increases the
levels of CR1 mRNA and protein.
Funding acknowledgement: GV/2018//166, CIBERNED
(group 209) and SAF2014-49469-R
J. Szymanski: None. F. Cardona: None. J. Pérez
Tur: None.
P09
Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders
P09.010A
Genetic and clinicopathological contribution of rare
ABCA7 mutations in Belgian early-onset Alzheimer ’s
disease patients
L. Bossaerts
1,2,3, E. Hens1,2,4, T. Van den Bossche1,2,4,
A. De Roeck1,2,3, S. Engelborghs2,3,5, A. Sieben1,2,6,
K. Peeters1,2, M. Van den Broeck1,2, A. Laureys1,2,P .D e
Deyn2,3,5, K. Sleegers1,2,3,P .C r a s2,4, C. Van
Broeckhoven1,2,3, Belgian Neurology consortium
1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center for
Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium,2Institute
Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,
3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,4Department of Neurology,
Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium,5Department of Neurology and Memory Clinics, Hospital
Network Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,6Department of
Neurology, University Hospital Ghent and University of
Ghent, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: Genetic studies in early-onset Alzheimer ’s
disease (EOAD) patients suggested an important role for
premature termination codon (PTC) mutations in ABCA7 .
ABCA7 was initially associated with late-onset Alzheimer ’s
disease (AD) in genome-wide association studies. PTC
mutations are predicted to lead to loss of functional protein
though active transcript rescue was observed.
Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of the
ABCA7 coding region or whole exome sequencing were
used to determine the frequency of ABCA7 PTC mutations
in 757 EOAD patients (mean onset age 61.2±7.0 years) and
757 control individuals. Clinicopathological characteristics
of mutation carriers were retrospectively reviewed.
Results: We identi ﬁed 13 different ABCA7 PTC muta-
tions in 34 carriers (34/757, 4.49%) and 15 PTC mutations
in controls, resulting in an OR of 2.33 (95% CI [1.26-4.31],p=0.006). Carriers had a mean onset age of 61.6±5.8 (48-
70) years. Clinical presentation was predominantly amnes-
tic. A positive ﬁrst-degree familial history was present in
88.8% (16/18). Neuropathological examination (n =5)
showed hallmark AD lesions, in 80% (4/5) combined with
pronounced cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Missensemutations were enriched in patients versus controls (OR of
2.20, 95% CI [1.06-2.85], p =0.028).
Conclusion: PTC mutations in ABCA7 are relatively
frequent in Belgian EOAD patients, particularly in familial
EOAD. Clinical and neuropathological data exhibited a
classical AD phenotype in combination with CAA andhighly variable onset ages. Additional information of
mutation frequency and spectrum as well as biological
impact is essential before implementation into clinicalpractice, including genetic testing and risk prediction.
L. Bossaerts: None. E. Hens: None. T. Van den
Bossche: None. A. De Roeck: None. S. Engelborghs:
None. A. Sieben: None. K. Peeters: None. M. Van den
Broeck: None. A. Laureys: None. P. De Deyn: None. K.
Sleegers: None. P. Cras: None. C. Van
Broeckhoven: None.
P09.012C
Anorexia nervosa genome-wide association study
identi ﬁes eight loci and implicates psychiatric and
metabolic origins
C. Hübel
1,2, H. J. Watson3,4,5, Z. Yilmaz3, Eating
Disorders Working Group Psychiatric GenomicsConsortium, M. Landén
1,6, N. G. Martin7, P. Mortensen8,
P. F. Sullivan1,3, G. Breen2,9, C. M. Bulik1,3Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 14151Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2King's College
London, London, United Kingdom,3University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States,
4Curtin University, Perth, Australia,5University of Western
Australia, Perth, Australia,6University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden,7QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Brisbane, Australia,8Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark,9South London and Maudsley National Health
Service Trust, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is an eating disorder
characterised by severe weight loss either through caloricrestriction or heightened energy expenditure or a combina-
tion of both. It has one of the highest mortality rates of all
psychiatric disorders and psychological and pharmacologi-cal treatments show only limited effect.
Materials and Methods: As an international collabora-
tion between the Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative andthe Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, we performed the
worldwide largest genome-wide association study (GWAS)
amassing 16,992 AN cases and 55,525 controls. Secondaryanalyses included chromosome conformation capture (i.e.,
Hi-C), linkage disequilibrium score regression, generalised
summary data-based Mendelian randomisation (GSMR),gene, and gene-set analysis using MAGMA.
Results: The GWAS identi ﬁed 8 independent loci and
estimated its common genetic variant heritability to be 11-17%, indicating a polygenic trait. Enrichment analyses
implicate central nervous tissues and cell types in AN.
Additionally, AN showed positive genetic correlations withobsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD, r
g=.45), major
depressive disorder (r g=.28), and anxiety (r g=.25),
mirroring its clinical comorbidity pro ﬁle. Surprisingly,
bidirectional GSMR a showed signi ﬁcant bidirectional
relationship between AN and BMI ( β;;;;; AN→BMI=-0.20;
OR BMI→AN=0.96), indicating that genomic variants that
predispose to lower body mass may also increase liability
for AN. Complementing these ﬁndings, we also reported
genomic overlap between AN and metabolic traits, such asfasting insulin concentrations (r
g=-.24) as well as high-
density lipoprotein concentrations (r g=.21).
Conclusions: Through these ﬁndings, we are encoura-
ging a reconceptualization of AN as both a psychiatric and
metabolic disorder.
Grant numbers: KG Jebsen Stiftelsen (SKGJ ‐MED ‐
008); Professional Services Agreement with the Regents of
the University of California; Price Foundation; Health
Research Society of New Zealand (16/600), NIHR Bio-medical Research Centre (BRC) and NIHR Dementia Bio-
medical Research Unit (BRU), King ’s College London and
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; TheKlarman Family Foundation; Veneto Region Grant BIO-
VEDA (DGR 3984/08); BMBF (01GV0601, ANTOP01GV0624, National Genome Research Net-Plus
01GS0820, 01KU0903); NIAAA (K02AA018755-06,
R01AA015416-08); Swiss Anorexia Nervosa Foundation;
MINECO (SAF2013-49108-R); AGAUR (2014 SGR-
1138); EC FP7/2007-2013 (ESGI 262055, 245009); EU
H2020 (692145, 676550, 654248); Estonian ResearchCouncil (IUT20-60), European Regional Development
Fund (2014-2020.4.01.15-0012); Instituto de Salud Carlos
III (FIS PI14/290, CIBERobn); MH CZ - DRO (MMCI,00209805); EC Framework V ‘Factors in Healthy Eating ’
(INRA/INSERM 4M406D, PHRC ENDANO 2008-
A01636-49); iPSYCH; CHOP; NHI/NHGRI eMERGENetwork (U01 HG006830); Kurbert Family; EU Marie
Curie Program (MRTN-CT-2006-035988); Ontario Mental
Health Foundation; Ministry of Health of Ontario AFPInnovation Fund; European Commission Framework 5;
Medical University of Vienna; Netherlands NWO (ZonMW
VIDI 91786327); University of Otago Research Grant; NRFKorea (2016R1D1A1A09917877); Bergen Research Foun-
dation, NFR (NORMENT-SFF); NCNG; Ontario Mental
Health Foundation; IGA MZ ČR (NT 14094-3/2013, AZV
17-28905A, Progres Q27); LifeGene; Ragnar and Torsten
Söderberg Foundation; AFA Insurance; Stockholm County
Council/Karolinska Institutet Research funds; LundbeckFoundation; Aarhus University for CIRRAU; Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation; Academy of Finland (259764,
28327, 286028, 265240, 263278, 308248, 312073); Nor-wegian Institute of Public Health; Research Council of
Norway (248778, 223273); The Norwegian Foundation for
Health and Rehabilitation; Psychiatry Research Trust(284286); Genome Canada; Government of Ontario;
Canadian Institutes of Health Research; University of Tor-
onto McLaughlin Centre; Resnick Family Chair in EatingDisorders; VR (D0886501); DFG (EH 367/5-1, SFB 940,
HI865/2-1); Australian NHMRC (310667, 324715, 480420,
1063061, 1073898, 1058522, APP1103623); NIH(K01MH109782, K01AA025113, K01MH093750, R01
MH109528, D0886501, R01 MH092793, K01MH106675,
2R01DK075787-06A1); Wellcome Trust (WT098051,WT088827/Z/09)
C. Hübel: None. H.J. Watson: None. Z. Yilmaz: None.
M. Landén: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Lundbeck.
F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; EPID Research Oy.
N.G. Martin: None. P. Mortensen: None. P.F. Sullivan:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Lundbeck. D. Speakers Bureau/Honor-aria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Roche. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Lundbeck, P ﬁzer, Element Genomics. G. Breen: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already1416received); Modest; Eli Lilly. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest;
Illumina. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Eli Lilly,
Otsuka. C.M. Bulik: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Modest; Shire Pharmaceuticals.F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Shire. Other;
Modest; Pearson and Walker.
P09.013D
The usefulness of array comparative genomic
hybridization in detection of copy number variants inpatients with epilepsy
I. Plaskota, M. Bartnik-G łaska, M. Smyk, K. Sobecka,
B. Wi śniowiecka-Kowalnik, J. Bernaciak, E. Szczepanik,
I. Terczy ńska, E. Obersztyn, B. Nowakowska
Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Epilepsy is one of the most common diseases
of the central nervous system affecting about 1% of the
human population. The causes of epilepsy, because of the
clinical and etiological heterogeneity, often remainunknown. However, it is well known that genetic factors
are responsible for epilepsy in 40-60% cases. Recent studies
have shown that in addition to the point mutations, the copynumber variants (CNVs) are also important factors in this
disorder.
Materials and Methods: We used array CGH method in
a group of 54 patients with the clinical diagnosis of epilepsy
and neurodevelopmental abnormalities with or without
dysmorphic features. Array CGH analysis was performedusing genome-wide microarray with average resolution of
30 kb (180K, Oxford Gene Technology) with speci ﬁcally
designed coverage for over 212 selected genes, known orcandidate to play an important role in the pathogenesis of
epilepsy.
Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 20
CNVs in 17 patients (31%). All of the identi ﬁed CNVs were
submicroscopic in size, ranging from 1.7 kb to 3.84 Mb,
and therefore could not have been detected by standardkaryotype analysis. We identi ﬁed 6 pathogenic or poten-
tially pathogenic CNVs (11%) and 14 CNVs with unknown
clinical signi ﬁcance (26%). 10 CNVs (50%) could not have
been detected by our clinical microarray (60K, OGT).
Conclusions: The results of our studies further support
the role of submicroscopic CNVs in the etiopathogenesis ofepilepsy and demonstrate the usefulness of array CGH in
the genetic diagnosis of this neurodevelopmental disorder.
I. Plaskota: None. M. Bartnik-G łaska: None. M.
Smyk: None. K. Sobecka: None. B. Wiśniowiecka-
Kowalnik: None. J. Bernaciak: None. E. Szczepanik:None. I. Terczy ńska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B.
Nowakowska: None.
P09.014A
Elucidating the genetic background of childhood-onset
ataxias
E. Ignatius
1, P. Isohanni1, M. Pohjanpelto2, E. Palin2,
V. Brilhante2, S. Ojanen2, A. Suomalainen2,
T. Lonnqvist1, C. J. Carroll3
1Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,
2Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland,3St. George's,
University of London, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Despite available genetic testing, a large
proportion of all documented ataxia cases remain geneti-
cally uncharacterized. Childhood-onset ataxias are clinicallyand genetically heterogeneous, which makes ﬁnding the
molecular diagnosis challenging. The aim of this study was
to characterize the genetic background of childhood-onsetataxias in Finland using WES technology.
Methods: Our cohort includes all pediatric patients with
ataxia as the primary symptom of disease evaluated inHelsinki University Central Hospital during the years 1999-
2016. Patients with acute, infection related ataxias, ataxias
that follow brain insult and patients with mild ataxia as aminor part of a disorder were excluded. 42 families lacked a
genetic diagnosis and were investigated using WES.
Results: A pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutation was
found for 17 families (40 %). Known or novel autosomal
recessive variants were found in known ataxia genes
HIBCH, STUB1, ADCK3, B9D1, CLN5, PTRH2, TPP1 aswell as in the novel ataxia gene SQSTM1, encoding
autophagy receptor p62, we reported recently. De novo or
dominant variants explained approximately a third ofgenetic causes in our cohort, with variants identi ﬁed in
EBF3, ITPR1, NKX2-1 and ATP1A3. A de novo variant
was identi ﬁed in MED23, which has not previously been
linked to ataxia.
Conclusions: WES is an effective way to diagnose
patients with known and novel causes of childhood-onsetataxia, and enables early diagnosis, which is critical for
patients with treatable forms of genetic ataxia and for
genetic counselling. Furthermore, our ﬁndings expand the
genetic spectrum of childhood-onset ataxias and highlight
novel cellular mechanisms.
E. Ignatius: None. P. Isohanni: None. M. Pohjanpelto:
None. E. Palin: None. V. Brilhante: None. S. Ojanen:
None. A. Suomalainen: None. T. Lonnqvist: None. C.J.
Carroll: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1417P09.015B
Ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder in a family de ﬁcient
for MRE11A, caused by a MRE11 variant
H. Tajsharghi1, M. Sedghi2, M. Salari3, A. Moslemi4,
A. Kariminejad5, M. Davis6, H. Hayley Goullée7,
B. Olsson8, N. Laing7
1Health and education, Translational medicine, Skovde,
Sweden,21Medical Genetics Laboratory, Alzahra
University Hospital, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences,, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of,3Department
of Neurology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,4Department of
Pathology, University of Gothenburg, SahlgrenskaUniversity Hospital, gothenburg, Sweden,
5Kariminejad-
Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,6Department of Diagnostic Genomics,
Pathwest, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Perth, Australia,
7Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western
Australia and the Harry Perkins Institute for MedicalResearch,, Perth, Australia,
8School of Bioscience,
University of Skovde, Skovde, Sweden
Objective: We report three siblings with the characteristic
features of ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder associated
with a homozygous MRE11 synonymous variant causing
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and MRE11A de ﬁciency.
Methods: Clinical assessments, next-generation sequen-
cing, transcript and immunohistochemistry analyses wereperformed
Results: The patients presented with poor balance,
developmental delay during the ﬁrst year of age and suf-
fered from intellectual disability from early childhood. They
showed oculomotor apraxia, slurred and explosive speech,
limb and gait ataxia, exaggerated deep tendon re ﬂex, dys-
tonic posture and mirror movement in their hands. They
developed mild cognitive abilities. Brain magnetic reso-
nance imaging in the index case revealed cerebellar atrophy.Next-generation sequencing revealed a homozygous
synonymous variant in MRE11 (c.657C>T, p.Asn219 =)
that we show affects splicing. A complete absence ofMRE11 transcripts in the index case suggested nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay and immunohistochemistry con-
ﬁrmed the absence of a stable protein.
Conclusions: Despite the critical role of MRE11A in
double-strand break repair and its contribution to the
Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex, the absence of MRE11A iscompatible with life.
H. Tajsharghi: None. M. Sedghi: None. M. Salari:
None. A. Moslemi: None. A. Kariminejad: None. M.
Davis: None. H. Hayley Goullée: None. B. Olsson: None.
N. Laing: None.P09.016C
Novel intronic and synonymous variants: validation of
bioinformatic splicing effect prediction increases the
molecular diagnosis rate
D. Santos
1, J. Damásio1,2,3, S. Morais1, C. Pereira1,4,
M. Santos1, J. Sequeiros1,3,4, I. Alonso1,3,4
1UnIGENe, IBMC –Institute for Molecular and Cell
Biology, i3S –Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ãoe m
Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal,2Neurology
Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,Porto, Portugal,
3CGPP –Centro de Genética Preditiva e
Preventiva, IBMC –Institute for Molecular and Cell
Biology, i3S –Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ãoe m
Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal,4ICBAS –Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Univ. Porto, Porto,
Portugal
The correct interpretation of biological consequences of
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) on splicing poses a
major challenge for clinical geneticists in molecular
diagnosis. In silico tools can be used to predict the
functional impact of a given VUS; however, softwarelimitations have not been properly evaluated and ﬁnal
conﬁrmation requires further molecular studies. Therefore,
our aim was to evaluate the functional impact of two novelVUSs (intronic c.1580-18C>G in ATP8A2 and synonymous
c.6819G>T in NIPBL ) on splicing, by a minigene assay,
and compare the observed effects with the predictionsobtained through bioinformatics tools. Minigene constructs
were generated through PCR ampli ﬁcation, from patient´s
DNA, of genomic sequences surrounding the VUS ofinterest, which were cloned into the pCMVdi vector.
Altered splicing was evaluated by PCR and Sanger
sequencing of cDNA obtained from HEK293T cellsexpressing the minigene constructs. This strategy showed
that both variants produced aberrant transcripts. The c.1580-
18C>G homozygous variant in ATP8A2 leads to the
retention of 17bp of intron 17, by the use of an alternative
acceptor splice site, resulting in a premature termination
codon in the predicted protein sequence. The NIPBL
variant, c.6819G>T, leads to a deletion of 137bp in exon
40, through activation of an exonic cryptic donor splice site,
also resulting in a premature termination codon. Thisallowed us to clearly classify these VUS as disease-causing,
conﬁrming the bioinformatics prediction of their functional
impact. Furthermore, this work denotes the importance ofconsidering intronic and synonymous variants as a way of
increasing the molecular diagnosis rate.
D. Santos: None. J. Damásio: None. S. Morais: None.
C. Pereira: None. M. Santos: None. J. Sequeiros: None.
I. Alonso: None.1418P09.017D
A novel CDKL5 mutation in an atypical Rett syndrome
patient and development an ef ﬁcient method for
detecting CDKL5 activity
T. Inazu, S. KatayamaRitsumeikan university, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe X-linked dominant
inheritance disorder with a wide spectrum of clinical
manifestations. Mutations in Methyl CpG binding protein2 (MECP2), Cyclin dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) and
Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) have been associated with
classic and/or variant RTT. This study was conducted toidentify the responsible gene(s) in atypical RTT patient, and
to examine the effect of the mutation on protein function.
DNA sequence analysis showed a novel heterozygousmutation in CDKL5 identi ﬁed as c.530A>G which resulted
in an amino acid substitution at position 177, from tyrosine
to cysteine. We demonstrated in vitro kinase assay using
radioisotope (RI) of mutant protein showed impairment of
its activity. The results suggested the mutant CDKL5 was
responsible for the disease.
Next, pathogenic point mutations including Y177C are
mostly observed within the catalytic domain of CDKL5,
therefore loss of catalytic activity may be related to diseaseonset. However, this hypothesis has rarely been demon-
strated. We develop an ef ﬁcient method for detecting
CDKL5 activity. Appropriately, CDKL5 underwent autop-hosphorylation following expression in Escherichia coli ,
with autophosphorylated CDKL5 detected as a band shift
by phos-tag SDS-PAGE, without enzyme puri ﬁcation and
RI. We tried to examine the effect of 15 pathogenic or likely
pathogenic or uncertain signi ﬁcant mutations on their
activity, we found all variants showed dramatically reducedcatalytic function. Thus, the protocol is useful for examin-
ing the relationship between disease-causing mutations and
their activity.
T. Inazu: None. S. Katayama: None.
P09.018A
Autism monozygotic twins with APBA2 gene duplication
vary for tick development
N. Lojo-Kadric, L. Pojskic
Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology,
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Introduction: Autism, or autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
is neurological and developmental disorder that begins earlyin childhood and lasts throughout a person's life, character-
ized by challenges with social skills, repetitive behaviors,
speech and non-verbal communication. Large genome
rearrangements are being identi ﬁed in ASD as an under-
lying cause for development of this syndrome. These
rearrangements are mostly deletions, but duplications canbe found. We present case of twin boys with APBA2 gene
duplication.
Materials and Methods: Twin boys, age 9 were referred
to genetic counseling and testing with diagnosed ASD
(DSM-IV). DNA was isolated from buccal swabs of the
boys, and 3 ml of whole blood from parents. Parents pro-vided completed questionnaires for tick disorders in chil-
dren as well as Coordination Disorder Questionnaire
(DCDQ). Identi ﬁcation of mutations was made with MLPA
(multiplex ligase-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation) technique,
with MLPA kits P343 and P339 (Mrc-Holland).
Results: All samples were typed successfully. We iden-
tiﬁed de novo APBA2 gene duplication in both twins. This
gene, located on 15q13.1 locus is already associated with
autism features. DCDQ scores are similar in twins withindication of DCD. Assessment of the Questionnaires for
tick disorders in children revealed that one sibling is com-
pletely absent for ticks while other has high score for sec-tion related to vocal and involuntary ticks.
Conclusions: This ﬁnding require further investigation
and follow up on spatial and temporal differences in autismassociated traits in APBA2 gene duplication associated
autism.
N. Lojo-Kadric: None. L. Pojskic: None.
P09.019B
MLPA analysis as a diagnostic test in patients withautism spectrum disorders
D. Avdjieva-Tzavella
1, H. Kathom1, T. Delchev1,
S. Bichev2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics
Hospital, Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2National Genetic Laboratory, University
Hospital “Majcin Dom"Medical University, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a
heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by
impaired reciprocal social interaction, lack of communica-
tion, isolated interests and repetitive or stereotypedbehaviors. Most cases are idiopathic, although there is
increasing evidence that ASDs have an important genetic
component with aetiological heterogeneity. The aim of ourstudy was to evaluate the role of multiplex ligation-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1419dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) as a screening test
in patients with autism spectrum disorders.
Materials and Methods: For this study we used MLPA
P245 Microdeletion Syndromes for screening of the most
common microdeletion syndromes and MLPA P036 Sub-
telomeres Mix 1 for screening of subtelomeric deletions/duplications in 198 patients with autism spectrum disorders.
To con ﬁrm alternations discovered with MLPA P036
Subtelomeres Mix 1 we used MLPA P070 SubtelomeresMix 2B.
Results: We identi ﬁed 12 autistic patients with sub-
microscopic aberrations. There were 2 patients with sub-telomeric deletion at the 14q and 2q regions respectively.
Two patients had the same deletion at the 1p36.33 region.
One patient had a submicroscopic deletion at the 6q regionand duplication at the 13q region simultaneously. Two
patients had the submicroscopic deletions at the 4q region.
Three duplications were detected at 3p, 9p, and 17p11.2regions. Two patients were with deletion at the 8p and
22q11.21 regions respectively.
Conclusions: The present study shows that the incidence
of a submicroscopic aberrations detected by MLPA in
autistic patients is approximately 6 %. MLPA is a rapid and
cost effective method for detection of genomic imbalancesin patients with autism spectrum disorders.
D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H. Kathom: None. T.
Delchev: None. S. Bichev: None.
P09.020C
Rare variants targeting genes that encode forcytochrome P450 enzymes in Autism Spectrum Disorder
J. X. Santos
1,2, A. R. Marques1,2, H. Martiniano2,
J. Vilela1,2, C. Rasga1,2, G. Oliveira3,4,5, A. M. Vicente1,2
1National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon,
Portugal,2BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences
Institute, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisbon,
Portugal,3Unidade de Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo
(UNDA), Serviço do Centro de Desenvolvimento da
Criança, Centro de Investigaç ão e Formaç ão Clínica,
Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário deCoimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
4Institute for Biomedical
Imaging and Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,5University
Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) heritability estimates of
50-80% support the hypothesis that gene-environment
interactions play a role in this pathology. ASD risk hasbeen associated with early exposure to various xenobiotics
that are cleared in the liver by Cytochrome P450 enzymes.We therefore explored the hypothesis that variants in
CYP450 genes, which de ﬁne the rapid or slow metabolizer
status of their carriers, may render individuals exposed to
certain toxicants more susceptible to brain disruption during
early development. To identify rare variants in 57 CYP450
genes we inspected exome sequence data, from publiclyavailable ASD datasets, for loss-of-function (LoF) and
missense Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) predicted to be
detrimental by in silico tools (MAF<5%), as well as rare
(<1%) Copy Number Variants (CNVs). In 2674 ASD
subjects, we found 516 LoF and missense SNVs, targeting
54CYP450 genes, most frequently in CYP2A13 ,CYP1A1 ,
CYP2D6 and CYP4B1 . Additionally, we identi ﬁed 135
CNVs targeting 24 CYP450 genes in 3030 ASD indivi-
duals. CYP2D6 was exclusively targeted by CNVs in 13 out
of 3030 ASD-subjects, while CYP4X1 was signi ﬁcantly
more frequently targeted by CNVs in ASD cases (22/3030;
0.72%) than controls (2/9649; 0.02%). CYP2D6 metabo-
lizes most psychoactive drugs, while CYP1A1 acts on
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and CYP4X1 is
involved in the metabolism of endocrine-disrupting chemi-cals (e.g. phthalates and bisphenol A). Early exposure to
neurotoxic phthalates, bisphenol A and PAHs has been
previously associated with ASD risk, and here we provideevidence for an effect of gene-environmental exposure
interaction mediated by CYP450 gene variants.
J.X. Santos: None. A.R. Marques: None. H. Marti-
niano: None. J. Vilela: None. C. Rasga: None. G. Oli-
veira: None. A.M. Vicente: None.
P09.021D
Autism Spectrum Disorder: gene variants involved in
the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway
A. R. Marques
1,2, H. Martiniano2,3, J. X. Santos1,2,
J. Vilela1,2, C. Rasga1,2, G. Oliveira4,5, L. Romão6,2,
A. M. Vicente1,2,7
1Departamento de Promoç ão da Saúde e Doenças n ão
Transmissíveis, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor
Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal,2BioISI - Biosystems &
Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências,Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal,
3Departamento
de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal,4Unidade de
Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo (UNDA), Serviço do
Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança, Centro de
Investigaç ão e Formaç ão Clínica, Hospital Pediátrico,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Lisboa,
Portugal,5Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra,Lisboa, Portugal,
6Departamento de Genética Humana,
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa,1420Portugal,7Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras,
Portugal
Genetic factors account for 50-80% of the familial risk of
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), but most of the genetic
determinants are still unknown and a role for otherregulatory mechanisms is likely. The nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD) pathway is essential to control mRNA quality
and has an important role in the regulation of thetranscriptome. Mutations in genes involved in the NMD
pathway, such as the UPF3B gene, a core component of this
pathway, were previously linked to ASD. In this study weexplored the potential role of other NMD factors in ASD.
We generated a list of 153 genes involved in the NMD
pathway using AmiGO, Reactome and a systematic litera-ture review. To identify potentially pathogenic variants in
the NMD genes, we analyzed whole exome sequencing data
(WES) data from 1338 ASD subjects. We also searched forCopy Number Variants (CNVs) targeting NMD genes in
ASD patients (n =3570) and checked their frequency in
controls (n =9649).
We identi ﬁed 43 high impact variants in 28 NMD genes,
including the UPF3B and ACE, two genes previously
implicated in ASD. Importantly, 11 were novel candidategenes that carry loss-of-function and missense (deleterious
and damaging) variants with a frequency of 1 to 5% in this
ASD dataset. Additionally, 5 NMD genes were found to betargeted by CNVs in 12 ASD subjects but none of the
controls.
The discovery of 33 NMD genes that are intriguing
candidates for ASD in large patient genomic datasets sup-
ports the involvement of the NMD pathway in ASD
pathophysiology.
A.R. Marques: None. H. Martiniano: None. J.X.
Santos: None. J. Vilela: None. C. Rasga: None. G. Oli-
veira: None. L. Romão: None. A.M. Vicente: None.
P09.022A
Application of oligonucleotide array CGH in 280patients with autism spectrum disorder
B. Wi śniowiecka-Kowalnik
1, I. Plaskota1,M .K ędzior1,
E. Obersztyn1, A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak1, A. Pietrzyk1,
N. Braun-Walicka1, J. Castañeda1, A. Barczyk1,
A. Sobczy ńska-Tomaszewska2, K. Czerska2,
B. Nowakowska1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,
2MEDGEN, Warsaw, Poland
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is a heterogenous group
of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by problems
in social interaction and communication as well as thepresence of repetitive and stereotyped behaviour. It is
estimated that the prevalence of ASD is 1-2% in general
population with the average male to female ratio 4-5:1.
Research studies have shown that clinically relevant CNVs
(copy number variants) invisible in karyotype analysis are
detected in 7-14% of patients with idiopathic ASD.
We elected to use oligonucleotide microarrays (OGT)
with average resolution of 30 kpz to evaluate its ef ﬁcacy for
identi ﬁcation and characterization of CNVs in a cohort of
275 patients with ASDs. The analyses of the patients ’
genomes were performed using exon-focused, high-
resolution (180k) array design covering relevant 227genes for autism research.
Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 71 non-
polymorphic CNVs in 63 out of 280 (22.5%) patients withASD. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic CNVs were detected
in 24 (8.6%) patients, whereas CNVs with unknown clinical
signiﬁcance were identi ﬁed in 41 (18.2 %) of cases. All of
the identi ﬁed CNVs were submicroscopic in size (between
15 kb and 3.1 Mb) and therefore could not have been
detected by standard karyotype analysis. Due to highresolution of the selected microarray, it was possible to
identify 24 CNVs that could not have been detected using
the clinical microarrays (OGT, 60k). Our study furtherconﬁrmed the potential of aCGH in elucidating the etiology
of ASDs, demonstrated by the identi ﬁcation of two novel
genes: LRRTM4 and DOCK1 as candidate for ASDs.
B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. I. Plaskota: None.
M. Kędzior: None. E. Obersztyn: None. A. Kutkowska-
Kaźmierczak: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. N. Braun-
Walicka: None. J. Castañeda: None. A. Barczyk: None.
A. Sobczy ńska-Tomaszewska: None. K. Czerska: None.
B. Nowakowska: None.
P09.024C
Genetic determinants for social skill training outcomesin autism spectrum disorder
D. Li
1,2, I. Rabkina1,2, S. Stamouli1,2, H. Jiao3,
M. Becker1,2, U. Jonsson1,2,4, N. Choque-Olsson1,2,5,
S. Bölte1,2, K. Tammimies1,2
1Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), Division
of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Women and Children's
Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Center for Psychiatry Research,
Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden,
3Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska
Institutet, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden,4Department of
Neuroscience, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden,5Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SwedenAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1421Introduction: Social skill group training (SSGT) is one of
the most common interventions for children and adolescents
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Individual responses
to SSGT vary and limited clinical predictors exist for the
treatment.
Material and Methods: Therefore, we performed a
detailed genetic characterization using genotyping, CNV
calling and exome sequencing of autistic individuals from
one of the largest randomized clinical trial for SSGT andanalyzed the association between genetic factors and SSGT
treatment outcome. Identi ﬁed rare copy number variations
(CNVs) were prioritized and polygenic risk score (PRS)was calculated from ASD, education attainment (EA) and
attention de ﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) based on
different p-value thresholds (Pt < 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1).
Results: Individuals who carried large CNVs (> 500kb)
showed signi ﬁcant worse outcome at 12 weeks post-
treatment ( β=15.4, p =0.017) and 3-months follow-up
(β=14.2, p =0.028). In addition, inferior outcomes were
implicated for individuals with higher PRS for ASD (Pt =
0.5:β=6.5, p=0.018) and ADHD (Pt 1.0: β=6.7, p=
0.015) at follow-up treatment. Currently, we are analyzing
exome sequencing data from the same 205 individuals and
then combining different rare and common genetic variantdata carriers together.
Conclusion: Autistic individuals with higher genetic
burden for the disorder, including large rare CNVs andhigher load of PRS, have different bene ﬁts of SSGT com-
pared with individuals with lower genetic risk. Our results
can aid in personalized intervention modi ﬁcations for ASD
in the future.
D. Li: None. I. Rabkina: None. S. Stamouli: None. H.
Jiao: None. M. Becker: None. U. Jonsson: None. N.
Choque-Olsson: None. S. Bölte: Other; Modest; Huber/
Hogrefe. K. Tammimies: None.
P09.025B
Evidence for altered calcium signaling and altered
mitochondrial function in an autism case study
R. L. Nguyen, P. Flodman, M. Smith, J. J. Gargus
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodeve-
lopmental disorders characterized by de ﬁcits in social
interaction, communication, and stereotypic behaviors.
While its etiology is unknown, the large assemblage ofrisk variants impacting calcium ion channels and signaling
proteins suggest that a functional disruption of this
signaling hub may be involved in ASD pathogenesis. Inthis study, we evaluate how such risk variants exert their
deleterious effects in a unique ASD case.We identi ﬁed this subject in a previous study where we
observed signi ﬁ
cant changes in the single-channel inositol
triphosphate (IP3) receptor kinetics of ASD ﬁbroblasts via
“optical patch-clamp ”and found that this feature could be
visualized with a high-throughput Fluorometric Imaging
Plate Reader (FLIPR) screening assay as a decrease incalcium release from the ER. This release was below the
lower limit of controls in >75% of ASD subjects, but
uniquely high in an 18-year old autistic female at a level farexceeding the upper limit of controls, nearing levels
obtained with ionomycin, an ionophore.
To assess the molecular basis of this ﬁnding, we com-
pleted a transcription analysis to compare expression levels
of calcium signaling-related genes in ﬁbroblast-derived
RNA from this subject to those of two controls and twotypical autism cases. The subject ’s transcriptome showed
increased expression (>5sd) of genes including the ATP2A3
calcium pump and purinergic receptors, and extremely lowexpression (>24sd) of VDAC2, a mitochondrial calcium
uptake channel. These ﬁndings corroborate suggestions of
mitochondrial dysfunction in her clinical biochemicalassays and are extended with Seahorse XFp assays.
R.L. Nguyen: None. P. Flodman: None. M. Smith:
None. J.J. Gargus: None.
P09.026A
Establishing genotype-phenotype associations for ASD
A. C. G. Ilhéu, M. Asif, F. M. Couto
LASIGE, Lisbon, Portugal
Genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity of Autism Spec-
trum Disorder (ASD) has hindered the establishment of
genotype-phenotype associations. Herein, we presented a
novel approach that integrates semantic similarity andunsupervised machine learning methods to dissect the ASD
genotypic heterogeneity and to identify phenotypic mani-
festations of ASD genetic variants. This approach wasapplied to copy number variants (N =6650), disrupting 3998
genes from 1119 ASD patients. Functional similarities
among genes were computed using Resnik semanticsimilarity measure. Semantic similarity score, ranging from
0 to 1 represents the functional similarity between two
genes, where 1 represents identical genes while score 0reﬂects functionally dissimilar genes. Agglomerative hier-
archical clustering of the computed gene similarity matrix
identi ﬁed four different clusters of functionally related
genes. Silhouette analysis indicated that clusters were
compact and consistent (average Silhouette value =0.31).
The genes (N =519) of cluster 1 was more relevant to ASD
as they were enriched for Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs)
(adjusted p-value =0.00001) and Axon guidance (adjusted1422p-value =0.02) pathways, which are known to be strongly
associated with ASD. Cluster 1 genes were also most
signiﬁcantly enriched for Schizophrenia Human Phenotype
Ontology (HPO) term, which is a co-occurring condition
with ASD. The other three clusters were not enriched for
ASD related HPO terms. The results indicated thatphenotypic-genotypic associations can established for
ASD by reducing its genotypic heterogeneity i.e. clustering
of functionally similar genes. However, to associate theseclusters with phenotype, further efforts are required to
enrich HPO resource. (Grant reference: PTDC/CCI-BIO/
28685/2017)
A.C.G. Ilhéu: None. M. Asif: None. F.M. Couto: None.
P09.027B
Resolving effects of CASK mutations in children with
neurodevelopmental disorders
M. Becker
1, F. Mastropasqua1, J. P. Reising2,
I. Rabkina1, L. Ballenberger1, M. Kele3, C. Willfors1,
E. Herlenius2, S. Bölte1, B. M. Anderlid4, A. Falk3,
K. Tammimies1
1Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND),
Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska
Institutet, Solna, Sweden,2Department of Women ’s and
Children ’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden,
3Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Solna,
Sweden,4Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Solna, Sweden
Introduction: Mutations in the CASK gene cause a range of
childhood neurodevelopmental disorders such as micro-cephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia (MICPCH),
epilepsy, developmental delay and autism. CASK , located
on Xp11.4, plays a role in neuronal differentiation andsynapse function. The molecular consequences of CASK
mutations have not been studied in human neurons. Our
project aims to elucidate the downstream effects of differentCASK mutations using patient-derived induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs).
Materials and Methods: Skin cells from two patients,
one female with severe MICPCH and one male with autism,
with different CASK mutations were programmed to iPSCs
and further differentiated to functional neurons. Bulk andsingle-cell RNA-sequencing was performed to identify
molecular phenotypes and guide morphological and func-
tional assessment of neuronal pathology in comparison withcontrol iPSCs.
Results: A splice-site mutation in the ASD patient
decreases wild-type CASK mRNA and a tandem duplica-tion of two CASK exons is expressed in the MICPCH
patient. The mutations reduce CASK protein levels indifferentiating neurons. Transcriptome analysis revealed
dysregulation of genes involved in the synaptic vesicle
cycle and single-cell RNA-sequencing indicated an imbal-
ance in excitatory-inhibitory neuronal populations. Conse-
quently, we study synapse morphology and spontaneous
ﬁring rates of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Moreover,
we observed neuron subtype-speci ﬁc upregulation of WNT
signaling pathway components.
Conclusions: We provide strong evidence that CASK
mutations lead to perturbed neurotransmission through
dysregulation of synapse vesicle traf ﬁcking and differential
distribution of neuronal populations. Our results can guidedrug development and aid in understanding the pathological
spectrum of CASK mutations.
M. Becker: None. F. Mastropasqua: None. J.P. Reis-
ing: None. I. Rabkina: None. L. Ballenberger: None. M.
Kele: None. C. Willfors: None. E. Herlenius: None. S.
Bölte: None. B.M. Anderlid: None. A. Falk: None. K.
Tammimies: None.
P09.029D
Implicating genetic risk variants for circadian rhythm
and sleep trait dif ﬁculties in individuals with autism
spectrum disorder
Z. Schmilovich
1,2, R. Tesfaye1,2, G. Huguet3,4, A. Dionne-
Laporte1, O. Diallo1, B. Chaumette2,5,6, S. Jacquemont3,4,
M. Elsabbagh1,2,P .A .D i o n1,2, G. A. Rouleau1,2
1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Montreal
Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montreal, QC,
Canada,3CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada,
4Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,
5Université Paris Descartes; Bio Sorbonne Paris Cité;
INSERM, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie des Maladies
Psychiatriques, Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences,UMR 894, GDR3557-Institut de Psychiatrie, Paris, France,
6Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Service hospitalo-
universitaire, GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences,Paris, France
Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a largely
hereditary neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
difﬁculties in social interaction and communication, and
restricted and repetitive behaviour. Sleep is disturbed in upto 80% of affected youths with ASD. Genes underlying the
circadian rhythm are proposed to elucidate sleep and other
timing problems in individuals with ASD. Our ﬁrst aim
investigates whether copy-number variants (CNVs) encom-
passing core circadian clock genes, circadian pathway
genes, and sleep trait candidate genes, detected fromprevious large genome-wide association studies, areAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1423signiﬁcantly overrepresented in ASD individuals compared
to their unaffected siblings.
Material and Methods: We used microarray data from
probands with ASD (n =2926) and their unaffected siblings
(n=2434) from the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC).
CNVs were called, validated, and subsequently ﬁltered
using established pipelines and detection algorithms
(PennCNV, QuantiSNP, SnipPeep).
Results: Fisher ’s exact test reveal that CNVs encom-
passed in core circadian clock genes, circadian pathway
genes, and sleep trait candidate genes are signi ﬁcantly
overrepresented in probands with ASD in comparison totheir unaffected siblings (p =0.003; Odds ratio 1.6; CI95%
[1.2 ; 2.3]).
Conclusions: These preliminary results are the ﬁrst to
implicate a broad network of sleep-related genes in the
etiology of ASD. Using whole-exome sequencing (WES)
data from the SSC, future investigations will evaluate therepresentation of probands ’SNPs within sleep-related genes
in comparison to their unaffected siblings. Furthermore,
SNP-set Kernel Association Test (SKAT) using probands ’
WES and corresponding phenotypic sleep observations will
identify candidate SNPs that associate signi ﬁcantly with
disturbed sleep traits in individuals with ASD.
Z. Schmilovich: None. R. Tesfaye: None. G. Huguet:
None. A. Dionne-Laporte: None. O. Diallo: None. B.
Chaumette: None. S. Jacquemont: None. M. Elsabbagh:
None. P.A. Dion: None. G.A. Rouleau: None.
P09.030A
Heterozygous de novo truncating mutation of nucleolin
in an ASD individual disrupts its nucleolar localization
T. I. Sheikh
1, N. Vasli2, M. Ayub3, R. Sasanfar4,
J. B. Vincent1
1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada,2Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada,3Queen ’s University,, Kingston, ON, Canada,
4University of Massachusetts Memorial Hospital,
Worcester, MA, United States
Introduction: Nucleolin is a major nucleolar protein,
playing a critical role in multiple processes, including
ribosome assembly and maturation, chromatin decondensa-tion, and pre-rRNA transcription. Due to its diverse
functions, nucleolin ’s role has been frequently implicated
in pathological processes, including cancer and viralinfection. Here, we identi ﬁed a de novo frameshifting indel
mutation, p.Gly664Glufs*70 through whole exome sequen-
cing of an autism spectrum disorder trio..
Materials and Methods: We transfected mammalian
cells with GFP-tagged constructs encoding either A. wildtype nucleolin; B. mutant nucleolin with the same C-
terminal sequence predicted for the autism proband; C.
truncation at Gly664. We co-stained with nucleophosmin
antibodies to show co-localization. Real time ﬂuorescent
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) was used to study
effects on kinetics/binding dynamics.
Results: we have shown that mutant nucleolin mis-
localizes from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm. Moreover,
a construct with a nonsense mutation at the same residue, p.Gly664*, shows a very similar effect on the location of the
NCL protein, thus con ﬁrming the presence of the nucleolar
location signal of NCL protein in this region. FRAP showssigniﬁcant changes in the kinetics and mobility of mutant
NCL protein in the nucleoplasm.
Conclusions: Several other studies have also reported de
novo mutations in NCL in ASD or neurodevelopmental dis-
orders. Altered mislocalization and dynamics of mutant NCL
(p.G664Glufs*70/ p.G664*) may have relevance to the etio-pathlogy of NCL-related neurodevelopmental phenotypes.
T.I. Sheikh: None. N. Vasli: None. M. Ayub: None. R.
Sasanfar: None. J.B. Vincent: None.
P09.031B
Screening of ataxia samples reveals potentiallypathogenic known and novel variants in ATM andSACS
and likely to reveal novel genes and variants associated
with autosomal recessive ataxia
N. Kaya
1, M. Al-Muhaizea2, R. Almass1, M. Alsagob1,
F. BinHumaid1, H. AlDhalaan2, L. AlQuait1,
L. Aldosary1,3, A. Alyousef1,3, H. Jaber1,3,
M. M. AlRasheed1,3, M. Aldosary1, D. Colak4
1Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2Department
of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital andResearch Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
3College of
Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
4Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scienti ﬁc
Computing, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Introduction: Autosomal recessive ataxias (ARAs) repre-
sent a heterogeneous group of rare neurological disorders
involving both the central and peripheral nervous systemencountered in various ethnic groups. Here we report
patients from 14 unrelated consanguineous families
with ARA.
Materials and Methods: Patients were thoroughly
examined by neurologists, radiologist, and evaluated and
referred to gene testing by medical geneticists. Diagnostictargeted gene panels as well as whole exome sequencing
(WES) coupled with autozygosity mapping were1424performed. Supplementary or con ﬁrmatory Sanger sequen-
cing was done together with family segregation analysis.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were taken as part
of radiological exam.
Results: Among the affected individuals, eight patients
were diagnosed with carrying two separate mutations (areported deletion and a novel compound heterozygous) in
ATM . Affecteds from Family 2, 3, and 4 harbor a deletion in
ATM assumingly a founder mutation with an estimated age
of ~879 years. Among the cohort two families were found
to carry SACS variants. One was already reported as a
mutation and the other one is novel and likely to bepathogenic. Rest of the families were negative for any
known ataxia related genes and variants.
Conclusions: Our iterative ﬁltering of WES revealed
several novel candidate genes in these families. Our study is
likely to discover previously unknown ARA genes. This
study was funded by the grant (No. 14-MED2007-20 to N.K.) from National Plan for Science, Technology and Inno-
vation program (NSTIP/KACST).
N. Kaya: None. M. Al-Muhaizea: None. R. Almass:
None. M. Alsagob: None. F. BinHumaid: None. H.
AlDhalaan: None. L. AlQuait: None. L. Aldosary: None.
A. Alyousef: None. H. Jaber: None. M.M. AlRasheed:
None. M. Aldosary: None. D. Colak: None.
P09.032C
Novel mutation causing AUTS2 síndrome. A de novo
small deletion affecting the transcription start site of
AUTS2 short isoform
B. Martinez-Delgado
1,2, E. López1,2, J. Lara3, S. Monzón4,
I. Cuesta4, G. Gómez-Mariano1, V. Aquino1,
C. Rodríguez-Martín1, A. Damián1, I. Gonzalo1,
B. Baladrón1, R. Cazorla3, G. Iglesias3, E. Román3,
P. Ros3, P. Tutor5, S. Mellor5, C. Jiménez6,
M. J. Cabrejas7, E. González7, F. J. Alonso1, E. Bermejo-
Sánchez1,2, M. Posada1,2
1Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras. Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,2CIBER
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain,
3Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Puerta de
Hierro., Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,4Bioinformatics
Unit. Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid,Spain,
5Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital
Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid,
Spain,6Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Universitario
Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,7Servicio
de Bioquímica Clínica. Hospital Universitario Puerta de
Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, SpainIntroduction: The Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Diseases
Program (SpainUDP) performs extended genetic analyses
and deep phenotyping to get a de ﬁnite diagnosis in rare
syndrome cases. We present the case of a 3-year-old male
with severe generalized hypotonia and muscle weakness
together with neurodevelopmental delay. He presentsmicrocephaly and dysmorphic features highlighting micro-
retrognathy, low-set ears and hypertelorism.
Materials and Methods: Trio-based exome analysis was
carried out by using Nextera Truseq Rapid Enrichment kit
and sequenced in NextSeq500 (Illumina).
Results: The exome analysis revealed a novel mutation
consisting on a small de novo 30-bp deletion in exon 9 of
AUTS2 gene (Autism susceptibility candidate 2,
OMIM:607270), which allowed the diagnosis of this patientas AUTS2 Syndrome or Mental Retardation, autosomal
dominant 26 (OMIM:615834). AUTS2 gene is involved in
the development of neurological disorders. Alterations ofAUTS2 gene were described as a result of genomic rear-
rangements, although large copy number variations and
intragenic deletions or mutations have also been describedto cause this syndrome. It is noteworthy that the deletion
found in this patient included the transcription start site of
the short isoform of the gene, which plays an important rolein brain development. The gene expression analysis showed
that the deletion causes reduction in the level of expression
not only of the short isoform but also of the completetranscript of the gene.
Conclusions: This case helps in establishing the
genotype-phenotype correlation adding more evidence tothe role of mutations speci ﬁcally affecting the short isoform
for the development of a severe phenotype.
B. Martinez-Delgado: None. E. López: None. J. Lara:
None. S. Monzón: None. I. Cuesta: None. G. Gómez-
Mariano: None. V. Aquino: None. C. Rodríguez-Martín:
None. A. Damián: None. I. Gonzalo: None. B. Baladrón:
None. R. Cazorla: None. G. Iglesias: None. E. Román:
None. P. Ros: None. P. Tutor: None. S. Mellor: None. C.
Jiménez: None. M.J. Cabrejas: None. E. González:
None. F.J. Alonso: None. E. Bermejo-Sánchez: None. M.
Posada: None.
P09.033D
Comprehensive genetic analysis of whole genome
sequencing data from 108 individuals of 8multigenerational spanish families affected with bipolar
disorder
S. B. Fischer
1,2,C .K .Y .N g3,4, M. Fink5, C. S. Reinbold1,2,
A. Maaser6, F. Streit7, S. H. Witt7, J. Guzman-Parra8,
G. Orozco-Diaz9, G. Auburger10, M. Albus11,
M. Borrmann-Hassenbach11, M. J. Gonza ́lez8, S. Gil-
Flores12, F. J. Cabaleiro-Fabeiro13, F. Del Río Noriega14,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1425F. Perez-Perez15, J. Haro-González16, F. Rivas17,
F. Mayoral17, S. Herms1,2,6, M. Rietschel7, M. M. Nöthen6,
P. Hoffmann1,2,6, A. J. Forstner6,1,18, S. Cichon2,6,19
1Human Genomics Research Group, Department of
Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland,
2Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland,3Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland,4Department
of Biomedicine, Hepatology Laboratory, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland,5Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland,6Institute of Human Genetics, University of
Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,7Department of Genetic Epidemiology in
Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, UniversityMedical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany,
8Department of Mental Health,
Institute of Biomedicine IBIMA, University Hospital ofMalaga, Malaga, Spain,
9Unidad de Gestión Clínica del
Dispositivo de Cuidados Críticos y Urgencias del Distrito
Sanitario Málaga - Coin-Gudalhorceedicine, Malaga,Spain,
10Department of Experimental Neurology, Division
of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt,
Germany,11Isar Amper Klinikum München Ost, kbo, Haar,
Germany,12Department of Mental Health, University
Hospital of Reina So ﬁa, Cordoba, Spain,13Department of
Mental Health, University Hospital of Jaen, Jaen, Spain,
14Department of Mental Health, University Hospital of
Jerez de la Frontera, La Frontera, Spain,15Department of
Mental Health, University Hospital of Puerto Real,Department of Mental Health, Cádiz, Spain,
16Department
of Mental Health, Hospital Punta de Europa, Algeciras,
Spain,17Department of Psychiatry, Carlos Haya Regional
University Hospital, Malaga, Spain,18Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany,
19Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1, Research
Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany
Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a genetically complex neuropsy-
chiatric disorder with an estimated heritability of approxi-
mately 70%. GWAS have shown that common risk factors
substantially contribute to the development of BD andexplain 25-38% of the phenotypic variance. Rare variants
with higher penetrance might explain some of the hidden
heritability. A research strategy to identify such rarevariants is Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) of promising
multigenerational families with BD. In the present study we
conducted WGS of 108 individuals in a set of 8 extendedmultigenerational and multiply affected families of Spanish
origin.
WGS was performed PCR free at 30X. VCFs were cre-
ated based on GATK´s best practice guidelines. We set up a
WGS analysis work ﬂow based on vcfR. We conducted agene set/pathway analysis for the resulting genes using IPA
and ConsensusPathDB. In addition to that we conducted
Polygenic Risk Score analysis in the subset of the 8
families.
In our analysis we focused on rare variants with a minor
allele frequency below 1% (ExAC database). Our ﬁrst
analysis is an “extended exome ”analysis of WGS data. We
applied a narrow analysis model to identify overlapping,
rare, co-segregating variants in the affected individuals inone family which are not shared by healthy individuals
within the same family. Additionally we applied an analysis
model for incomplete penetrance. In total we identi ﬁed 3
protein truncating and 9 missense variants. PRS analyses in
the families show very diverse risk pro ﬁles for healthy and
affected individuals. Gene set enrichment analyses mainlyhighlight immunological genes.
S.B. Fischer: None. C.K.Y. Ng: None. M. Fink: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novartis
Pharma AG. C.S. Reinbold: None. A. Maaser: None. F.
Streit: None. S.H. Witt: None. J. Guzman-Parra: None.
G. Orozco-Diaz: None. G. Auburger: None. M. Albus:
None. M. Borrmann-Hassenbach: None. M.J. Gonza ́lez:
None. S. Gil-Flores: None. F.J. Cabaleiro-Fabeiro: None.
F. Del Río Noriega: None. F. Perez-Perez: None. J.
Haro-González: None. F. Rivas: None. F. Mayoral:
None. S. Herms: None. M. Rietschel: None. M.M.
Nöthen: None. P. Hoffmann: None. A.J. Forstner: None.
S. Cichon: None.
P09.036C
Bi-allelic MYORG variant carriers exhibit primary
brain calci ﬁcation with a distinct phenotype
L. Grangeon1, D. Wallon1, C. Charbonnier2, O. Quenez2,
A. Richard2, S. Rousseau2, C. Budowski1, T. Le Bouvier3,
C. Anne-Gaëlle4, V. Marie5, M. Aurélie5, R. Emmanuel5,
A. Mathieu6, T. Christine6, P. Favrole7, J. Antoine8,
L. Defebvre9, X. Ayrignac10, P. Labauge10, J. Pariente11,
M. Clanet11, D. Maltête12, A. Rovelet-Lecrux2,
A. Boland13, J. Deleuze13, French PFBC study group,
T. Frebourg2, D. Hannequin1, D. Campion2, G. Nicolas2
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Neurology and CNR-
MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomic and PersonalizedMedicine, Rouen, France,
2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department
of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomicand Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France,
3Department of
Neurology, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France,
4Department of Neurology, Nantes University Hospital,
Nantes, France,5Département de neurologie, Hôpital Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris,1426Faculté de médecine de Sorbonne Université, Inserm
U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013, Sorbonne
Universites, Paris, France,6Service de Neurologie,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France,7Department of
Neurology, Aix Hospital,, Aix en Provence, France,
8Department of Neurology, Saint-Etienne University
Hospital, Saint Etienne, France,9Department of Neurology
A, Salengro University Hospital, and EA4559, Lille,France,
10Department of Neurology, Montpellier University
Hospital, Montpellier, France,11Toulouse NeuroImaging
Center, Toulouse University, Inserm, Toulouse, France,
12Department of Neurology, Rouen University Hospital and
University of Rouen, France; INSERM U1239, Laboratory
of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Differentiation andCommunication, Rouen, France,
13Centre National de
Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de
Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay,Evry, France
Introduction: Primary Familial Brain Calci ﬁcation (PFBC)
is a rare disorder with diverse neuropsychiatric expression.
Mutations in four genes cause autosomal dominant PFBC
(AD-PFBC). Recently, bi-allelic MYORG pathogenic var-
iants have been reported to cause autosomal
recessive PFBC.
Methods: We screened MYORG by whole exome
sequencing in 29 unrelated probands negatively screened
for the AD-PFBC genes, studied the clinical and radi-
ological features in bi-allelic pathogenic variant carriers andcompared them to that of 102 AD-PFBC patients.
Results: We identi ﬁed 16 patients from 11 families with a
bi-allelic rare or novel predicted damaging variant. MYORG
patients exhibited a high clinical penetrance (median age of
onset of 52 years, range: 21-62) with motor impairment at
the forefront. Dysarthria was the presenting sign in 11/16patients. In contrast to AD-PFBC patients, 80% sympto-
matic patients eventually presented at least 4 of the fol-
lowing 5 symptoms: dysarthria, cerebellar syndrome, gaitdisorder, akinetic-hypertonic syndrome and pyramidal
signs. In addition, MYORG patients exhibited the most
severe pattern of calci ﬁcations. Strikingly, 12/15 presented
brainstem calci ﬁcations in addition to extensive calci ﬁca-
tions in other brain areas (basal ganglia, cerebellum ± cor-
tex). Among them, 8 patients exhibited pontinecalciﬁcations, which were never observed in AD-PDFC.
Finally, all patients exhibited cerebellar atrophy as con-
ﬁrmed by MRI Voxel Based Morphometry. Of note, in
three families, the father carried small pallido-dentate cal-
ciﬁcations, suggesting a putative phenotypic expression in
some heterozygous carriers.
Conclusions: We con ﬁrmMYORG as a novel major
PFBC causative gene and identify a recognizable clinico-radiological phenotype in the interface between PFBC and
spino-cerebellar ataxias.
L. Grangeon: None. D. Wallon: None. C. Charbon-
nier: None. O. Quenez: None. A. Richard: None. S.
Rousseau: None. C. Budowski: None. T. Le Bouvier:
None. C. Anne-Gaëlle: None. V. Marie: None. M. Aur-
élie: None. R. Emmanuel: None. A. Mathieu: None. T.
Christine: None. P. Favrole: None. J. Antoine: None. L.
Defebvre: None. X. Ayrignac: None. P. Labauge: None.
J. Pariente: None. M. Clanet: None. D. Maltête: None. A.
Rovelet-Lecrux: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze:
None. T. Frebourg: None. D. Hannequin: None. D.
Campion: None. G. Nicolas: None.
P09.037D
Identifying novel KIF1C- cerebellar ataxia variants by
exome sequencing and molecular characterization
M. Santos1,2, S. Carmona2,3, J. L. Neto2,4, J. Damásio1,5,6,
J. Sequeiros1,5,7, C. Barbot5, P. Coutinho5, R. Guerreiro2,3,
J. Brás2,3, I. Alonso1,5
1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell
Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ãoe m
Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal,2Department of
Neurodegenerative Disease and UK Dementia Research
Institute, University College London, London, UnitedKingdom,
3Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van
Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, United States,
4Present address: Instituto de Medicina Molecular Jo ão
Lobo Antunes, Univ. Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal,5CGPP,
IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S -
Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde, Univ.
Porto, Porto, Portugal,6Neurology Department, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
7ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar,
Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal
Hereditary cerebellar ataxias are a group of neurodegenera-
tive disorders with a high clinical and genetic heterogeneity,
characterized by incoordination of movement and speech,
and unsteady gait. Several genes have been identi ﬁed as
causative of these diseases; however, several families
remain without molecular diagnosis.
In this study, we used homozygosity mapping and exome
sequencing to study a cohort of Portuguese families with
autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia, identi ﬁed during a
systematic population-based survey. These analysesrevealed two novel homozygous variants in KIF1C in two
families with spastic ataxia: a frameshift variant
(c.393_396del, p.Ser131Argfs*13) and a splice site variant(c.1166-2A>G), both segregating with the disease and
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. Western blot analysisAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1427showed that the frameshift variant, located in the motor
domain, leads to a truncated protein that lacks most of the
KIF1C functional domains. We also demonstrated, using a
minigene assay, that the splice variant abolishes the
acceptor splice site, activating a new one 8 bp downstream.
This change is predicted to cause a frameshift and a pre-mature stop codon, thus leading to a truncated protein (p.
Gly389Aspfs*27).
KIF1C encodes a member of the kinesin-3 family, which
are microtubule-based motor proteins. Variants in KIF1C
have been previously associated with SPG58 and SPAX2,
both autosomal-recessive diseases combining spasticity andcerebellar signs. Our study revealed two novel KIF1C
variants in two families with a phenotype compatible with
SPAX2. These variants probably cause KIF1C loss-of-function, supporting the role of intracellular traf ﬁcking in
the pathogenesis of cerebellar ataxia.
M. Santos: None. S. Carmona: None. J.L. Neto: None.
J. Damásio: None. J. Sequeiros: None. C. Barbot: None.
P. Coutinho: None. R. Guerreiro: None. J. Brás: None. I.
Alonso: None.
P09.038A
In-depth genomic investigation reveals a wide spectrumof deleterious variants in 120 cases of idiopathic cerebral
palsy
H. HU
1,2,3,K .X U4, D. LIU5, H. TANG4,L .H E4,N .L I1
1Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and
Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou, China,
2Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China,
3Zhengzhou University the third af ﬁliated hospital,
Zhengzhou, China,4Department of Rehabilitation,
Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou, China,5Co-innovation Center of
Neuroregeneration, Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration
of Jiangsu and Ministry of Education, Nantong University,
Nantong, China
Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of neurodevelopmental
disorders affecting movement and posture, in which the roleof genetic variation is yet to be fully established. Here we
perform comprehensive genetic analysis on a cohort of 120
idiopathic CP families by integrating 35X whole-genomesequencing, 500X whole-exome sequencing, 5000X mito-
chondrial genome sequencing, and high-density cytogenetic
microarray. We ﬁnd that up to 40% of idiopathic CP cases
are attributed to de novo and inherited deleterious variants
in a spectrum of genes, including novel candidate genes
such as TYW1 and GPAM , the dysfunctional copies of
which are shown to cause abnormal neurodevelopment in
organismal models.H. Hu: None. K. Xu: None. D. Liu: None. H. Tang:
None. L. He: None. N. Li: None.
P09.039B
TORCH-like encephalopathy due to de novo COL4A1
mutation
A. Gerasimenko
1, D. Héron1, T. Billette de Villemeur2,
D. Rodriguez2, C. Garel3, E. Tournier-Lasserve4,
F. Chalard3, M. Miné5, T. Coste3, C. Mignot1
1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and
Pitié Salpêtrière hospital, Reference Center for Intellectuel
disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France,2APHP,
Department of pediatric neurology, Armand-Trousseauhospital, Paris, France,
3APHP, Department of pediatric
radiology, Armand-Trousseau hospital, Paris, France,
4APHP, Department of molecular genetics, Lariboisière-
Fernand-Widal, Paris, France,5APHP, Department of
molecular genetics, Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal hospital,
Paris, France
Cerebrovascular destructive lesions of the brain are well-
known antenatal manifestations of COL4A1 pathogenicvariants. These lesions include both limited porencephales
and wider lesions such as hydranencephaly and schizence-
phaly, sometimes associated with intracranial calci ﬁcation.
Nature of the lesions depends on timing and anatomical
extension of the vascular insuf ﬁciency.
We report the case of a girl born in Kazakhstan after
prenatal suspicion of microcephaly. She received intensive
care after birth and showed infantile spasms at 3 months. At
ourﬁrst examination at 9 months, she presented severe
development delay, tetrapyramidal involvement, marked
microcephaly and epilepsy. At 11 years, the girl was pro-
foundly intellectually disabled and showed stable micro-cephaly at -7 SD. Initial brain imaging showed widespread
ulegyria, incomplete gyration with major widening of the
Sylvian ﬁssure and polymicrogyria, as well as band-like
calciﬁcations. This suggested a TORCH infection.
Analysis of the OCLN gene, responsible for Pseudo-
TORCH syndrome 1, revealed no variation. Cytomegalo-virus fetopathy was suspected since the virus was found in
the urine. Finally, targeted sequencing of COL4A1 revealed
the de novo heterozygous p.Gly148Arg variant, typicallyaltering a Gly-X-Y motive of the collagen triple helix.
COL4A1 mutations should be considered in unproven
TORCH-like encephalopathies combining widespread vas-cular insuf ﬁciency of the fetal brain, gyration abnormalities
and calci ﬁcations.
A. Gerasimenko: None. D. Héron: None. T. Billette de
Villemeur: None. D. Rodriguez: None. C. Garel: None.1428E. Tournier-Lasserve: None. F. Chalard: None. M.
Miné: None. T. Coste: None. C. Mignot: None.
P09.040C
Development of a cellular model to study the role of CR1
in Alzheimer's disease
F. Cardona1,2, J. Szymanski1,2, J. Pérez-Tur1,2,3
1Unitat de Genètica Molecular, Instituto de Biomedicina de
Valencia, CSIC, Valencia, Spain,2CIBERNED, Madrid,
Spain,3Unidad mixta de Neurología y Genética, Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria la Fe (IIS La Fe), Valencia,
Spain
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurode-
generative dementia in the elderly, affecting between 5 and
10% of the population over 65 years of age, and increasingits prevalence with age. The ratio of isoforms F and S of
CR1 (CD35), determined by the presence of some
haplotypes or variants, has been related to late onset AD.Particularly the signi ﬁcant presence of the long isoform (S)
is related to a lower total amount of CR1, which leads to a
worse elimination of the β-amyloid peptide (A β), greater
activation of the microglia as an in ﬂammatory response, and
neuronal death.
In this work we have generated a mixed cellular model of
neuroin ﬂammation, using as a model the cell lines SH-
SY5Y (neuron), 1321N1 (astrocyte) and HCM3 (micro-
glia). The results shown that these co-cultures are able toactivate the glial cells when treated with lipopolysaccharide
toxin (LPS) or A β, increasing the protein markers for each
activated cell type. This cellular model also increases theexpression of the genes of the complement complex pro-
teins ( CR1,C1q,C3and C4) in response to these treat-
ments. Preliminary results also suggest that the silencing ofCR1 in this model decreases neuronal viability with A β,
pointing to the role of this protein in neuronal
survival in AD.
This model could be a useful tool to test the effect of gene
or pharmacological therapies to improve the response to A β
and neuroin ﬂammation, thus improving neuronal
survival in AD.
Funding acknowledgement: GV/2018//166 and
CIBERNED (group 209)
F. Cardona: None. J. Szymanski: None. J. Pérez-
Tur: None.
P09.041D
Single cell sequencing of iPSC neural cells from Down
syndrome patients uncovers perturbed celldifferentiationJ. Klar, J. Schuster, M. Sobol, L. Laan, A. Fatima,
G. Annerén, N. Dahl
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala, Sweden
Background: Down syndrome (DS) is a leading genetic
cause of intellectual disability and approximately 95% of
patients with DS have a full trisomy 21 (T21). This result ina global transcriptional dysregulation and studies suggest an
altered distribution of neuronal and glial cells in DS brains.
Methods: We established induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSC) from a patient with full T21 and a healthy control
individual. The iPSCs were differentiated into neural cells
for 30 days using an undirected protocol. Libraries wasprepared using the Chromium Single Cell 3 ’Reagent Kits
v2 (10X Genomics), sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 PE (Illu-
mina) and analyzed using CellRanger V2.0 (10X Geno-mics) and Monocle 2 (Trapnell Lab).
Results: Cluster analysis from euploid cells shows that
63% correspond to radial glia, 6% to intermediate neuronalprogenitor cells (nIPC), 20% to neurons and 5% to vascular
and leptomeningeal cells (VLMCs). In contrast, the cluster
analysis of T21 cells shows that 24% correspond to radialglia, 5% nIPCs and only 4% neurons. Importantly, 56% of
trisomic cells correspond to VLMCs, making this cluster
predominant.
Conclusion: In our model of T21 neurogenesis we
observe a reduced proportion of neuronal cells and an
increased proportion of glia cell. The formation of theVLMC population in iPSC neural cells with T21 appears to
be continuous and with a differentiation trajectory distinct
from that of euploid cells consistent with DS braindevelopment.
Grant: This work was supported by the Swedish
Research Council (VR).
J. Klar: None. J. Schuster: None.
M. Sobol: None. L.
Laan: None. A. Fatima: None. G. Annerén: None. N.
Dahl: None.
P09.042A
Rare complex chromosome mosaic with two differentchromosome-15 derived supernumerary marker
chromosomes in a boy with developmental delay and
behavioural abnormalities
U. Heinrich
1, M. Cohen1,2, S. Upheber2, I. Rost1
1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine,
Martinsried, Germany,2kbo Children's Centre, Munich,
GermanyAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1429Case report: We report on 5 years old boy with global
developmental delay, short attention span, lack of coopera-
tion, sleep disturbance, and microcephaly. He is the only
child of parents of Nepalese descent.
Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping was
performed using standard GTG banding technique. FISHanalyses were performed on metaphase spreads according to
the manufacturer ’s speci ﬁcations. For microarray analysis,
CytoSure Constitutional 180K microarray was used.
Results: Chromosome analysis revealed four different
cell lines: cell line I (28 %): normal karyotype; cell line II:
bisatellited supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) (50%); cell line III: a different SMC (3 %); cell line IV: both
SMC ’s (19 %). The combined use of FISH probes and
microarray analysis led to the following characterizations:the bisatellited marker chromosome as monocentric chro-
mosome 15 with no clue for euchromatin; the second
marker chromosome as a complex ring chromosome 15with a 9,8 Mb duplication 15q11.2q13.3 including the
Prader-Willi-/Angelman syndrome critical region, together
with a 538 kb gain in band 15q11.2 (Burnside-Butler syn-drome region) presumably in triplicated form.
Conclusion: We present a patient with a partial pentas-
omy 15q11.2/tetrasomy 15q11.2q13.3 mosaicism. Patientswith the recurrent chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication
syndrome are characterized by intellectual disability, sei-
zures, and behavioural abnormalities, while patients with atriplication 15q11-q13 have a more severe neurosycholo-
gical phenotype. Due to the mosaicism the further devel-
opment of our patient is hardly to predict making geneticcounseling a dif ﬁcult task. Besides, none of the modern
NGS-based techniques is able to solve this case correctly.
U. Heinrich: None. M. Cohen: None. S. Upheber:
None. I. Rost: None.
P09.043B
Gene expression analysis in cortical neurons
differentiated from 32 induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC) lines of THAP1 mutation carriers and controls
H. Baumann
1, M. Trilck-Winkler1, M. Grosse2,
A. Muenchau1, V. Kostic3, C. Klein1, F. Kaiser2,
P. Seibler1, K. Lohmann1
1Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck,
Germany,2Section of Functional Genetics, Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck,
Germany,3Clinic of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: Dystonia is a heterogeneous movement
disorder and can be caused by mutations in THAP1
(DYT-THAP1). However, only ~50% of THAP1 mutationcarriers develop dystonia. The underlying mechanisms of
the reduced penetrance remain elusive. Maturing neurons
generated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) could
serve as an in-vitro model to unravel penetrance-relevant
mechanisms.
Material and Methods: Human dermal ﬁbroblasts were
reprogrammed using non-integrating Sendai virus and
iPSCs were cultivated on Matrigel with E8 and mTeSR
media. Neural differentiation of 32 iPSC lines into corticalneurons was achieved using dual SMAD inhibition, two
neural rosette stages, and a dissociation step. Cortical neu-
rons were harvested on day 44 of differentiation for geneexpression analysis by quantitative PCR.
Results: In the 44-day old neuronal lines, THAP1
expression was elevated in mutation carriers with p.Lys158Asnfs*23 and p.Ser21Cys mutations, but not in p.
Arg13His carriers. A trend of increased THAP1 expression
in affected compared to unaffected carriers was observed.Expression of TOR1A , another dystonia gene that possibly
is regulated by the transcription factor THAP1, seemed
unaltered. Furthermore, THAP1 expression was indepen-
dent of a seemingly penetrance-linked polymorphism in the
KAT6A promotor, a region that loops to the THAP1 pro-
motor as shown by 4C analysis.
Conclusion: We observed higher expression of THAP1 in
some mutation carriers compared to controls depending on
the mutation, which may be explained by the autoregulationofTHAP1 . Further, the THAP1 expression level might
correlate with the disease status. Future transcriptomic
proﬁling will shed light on dysregulated signaling pathways
resulting in DYT-THAP1 dystonia (FOR2488).
H. Baumann: None. M. Trilck-Winkler: None. M.
Grosse: None. A. Muenchau: None. V. Kostic: None. C.
Klein: None. F. Kaiser: None. P. Seibler: None. K.
Lohmann: None.
P09.044C
Diagnostic yield and clinical relevance of exome trio
analysis in patients with epilepsy
M. Martinez-Garcia, I. Diez, R. Perez-Carro,
S. Rosestone, E. Fernandez-Tabanera, C. Rodriguez,I. Sanchez-Navarro, R. Sanchez-Alcudia, E. Mata,
D. Rodriguez, N. Sanchez-Bolivar, M. Carcajona,
P. Maietta, S. Alvarez
Medical Department, NIMGenetics S.L., Madrid, Spain,
Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Epilepsy is a chronic disorder characterized
by recurrent unprovoked seizures. Frequently, these patientshave different type of seizure and may have other
neurological symptoms. The goal of this study was to1430identify the genetic causes and to establish the diagnostic
yield of trio analysis on patients with isolated seizures or
with syndromic clinical presentations.
Patients and Methods: A cohort of 81 probands was
sequenced by Trio whole exome sequencing. The median
age was 7 years old. In 78% of the probands, seizures weredescribed as part of a more complex phenotype. Genomic
libraries were generated with Ion AmpliSeq
TMor SureS-
electXTand sequenced by Ion ProtonTM/S 5TMXL or Nova-
Seq 6000. The data were processed using an “in house ”
developed pipeline.
Results: A genetic diagnosis was obtained on 28 out of
81 patients, leading to a diagnostic yield of 35%. Among
the identi ﬁed variants the distribution was, 64% de novo,
18% homozygous, and 14% hemizygous, with a largeproportion of missense variants (64%). Diagnostic yield of
42%, was obtained in the syndromic cases (n =63), identi-
fying variants not previously reported in targeted analysis.In the cases with isolated seizures (n =22), the genetic
diagnosis was only established in two cases, through the
identi ﬁcation of de novo variants in the genes COL4A3BP
and TBR1 , previously associated to a more complex
phenotype.
Conclusions: Exome trio sequencing is a cost-effective
strategy with a high diagnostic yield in syndromic patients
with epilepsy that enables a phenotypic broad-spectrum
diagnosis. This approach contributes signi ﬁcantly to the
identi ﬁcation of new candidate genes.
M. Martinez-Garcia: None. I. Diez: None. R. Perez-
Carro: None. S. Rosestone: None. E. Fernandez-Taba-
nera: None. C. Rodriguez: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro:
None. R. Sanchez-Alcudia: None. E. Mata: None. D.
Rodriguez: None. N. Sanchez-Bolivar: None. M. Car-
cajona: None. P. Maietta: None. S. Alvarez: None.
P09.045D
CNVs in patients with epilepsy - Czech experience
H. Z ůnová
1,T .R a špličková1, D. Novotná1,M . Štolfa1,
M. Havlovicová1, M. Malíková1, P. Tesner1, J. Drábová1,
K.Štěrbová2,P .K r šek2, J. Zárubová3, H. Krijtová3,
P. Maru šič3,M .V l čková1
1DBMG, 2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department od Paediactric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine Charles University and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Neurology,
2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic
Epilepsy is heterogeneous chronic neurological disorder
with prevalence 8/1000. Copy number variants (CNVs) areresponsible for 2-11 % of epilepsies. We present cohort of
193 patients with epilepsy, both children and adults, divided
in two groups - 49 patients with isolated epilepsy and 144
patients with syndromic epilepsy (i.e. associated with
developmental delay, dysmorphic features etc). ArrayCGH
platform SurePrint G3 ISCA 4x180 and 8x60 (AgilentTechnologies) were used for the examinations. We detected
CNVs in 32/193 of patients (16.6 %): 16 deletions (50 %),
12 duplications (38 %), one triplication (3 %) and more thanone CNV were detected in three patients (9 %). 15 CNVs
were pathogenic and explaining the phenotype, three CNVs
were probably pathogenic, two were benign and 12 werevariants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VOUS). Pathogenic and
probably pathogenic CNVs were detected only in syndro-
mic patients. In patients with isolated epilepsy only VOUSand benign variants were detected. Origin of variants was
determined as maternal (20 %), paternal (13 %), de novo
(30 %) and was unknown in 37 % of cases. CNVs sizeranged from 15 kb to 9 Mb. Except of CNVs located in
regions associated with known syndromes and epilepsy
"hotspots", we detected new non-recurrent CNVs. UsingarrayCGH, we identi ﬁed CNVs as a cause of epilepsy in 18/
144 syndromic patients (12.5 %). CNVs play an important
role in aetiology of epilepsies. Therefore arrayCGH shouldbe included into diagnostic algorithm as a ﬁrst-choice
genetic method in patients with syndromic epilepsy.
Supported by: 00064203, NF-CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014, 17-29423A
H. Zůnová: None. T. Ra špličková: None. D. Novotná:
None. M. Štolfa: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M.
Malíková: None. P. Tesner: None. J. Drábová: None. K.
Štěrbová: None. P. Kr šek:None. J. Zárubová: None. H.
Krijtová: None. P. Maru šič:None. M. Vlčková: None.
P09.047B
How far can we go? Whole genome sequencing, periodicreanalysis and international collaborations expands our
understanding of the causes of developmental and
epileptic encephalopathy
E. E. Palmer
1,2, R. Sachdev3,2, R. Macintosh3,
T. Kandula2,3, A. Minoche4, C. Puttick4, V. Gayevskiy4,
T. Roscioli3,5, M. Dinger2, L. Hesson6, C. Shoubridge7,
A. Drew4, R. Davis8,9,4, S. Kummerfeld4, M. Cowley10,
A. Bye2,3, E. Kirk2,3
1Genetics of Learning Disability (GoLD) Service, Waratah,
Australia,2University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia,3Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney, Australia,
4Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute
of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia,5NeuRA, Sydney,
Australia,6Garvan Institute for Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia,7University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 14318Kolling Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,
9Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia,
10Children's Cancer Institute, Sydney, Australia
Introduction: There is a pressing clinical need to determine
the molecular causes of DEE to guide management andgenetic counselling. Our trio exome sequencing (ES) study
(2016-2017) had a high diagnostic yield (15/30: 50%),
demonstrated cost-effectiveness and delineated novelgenetic causes of DEE; but could we improve the diagnostic
yield further?
Materials and Methods: Trio WGS (Illumina HiSeqX
platform) was applied to 15 individuals undiagnosed by our
ES study and 16 individuals undiagnosed by massively-
parallel sequencing panel. In-house platforms Seave, Mity,ClinSV, Introme and ROHmer facilitated variant annotation
andﬁltration and identi ﬁcation of regions of homozygosity
and mitochondrial, non-coding and structural variants.Collaborations were initiated to clarify pathogenicity of
novel variants.
Results: 8 additional diagnoses were made in the 15
individuals from the ES study: 5 were detectable by ES but
required collaborative clinical/functional studies to prove
pathogenicity; 3 (20%) were genomic mechanisms unde-tectable by ES (complex structural variants). 11 diagnoses
were made in the 16 panel-negative individuals (68%): the
majority (n =10) in genes excluded from the panel, 1 was
missed for technical reasons.
Conclusions: An ES or WGS approach plus periodic
reanalysis and international collaborations can result in acumulative diagnostic yield of over 75% for DEE. WGS
can robustly detect structural variants; ongoing research will
assist non-coding variant interpretation. Individualsundiagnosed after intensive genomic analysis often had
normal development prior to seizure onset, and lacked
congenital anomalies and neurological progression: theymay have alternative causes such as somatic mosaicism or
polygenic variants. Funding: NHMRC, NSW Health,
Kinghorn Foundation
E.E. Palmer: None. R. Sachdev: None. R. Macintosh:
None. T. Kandula: None. A. Minoche: None. C. Puttick:
None. V. Gayevskiy: None. T. Roscioli: None. M. Dinger:
None. L. Hesson: None. C. Shoubridge: None. A. Drew:
None. R. Davis: None. S. Kummerfeld: None. M. Cow-
ley:None. A. Bye: None. E. Kirk: None.
P09.048C
Multi-omic approaches implicate dysregulated calciumpathways in essential tremor
C. Liao
1,2, F. Sarayloo1,2, D. Rochefort1, F. Akçimen1,2,
A. D. Laporte1, D. Spiegelman1, A. Rajput3, P. A. Dion4,2,
G. A. Rouleau1,21Montréal Neurological Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada,
2McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada,3University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada,4Montréal
Neurological Institute, Montréal, ON, Canada
Introduction: The genetic etiology of one of the most
common movement disorders, essential tremor (ET), is not
yet fully characterized. Currently, studies have focused on
investigating common or rare genetic variants but have yetto investigate ET transcriptomes.
Methods: To identify relevant pathways and genes, the
transcriptome of two cerebellar regions (dentate nucleus andcortex) derived from 16 cases and 16 age- and sex-matched
controls was interrogated by RNA sequencing. A genome-
wide gene association study (GWGAS) was conductedusing 1,778 cases and 5,376 control individuals. Afterward,
pathway enrichment was done using genes shown to be
signiﬁcant after Bonferroni correction (P<2.7E-06) to nar-
row down transcriptomic pathways.
Results: We identi ﬁed several novel dysregulated genes
including CACNA1A , a calcium voltage-gated channel
implicated in ataxia and reported to cause tremor in Cac-
na1a -knockout mice. Furthermore, several pathways
including axon guidance and calcium channel activity weresigniﬁcantly enriched. The GWGAS also revealed a sig-
niﬁcant enrichment across genes associated with calcium
ion-regulated exocytosis of neurotransmitter. Finally, thedentate nucleus and cerebellar cortex appeared to have
different transcriptomes, supporting the notion of spatially
different transcriptomes across the cerebellum.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁcation of dysregulated path-
ways in post-mortem cerebellum from patients can increa-
ses our understanding of the pathogenesis for thisunderstudied condition, which may reveal potential targets
for therapeutic treatment. Calcium-related pathways were
shown to be relevant to ET and future studies shouldinvestigate the underlying mechanisms of this disruption.
We thank the participants for providing DNA and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (#RN254517-332736).
C. Liao: None. F. Sarayloo: None. D. Rochefort: None.
F. Akçimen: None. A.D. Laporte: None. D. Spiegelman:
None. A. Rajput: None. P.A. Dion: None. G.A.
Rouleau: None.
P09.049D
Study of TTR familial amyloid polyneuropathy in Greek
patients
C. Kartanou
1, M. Breza1, A. Papathoma2, T. Bagratouni2,
Z. Kontogeorgiou1, A. Georghiou3, P. Koutsou3,
K. Christodoulou3, M. Panas1, E. Kastritis2, G. Koutsis1,
G. Karadima114321Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology,
University of Athens Medical School, Eginition Hospital,
Athens, Greece,2Department of Clinical Therapeutics,
Alexandra Hospital National and Kapodistrian, University
of Athens, Athens, Greece,3Neurogenetics Department, The
Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus
Introduction: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a
rare, autosomal dominant, neurodegenerative disorder,usually associated with mutations in the transthyretin gene
(TTR). The most common mutation worldwide is p.
Val30Met. The present study aims to identify TTR genemutations in Greek patients and attempt genotype-
phenotype correlations.
Materials and Methods: We studied 16 Greek indivi-
duals belonging to 10 families. These included 8 patients
referred for suspected FAP, 6 asymptomatic relatives of
patients, and 2 patients with an FAP clinical phenotype thatwere, however, originally referred for Charcot-Marie-Tooth
(CMT) gene testing and selected from a group of 800 sus-
pected CMT patients, negative for CMT1A. The moleculardiagnosis included screening for p.Val30Met with restric-
tion fragment length polymorphism analysis (RFLP) and
Sanger sequencing of the entire coding region of theTTR gene.
Results: The p.Val30Met mutation was detected in 3 out
of 10 index-cases (30%). In the remaining probands, Sangersequencing identi ﬁed the p.Cys10Arg, p.Arg34Gly, p.
Arg54Thr, p.Ala81Thr, p.Glu89Gln, p.Glu89Lys and p.
Val94Ala mutations. The p.Val30Met cases had the typicalearly-onset neuropathic phenotype, without early cardio-
myopathy. The remaining patients had later onset neuro-
pathy and concomitant cardiac amyloidosis. In two of thesepatients the presenting symptom was exertional dyspnea.
Conclusions: The p.Val30Met mutation is a frequent but
not universal cause of FAP in the Greek population. Itseems to present with the early-onset classic phenotype.
Other mutations exhibit more varied phenotypes with later
onset. Interestingly, some FAP patients are hidden withinthe large group of “suspected CMT ”.
C. Kartanou: None. M. Breza: None. A. Papathoma:
None. T. Bagratouni: None. Z. Kontogeorgiou: None. A.
Georghiou: None. P. Koutsou: None. K. Christodoulou:
None. M. Panas: None. E. Kastritis: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Janssen, Amgen. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Janssen,Celgene, Genesis, Takeda, Millennium-Takeda, Pharma-
cyclics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Janssen,
Amgen, Takeda, Prothena. G. Koutsis: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received);Signi ﬁcant; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Genesis Pharma. Other;
Signi ﬁcant; Novartis, Genesis Pharma, Sano ﬁ-Genzyme,
Teva Pharmaceuticals. G. Karadima: None.
P09.050A
Investigation of the role of GRN upstream open reading
frames in frontotemporal dementia
A. Frydas
1,2, E. Wauters1,2, B. Heeman1,2,J .v .d .Z e e1,2,
C. V. Broeckhoven1,2
1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases, Center for Molecular
Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium,2Biomedical Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Introduction: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the
second most common subtype of dementia regarding people
under 65 years old. It is featured by degeneration of thefrontal and temporal lobes of the brain and leads to
behavioral and language impairments. Upstream open
reading frames (uORFs) play an important role in control-ling protein expression. Variants in these elements have
been linked with certain diseases. In this project, we will
investigate the role of uORFs in granulin ( GRN )-
associated FTD.
Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of
uORF-harboring regions of GRN by design of an amplicon
target ampli ﬁcation assay (Agilent, https://www.agilent.
com) was performed. Screening was done in the Belgian
cohort, consisting of 389 patients and 415 controlindividuals.
Results: Investigation of ribosome pro ﬁling databases
and literature allowed us to identify four uORFs for GRN .
Preliminary screening in the Belgian cohort revealed 2
variants present within a GRN uORF. First variant (2/415
controls, 1/389 patients) is within a splice region and itspresence could promote differential splicing by the spli-
ceosome machinery. The second variant (3/415 controls, 2/
389 patients) leads to a change in the amino acid sequenceof the uORF close to the termination codon, which could
inﬂuence ribosomal occupancy, thus affecting translations
of the downstream protein.
Conclusions: These variants could act as potential
modiﬁers, affecting GRN serum levels or age at onset.
Therefore, functional validation of these variants could leadto the development of biomarkers and provide novel
mechanistic insights in FTD.
A. Frydas: None. E. Wauters: None. B. Heeman: None.
J.V.D. Zee: None. C.V. Broeckhoven: None.
P09.051
bdetection of gene dosage alterations in patients with
spinocerebellar disease using an exon-dense snp arrayAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1433B. Quintans1, F. Barros2, I. Quintela3, A. Ordóñez-
Ugalde4, C. Castro-Fernández1, P. Blanco-Arias2,
D. García-Estévez5, I. Sanz6, M. Arias7, M. Sobrido1
1Neurogenetics Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain,2Fundación Pública
Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain,3Centro Nacional de Genotipado, Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
4Laboratorio Biomolecular, Hospital José Carrasco
Arteaga IESS, Cuenca, Ecuador,5Department of
Neurology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario deOurense, Ourense, Spain,
6Department of Neurology,
Hospital Nuestra Señora de Sonsoles, Ávila, Spain,
7Department of Neurology, Complexo Hospitalario
Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain
AIMS: In spite of NGS many patients remain without a
diagnosis. In some cases this might be due to undetected
pathogenic copy number variants. We evaluated a high-
density SNP-array to assess dosage abnormalities in ataxiaand spastic paraplegia.
Methods: 10 patients were genotyped with CytoScan_-
XON_array (ThermoFisher). The following deletions hadbeen previously detected by MLPA: SPAST exon 1 (1.52kb,
N=2), exons 6-7 (0.58kb, N =2) and exons 2-17 (154.4kb,
N=1);SPG11 exon 29 (0.21kb, N =1);ABCD1 exons 3-10
(10.11kb, N =4). We included 94 control samples from the
1000G_IBS collection. Patients with deletion of SPAST
exon 1 and SPG11 exon 29 were genotypes in duplicate and
triplicate, respectively, to evaluate inter-experiment repro-
ducibility. Data analysis was carried out with CHAS ®
software.
Results: All assays passed quality check and were con-
sistent between replications. Concordant results from
MLPA and array were obtained in 5/10 cases: ABCD1
exons 3-10, SPAST exons 1, 6-7, and 2-17, the latter
including contiguous genes ( SLC30A6 ,NLRC4 ). In 3
patients ABCD1 deletion was partially detected, exons 3-5
(3.51kb). The deletion was not detected by the array in 2/10
cases: SPAST exons 6-7, SPG11 exon 29, albeit observable
upon visual examination in all 13 assays. There were nogains or losses in control samples.
Conclusions: CytoScan_XON array is useful to identify
gene deletions in parallel, even at exon level. False negativerate was 20% (2/10), however these deletions were visually
observable. Factors in ﬂuencing the ef ﬁciency of the
approach include the size of the deletion and presence ofpseudogenes. Funding: ISCIII (PS09/01830; PI17/01582)
B. Quintans: None. F. Barros: None. I. Quintela: None.
A. Ordóñez-Ugalde: None. C. Castro-Fernández: None.
P. Blanco-Arias: None. D. García-Estévez: None. I.
Sanz: None. M. Arias: None. M. Sobrido: None.P09.053D
Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia with ﬁrst
homozygous duplication in GRID2 and review of the
literature
A. Ceylan
1, E. Acar Arslan2, H. Erdem3, H. Kavus4,
M. Arslan5, H. Topalo ğlu6
1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara Ataturk
Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey,2Karadeniz Technical University,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Child Neurology,Trabzon, Turkey,
3Ankara Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit
Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey,4Gulhane Training and Research
Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey,
5Gulhane Training and Research Hospital, Department of
Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey,6Hacettepe University,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Child Neurology,
Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias are
characterized by abnormal structure of the cerebellum and
spinal cord. GRID2 is involved in ataxia through both loss-of-function mutations and gain-of-function mutations due to
respective deletions and missense variations. Here, we
report the identi ﬁcation and characterisation of a novel
ARCA caused by bi-allelic duplication of GRID2 in two
siblings.
Methods: Illuminia ®Truesight One clinical exome was
performed on one of the siblings with MiSeq next ‐genera-
tion sequencing platform. Whereas chromosomal micro-
array analysis was performed on the entire family by usingAfﬁmetrix Optima ®chips. Variants were evaluated based
on the phenotype and standard in silico tools.
Results: No disease causing mutations were reported as a
result of the clinical exome test.Chromosomal microarray
analysis showed a ~121 kb homozygous duplication of
GRID2 (chr4:94,447,511-94,569,021), including exon 14,in two siblings.
Conclusion: Previously there has been reports of homo-
zygous deletions and missense mutations of GRID2, but ourstudy is the ﬁrst one to identify a homozygous duplication
of the gene. This mutation, which segregated in two siblings
with autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia, will help usunderstand the effect of the exon 14 of GRID2 on the
phenotype and the structure of the GluRD2 protein. These
ﬁndings provide us with the conclusion that chromosomal
microarray should be the ﬁrst step of the diagnostic process
of autosomal recessive ataxia types.
A. Ceylan: None. E. Acar Arslan: None. H. Erdem:
None. H. Kavus: None. M. Arslan: None. H.
Topaloğlu:None.1434P09.054A
Cadherin 13 interacts with Integrin Beta-1 and Integrin
Beta-3 to regulate inhibitory synaptic function in a
human neuronal model
B. Mossink1,2, J. v. Rhijn3,2, M. Selten3,2, K. Linda1,2,
E. v. Hughte1,2, J. Bak3,2, M. Frega1,2, D. Schubert3,2,
N. Nadif Kasri1,2,3
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Department of
Cognitive Neurosciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
The brain is a complex neural network that requires a
precisely tuned interplay of excitatory and inhibitory signals
in order to function. Disruptions in synaptic connectivity, inparticular the balance between excitation (E) and inhibition
(I), have been shown to underlie neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDDs). However, the mechanisms underlyingthis coordination remain elusive. One gene that is
implicated NDDs is Cadherin 13 (CDH13 ). Dysregulations
ofCDH13 have been linked to attention-de ﬁcit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder and comorbid disorders such as autism and
schizophrenia. Studies in mice showed that Cdh13 localises
at the inhibitory presynapse, and when knocked out leads toincreased inhibitory drive onto hippocampal CA1 pyrami-
dal neurons. However, the mechanism by which CDH13
regulates the function of inhibitory synapses in humanneurons remains unknown. To understand the function of
CDH13 in human neurons, we generated both GABAergic
and Glutamatergic neurons via controlled differentiation ofInduced Pluripotent Stem Cells (hIPSC). Using RNA
interference we reduced CDH13 expression in GABAergic
neurons. We investigated neuronal network communicationby means of Micro-Electrode Arrays, whereas on a single-
cell level, inhibitory synaptic transmission was assessed
using whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. Our data showsthat CDH13 knockdown in human GABAergic neurons
increases inhibitory control on glutamatergic neurons
recorded by MEA. Moreover, cell-adhesion assay revealedthat ITG β1 and ITG β3 play an opposite role in the
regulation of inhibitory synaptic strength via interaction
with CDH13. In summary, these results point towards animportant role for CDH13 in inhibitory synapses via
CDH13-ITG β1/ITG β3 interaction, which could be critical
in the maintenance of the E/I balance.
B. Mossink: None. J.V. Rhijn: None. M. Selten: None.
K. Linda: None. E.V. Hughte: None. J. Bak: None. M.
Frega: None. D. Schubert: None. N. Nadif Kasri: None.P09.055B
A rare etiology of epileptic encephalopathy: HECW2
mutations
M. H. Demirbas
1, P. Özbudak2, A. Serdaro ğlu2,
M. A. Ergün1, E. F. Perçin1
1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey,2Pediatric Neurology Department, Gazi
University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in the HECW2
cause ‘’Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Hypotonia,
Seizures, and Absent Language; NDHSAL ’’(#617268),
which is characterized by severe developmental delay,absent speech, epilepsy, hypotonia, dystonia/dyskinesia,
microcephaly, and structural brain anomalies. Here we
present a novel de novo heterozygous mutation in the
HECW2 gene in a patient with growth retardation and
epileptic encephalopathy. Material-Methods: A seven-year-
old boy who referred to our clinic with epilepticencephalopathy had severely delayed psychomotor devel-
opment, absent speech and feeding dif ﬁculty. His height,
weight and head circumference measurements were lessthan 3
rdcentile. His motor tonic seizures were reported to
start at the age of two and to continue daily. Generalized
epileptic changes were present in his EEG. Progressiveatrophy of cerebrum, cerebellum and brainstem was seen in
the cranial MRI. WES analysis was performed in order to
elucidate the aetiology of the neurodevelopmental disorder.
Results: A novel de novo heterozygous mutation
c.4484G>A (p.Arg1495Lys) was found in the
HECW2 gene.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, only four
mutations in the HECW2 have been identi ﬁed in ten
patients. Because of the rareness of the reported cases, herewe present the patient with a novel HECW2 variant asso-
ciating with his clinical ﬁndings. Similar reports are still
needed to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations ofNDHSAL.
M.H. Demirbas: None. P. Özbudak: None. A. Ser-
daroğlu:None. M.A. Ergün: None. E.F. Perçin: None.
P09.056C
Dominant negative heterozygous mutation in Erlin2prevents degradation of IP3 receptors and is responsible
for hereditary spastic paraplegia 37
G. Stevanin
1, A. Rastetter1, T. Esteves1, S. Hanein1,
C. Depienne2, A. Brice2, A. Durr2, F. Darios2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 14351Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Inserm,
CNRS, SU, EPHE, Paris, France,2Institut du Cerveau et de
la Moelle épinière, Inserm, CNRS, SU, Paris, France
Introduction: Erlin 2 is an endoplasmic reticulum protein
mediating the degradation of IP3 receptors. Autosomalrecessive or dominant mutations of Erlin2 have been
implicated in complex motor neuron diseases with cognitive
impairment, including hereditary spastic paraplegia SPG18.
Materials and Methods: We analysed the exome
sequencing of four patients of a large family with autosomal
dominant spastic paraplegia signi ﬁcantly linked to the
SPG37 locus, a chromosomal region containing the Erlin2
gene and overlapping the SPG18 locus. Fibroblasts of an
affected patient and of a sex and age-matched control weresubjected to an agonist of IP3 receptors to analyse their
degradation by the proteasome. Fibroblasts were also
transfected with siRNAs targeting the pathological allele toobserve the reversal of the phenotype.
Results: We identi ﬁed the heterozygous c.194C>T (p.
T65I) missense variant in Erlin2 segregating in the family.
Mutated and wild type alleles were expressed at the same
level in ﬁbroblasts. Compared to controls, IP3 receptors
degradation was slower in mutated ﬁbroblasts, suggesting a
degradation process blockage. To test the hypothesis that
the variant acts as a dominant negative, we speci ﬁcally
downregulated the p.T65I variant using siRNA. WhileErlin2 levels remained normal in control lines, a 50%
downregulation of the p.T65I allele was observed in the
SPG37 line with reduced degradation capacities of IP3receptors.
Conclusion: We report that a heterozygous missense
variant of Erlin2 accounts for SPG37 through a dominant
negative effect on the IP3 receptors degradation in vitro .
G. Stevanin: None. A. Rastetter: None. T. Esteves:
None. S. Hanein: None. C. Depienne: None. A. Brice:
None. A. Durr: None. F. Darios: None.
P09.057D
Hereditary spinocerebellar degeneration in Sudan:
identi ﬁcation of variants in known and new genes in a
large cohort
A. Yahia Osman Mohamed
1,2,3, M. Papin2,3, T. Esteve2,3,
I. Mohammed1, A. Hamed1, M. Elseed1, A. Mutwakil1,
S. Elsadig1, M. Elzubir1, M. Koko4, J. Schubert4,
R. Abubakr5, F. Abuzar1, S. Emad1, M. Musallam1,
R. Adil1, M. Osama1, E. Osama1, A. Babai5, H. Malik1,
Z. Omer1, A. Ahmed1, M. Amin1, A. Khalid1, R. Idris5,
S. O. Taha6, H. Mohamed7, E. F. Bushara1, S. Elmalik8,
M. Hamad9, M. A. Salih9, M. I. Elbashir1, M. E. Ibrahim5,
H. Lerche4, A. Brice2,10, L. E. O. Elsayed1, A. E. Ahmed1,
G. Stevanin2,3,101Faculty of Medicine, Khartoum, Sudan,2Institut du
cerveau et de la moelle épinière, Paris, France,3Ecole
pratique des hautes etudes, EPHE, PSL université, Paris,
France,4Department of neurology and epileptology, Hertie
institute for clinical brain research, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany,5Inistitute of endemic diseases,
University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan,6Department of
radiology, Dar Al Elaj specialized hospital, Khartoum,
Sudan,7Alnelain medical center, Khartoum, Sudan,
8Department of physiology, College of medicine, King Saud
University, Ryiadh, Saudi Arabia,9Department of
pediatrics, College of medicine, King Saud University,Ryiadh, Saudi Arabia,
10APHP Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital,
Department of genetics, Paris, France
Introduction: Hereditary spinocerebellar degeneration
(SCD) encompasses a spectrum of clinically and genetically
heterogeneous disorders, with phenotypes ranging frompure spastic paraplegia or pure cerebellar ataxia to more
complex forms. Sudan is located in east Africa which is a
region known for the high genetic diversity among itspopulation. The Sudanese population is characterized by
high rates of consanguineous marriages (40-49%).
Methodology: We used next generation sequencing tar-
geted genes panel screening and whole exome sequencing
to study 25 Sudanese families with SCD. We analyzed the
sequencing data using online and in-house bioinformatictools. We con ﬁrmed the segregation of the identi ﬁed can-
didate variants with the disease phenotype in the studied
families using Sanger sequencing.
Results: We identi ﬁed 24 culprit variants, 18 of these
were in 15 genes previously linked to SCD and six were
located in six new candidate genes never linked to patho-logical phenotypes in man. Out of the 18 variants in the
known SCD genes, 11 variants were novel, one was auto-
somal dominant, six were compound heterozygous and 11were homozygous. Three of the variants were possible
founder variants: NM_024306.4( FA2H ):c.674T>C and
NM_021222.2( PRUNE1 ):c.132+2T>C, each in two famil-
ies; NM_138422.3( ADAT3 ):c.430G>A in one of our
families and was previously identi ﬁed in families from the
gulf area.
Conclusion: We studied 25 Sudanese families with her-
editary spinocerebellar degeneration, and we identi ﬁed the
causative mutations in 88% of these families. The 24 culpritvariants were found in 15 genes previously linked to the
phenotype and in six new candidate genes under validation
through functional studies.
A. Yahia Osman Mohamed: None. M. Papin: None. T.
Esteve: None. I. Mohammed: None. A. Hamed: None. M.
Elseed: None. A. Mutwakil: None. S. Elsadig: None. M.
Elzubir: None. M. Koko: None. J. Schubert: None. R.
Abubakr: None. F. Abuzar: None. S. Emad: None. M.1436Musallam: None. R. Adil: None. M. Osama: None. E.
Osama: None. A. Babai: None. H. Malik: None. Z.
Omer: None. A. Ahmed: None. M. Amin: None. A.
Khalid: None. R. Idris: None. S.O. Taha: None. H.
Mohamed: None. E.F. Bushara: None. S. Elmalik: None.
M. Hamad: None. M.A. Salih: None. M.I. Elbashir:
None. M.E. Ibrahim: None. H. Lerche: None. A. Brice:
None. L.E.O. Elsayed: None. A.E. Ahmed: None. G.
Stevanin: None.
P09.058A
Understanding the role of HNRNPU in braindevelopment and neurodevelopmental disorders
F. Mastropasqua
1, I. Rabkina1, M. Becker1, B. Anderlid2,
S. Bölte1, A. Falk3, K. Tammimies1
1Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND),
Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden,2Department of
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute,
Solna, Sweden,3Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Solna, Sweden
Background: Mutations affecting HNRNPU (Heteroge-
neous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U) located on chr1q44
have been described in individuals with various neurode-
velopmental disorders. HNRNPU is one of the componentsof the spliceosome and shown to regulate the 3D genome
organization. However, the role of HNRNPU in neuronal
development has not been characterized.
Material and Methods: Induced pluripotent stem cells
from controls and individuals with HNRPU mutations will
be used to investigate its role in neuronal development.HNRNPU expression is measured during the early stages of
the neuronal differentiation using the neuroepithelial stem
cell-like (NES) model followed with detailed investigationsof the 3D genome organization, transcriptomics including
splicing patterns and DNA/RNA targets of HNRNPU using
high-throughput methods.
Results: We have identi ﬁed a monozygotic twin pair with
severe ID, autism and epilepsy carrying a ~44.3Kb het-
erozygous deletion of HNRNPU and COX20. The expres-
sion of HNRNPU in NES cells was con ﬁrmed to be reduced
~50% due to the deletion as expected. In control cell lines,
theHNRNPU expression was reduced upon neuronal dif-
ferentiation, however similar pattern was not seen in the
deletion carrier. We are currently investigating the early
time points of neuronal differentiation and how the multipleroles of HNRNPU are connected to the typical and atypical
trajectories of the neuronal development using multiple
omics-methods.
Conclusions: Reduction of HNRNPU levels interfere
with differentiation at an early phase of neuronalcommitment. Our study will elucidate the molecular
mechanisms that could underlie the NDDs associated with
HNRNPU mutations and 1q44 deletions.
F. Mastropasqua: None. I. Rabkina: None. M. Becker:
None. B. Anderlid: None. S. Bölte: None. A. Falk: None.
K. Tammimies: None.
P09.059B
Heterozygous mutations of HTRA1 and cerebral small
vessel diseases, a diagnostic challenge
T. Coste
1, D. Hervé2, M. Miné1, F. Marchelli1,
E. Tournier-Lasserve1
1Service de Génétique Moléculaire Neurovasculaire, Paris,
France,2Service de Neurologie, Paris, France
Heterozygous HTRA1 missense mutations have recently
been involved in an autosomal dominant Cerebral Small
Vessel Disease (cSVD). Functional in vitro analysis has
been performed for a very limited number of these variants,suggesting a probable dominant negative effect. The aim of
this study was to investigate the implication of HTRA1
heterozygous mutations in cSVD in a large consecutiveseries of patients. Samples from 2135 unrelated adult
patients were referred consecutively from 2016 to 2018 in
the neurovascular genetics department of Lariboisièrehospital for targeted sequencing of known cSVD genes,
including HTRA1 . Heterozygous HTRA1 missense variants
with a prevalence < 1/10 000 in polymorphism databasesand predicted to be pathogenic by at least 2 in silico
prediction softwares were retained. Among these 2135
patients, 35 patients (1.6%) showed a heterozygouscandidate missense variation. Only 7 of the detected
variations were previously described (and 5 functionally
tested). 16 of them predicted as being pathogenic have notyet been reported. Frequencies of candidate missense in our
series and control samples from GnomAD are signi ﬁcantly
different (p =6.4E-7, OR: 1.8-3.7), con ﬁrming the involve-
ment of HTRA1 in cSVD pathogenesis. Co-segregation of
these variants in affected relatives is ongoing. However,
additional functional screening of these variants, includingresidual htra1 enzyme activity measurement and trimeriza-
tion analysis are now required to establish or in ﬁrm their
pathogenicity, raising a strong challenge in a diagnosiscontext.
T. Coste: None. D. Hervé: None. M. Miné: None. F.
Marchelli: None. E. Tournier-Lasserve: None.
P09.060C
Genetic epidemiology analysis of Huntington andHuntington like disease among Hungarian patientsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1437A. Gal, K. Bathori, V. S. Farkas, F. Szabo, A. Suveges,
H. Zeke, Z. Grosz, M. J. Molnar
Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders,
Semmelweis Universitiy, Budapest, Hungary, Budapest,
Hungary
Introduction: Huntington and Huntington-like diseases are
progressive neurodegenerative disorders which are char-acterized by uncontrolled movements (chorea), emotional
problems, and loss of thinking ability. The classical
Huntington chorea is associated with the abnormaltrinucleotide (CAG) repeat expansion in the huntingtin
(HTT) gene. In the remaining cases, mutations of the
C9ORF72 hexanucleotide- (G
4C2),TBP (TATA box-
binding protein) trinucleotide (CAG/CAA) repeat and prion
protein ( PRNP ) genes mutations may also cause a
Huntington-like clinical phenotype. Aims: In this study
the genetic background of chorea-like movement distur-
bances were investigated among our Hungarian cohort.
Patients and Methods: In 375 (mean age 45.2 years)
patients with choreiform movement disorder, the HTT,
C9ORF72, TBP repeats and PRNP mutations were
analysed.
Results: The expanded HTT allele (>40 CAG repeat)
repeat expansion were found in 335 cases. The mean of the
expanded repeat numbers is 44.6. Abnormal C9ORF72
hexanucleotide repeats were detected in 3 cases (one patient
has full mutation (>30 G 4C2repeat) and two others have
intermedier-range (24-29 G 4C2repeat) hexanucleotide
repeat expansions). The TBP repeat disease was determined
in one patient, and in further one case a PRNP octa-
nuclteotide in frame deletion was detected.
Discussion: The rate of occurrence of HTT gene abnor-
mal trinucleotide expansion in our investigated cohorts is
90%. The remaining 10% of patients are classi ﬁed as
Huntington-like clinical phenotypes. In this group, the
C9ORF72 hexanucleotide gene was detected in 7.5%, while
in the TBP and PRNP mutations were present in 2.5-2.5%.This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6 to V.
A-V. grant.
A. Gal: None. K. Bathori: None. V.S. Farkas: None. F.
Szabo: None. A. Suveges: None. H. Zeke: None. Z.
Grosz: None. M.J. Molnar: None.
P09.061D
A novel repeat-primed PCR assay to detect the full
range of trinucleotide CAG repeats in Huntingtin gene(HTT)
F. Consoli
1, A. Morella1, A. Onori1,M .D ’Asdia1,
B. D’Alessio2, A. De Luca1, F. Squitieri31Molecular Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,
2Fondazione Lega Italiana Ricerca Huntington (LIRH) e
malattie correlate, Rome, Italy,3Huntington and Rare
Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
Accurate determination of the CAG repeat number is crucial
in Huntington's disease (HD) to either con ﬁrm the diagnosis
in symptomatic patients or to predict the genetic condition
in subjects at risk of HD, including prenatal testing. We
evaluated a novel tripled repeat primed PCR-basedtechnology for estimation of HTT CAG repeats in 46 HD
reference DNA samples, including 34 samples carrying
alleles with full penetrance (> 40 CAGs). Of the sampleswith full penetrance alleles, 20 harbored alleles larger than
60 CAG repeats, generally seen in subjects with juvenile
onset HD < 20 years and in the rarest pediatric variant.Analyzed samples had been previously tested using either
ﬂurescent repeat- ﬂanking PCR or tripled repeat primed PCR
method, or both. All samples showed full concordance withthe previously veri ﬁed allele sizes. Identical repeat size or
sizing errors within ±1 CAG were obtained for alleles ≤42
CAG repeats, whereas sizing errors within ±3 were obtainedfor alleles > 43 CAG repeats, conforming to established
guidelines. The assay was able to accurately size 18 samples
with very large alleles comprised between 60 and 100 CAGrepeats, and to detect two exceptionally large alleles with
more than 200 CAG repeats. This method provides a rapid,
sensitive and reliable method to accurately genotype theHTT CAG repeat stretch, and extends the detection limit of
large expanded alleles to over 200 CAG repeats, thus
providing a comprehensive molecular diagnostic evaluationof all HD samples, including those pediatric forms carrying
extremely large, hard to detect, alleles.
F. Consoli: None. A. Morella: None. A. Onori: None.
M. D ’Asdia: None. B. D ’Alessio: None. A. De Luca:
None. F. Squitieri: None.
P09.062A
Psychological reactions when coping with predictive
genetic testing for Huntington ’s disease: A qualitative
study
C. von der Lippe
1, K. H. Tillerås1, S. H. Kjølaas1,
E. Dramstad2, K. B. Feragen1
1Centre for Rare Disorders, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway,2Dep. of Medical Genetics,
Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Introduction: Huntington ’s disease (HD) is an autosomal
dominant disease characterized by progressive weakening1438of the cognitive, psychological and motoric systems. HD
may have a severe impact on family dynamics, and growing
up with a parent with HD may be challenging. Adult
individuals at risk can get predictive genetic testing.
Materials and Methods: We used an explorative quali-
tative study design and interviewed 36 persons who cur-rently grow up or grew up with a parent with HD, and
analyzed the interviews using thematic analysis.
Results: Participants described several challenges related
to the decision regarding predictive testing. Some wanted to
enjoy life without knowing. Others lacked motivation for
getting an education and limited their involvement inromantic relationships, even though they did not know
whether they had the mutation or not. Participants described
ineffective coping mechanisms and a search for symptomsbefore predictive testing, continuing after they had tested
positive for the mutation. Others, positive for the mutation,
described a relief of ﬁnally having the knowledge, and an
increased understanding of affected family members. Par-
ticipants who had tested negative for the mutation were
surprised by ambivalent feelings, and described a need forfollow-up after they had received a negative test result.
Conclusion: Predictive testing for HD is a demanding
process. Individuals who grow up in families affected byHD, worry about the potential genetic risk for themselves
and their siblings. The current study indicates that indivi-
duals may need long-term follow-up from the healthcaresystem whether they test positive or negative for the
mutation.
C. von der Lippe: None. K.H. Tillerås: None. S.H.
Kjølaas: None. E. Dramstad: None. K.B. Feragen: None.
P09.063B
The genetic background of hydrocephalus - candidate
gene analysis from +6,000 exomes
T. M. Munch
1,2, P. L. Hedley1,3, C. M. Hagen1,3,
M. Bækvad-Hansen1,3, J. Bybjerg-Grauholm1,3,
M. Melbye1, D. Hougaard1,3, M. Christiansen1,3,4
1Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark,
2Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,
3The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative
Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH), Aarhus, Denmark,
4University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Congenital hydrocephalus, a condition
characterised by relatively excessive intracranial cerebrosp-inal ﬂuid, is often considered to present neonatally.
However, in practise, most patients present during infancy
with slowly developing symptoms, or even later in life withsubtle or neglected symptoms. Despite being a relativelycommon congenital disorder (1.1/1000), the genetic aetiol-
ogy of hydrocephalus remains unclear.
Objectives: 1. Candidate gene analysis of 113 genes in
6,077 whole exome sequenced individuals (50 with
hydrocephalus)
2. Explore the cellular pathways involving the implicated
genes to understand better, how dysfunction of these genes
might lead to or in ﬂuence the expression of hydrocephalus.
Materials and Methods: This register-based cohort
study is a sub-study of the Lundbeck Foundation Initiative
for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH) and com-
bines data from The National Patient Registry, and TheDanish Neonatal Screening Biobank. Genetic variants
identi ﬁed in the candidate genes were ﬁltered based on
minor allele frequency (MAF) data. We removed variantswith MAF >2 x 10
-5in gnomAD or >5 x 10-3in controls.
Results: Forty-nine mutations were identi ﬁed in 31
genes. Interestingly, along with the known hydrocephalus-causing genes ( CCDC88C, MPDZ ) several of the genes
implicated are involved cilia formation and function
(CEP290, USP9X, SNX10, TMEM67 ) as well as cortico-
genesis and neuronal adhesion and migration ( CELSR2,
FLNA ).
Conclusions: The results of this study suggest that a high
proportion of Danish hydrocephalus patients have an
underlying genetic predisposition and the genes involved
affect pathways of importance for Cilia, corticogenesis aswell as neuronal adhesion and migration.
T.M. Munch: None. P.L. Hedley: None. C.M. Hagen:
None. M. Bækvad-Hansen: None. J. Bybjerg-Grauholm:
None. M. Melbye: None. D. Hougaard: None. M.
Christiansen: None.
P09.065D
Evaluation of targeted sequencing as the ﬁrst-tier
genetic test for intellectual disability and autismspectrum disorders diagnosis
M. Peña-Vilabelda, L. Rausell, M. Lázaro, S. Vidal,
M. Molero, L. Cabrera, M. J. García, C. Pérez, P. Cano,
E. Férriz, G. Cartagena, M. Bermejo, S. Santamaría,
C. Ruiz, J. García-Planells, M. García-Hoyos
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN), Valencia,
Spain
Identi ﬁcation of the genetic aetiology of intellectual
disability (ID) or autism spectrum disorders (ASDs)provides bene ﬁts, like speci ﬁc genetic counselling, more
accurate prognosis and specialized treatment. The world-
wide average prevalence of ASDs is 1 in 160 children and1-3% of ID. Due to the genetic heterogeneity of these
pathologies different genetic tests are available. Today,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1439chromosomal microarray is the ﬁrst-tier recommended
diagnostic test and provides a yield around 10-15% for ID
patients and around 9% for ASDs patients, depending on
the cohort. Our goal is to evaluate if the diagnostic yield
estimated by targeted sequencing in our cohorts of ID or
ASDs subjects is higher than that obtained by CGH array.We screened 701 in-house selected ID-related genes and
189 autism-related genes in a cohort of more than 100 and
60 patients, respectively. Libraries were prepared withdifferent capture kits and the Illumina NextSeq500 platform
was used to sequence targeted regions. Bioinformatic
analysis was performed with an in-house pipeline. Thediagnostic yield was 41% in the ID cohort and 20% in the
ASDs cohort. Variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance were
identi ﬁed in 50% of the ID patients and 72% of the autism
patients and negative results were obtained in 9% and 8% of
the ID and autism individuals, respectively. ID or autism-
related genes sequencing provide higher diagnostic yieldsthan CGH array. Furthermore, copy number variants
evaluation could be performed simultaneously with our
pipeline. For this reason, we proposed targeted sequencingas the ﬁrst-tier genetic test for ID and autism diagnosis.
M. Peña-Vilabelda: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). L.
Rausell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). M. Lázaro:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de
Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). S. Vidal: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Gen-
ómica (IMEGEN). M. Molero: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica
(IMEGEN). L. Cabrera: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IME-
GEN). M.J. García: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). C.
Pérez: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). P. Cano: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de
Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). E. Férriz: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina
Genómica (IMEGEN). G. Cartagena: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica
(IMEGEN). M. Bermejo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IME-
GEN). S. Santamaría: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN).
C.
Ruiz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). J. García-
Planells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). M. García-
Hoyos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN).P09.066A
Development of a LYST deﬁcient glutamatergic
neuronal model of Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
J. Serra-Vinardell1, D. Chauss2, K. Keyvanfar3,
W. J. Introne1, M. E. Ward4, W. A. Gahl1,5,M .C .V .
Malicdan1,5
1Section of Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States,
2Section of Immunoregulation, Kidney Diseases Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
United States,3Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, United States,4National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health,Bethesda, MD, United States,
5National Institutes of Health
Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Of ﬁce of
the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,United States
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome (CHS) is an autosomal reces-
sive disorder caused by biallelic mutations in the lysosomal
trafﬁcking regulator gene ( LYST ) that results to impaired
function of lysosome and lysosome-related organelles. CHSis characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, predisposition
to bleeding, immunode ﬁciency and progressive neurologi-
cal dysfunction. Bone marrow transplantation has been asymptomatic treatment for the immune defects but does not
alter the course of the relentless neurodegeneration. To date,
several animal models of CHS have been identi ﬁed, but
none of them consistently recapitulate the neurological
phenotype seen in patients. Additionally, the role of LYST
in lysosome biology is still is poorly understood and couldbe cell-dependent. For these reasons, we aim to investigate
the function of LYST in a neuronal cell model and to
identify targets for therapy. We used clustered regularlyinterspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and
CRISPR interference technologies to knock-out or knock-
down the expression of endogenous LYST in induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), which were genetically
engineered to facilitate an inducible expression of Neuro-
genin 2. With this approach, we have established aglutamatergic neuronal CHS model de ﬁcient for LYST
expression, to analyze the localization, size and function of
lysosomes in neurons. Using this technique, we were able togenerate a homogenous population of neuronal cells, which
are essential for global proteome, transcriptome and
metabolome studies not only of CHS, but also for otherMendelian loss-of-function neurogenetic diseases.1440J. Serra-Vinardell: None. D. Chauss: None. K. Key-
vanfar: None. W.J. Introne: None. M.E. Ward: None.
W.A. Gahl: None. M.C.V. Malicdan: None.
P09.067B
Gene-phenotype correlation of myoclonic progressiveepilepsy type 3
A. Borovikov
1, A. Sharkov2, I. Akimova1, S. Michailova3,
A. Filatova1, A. Marakhonov4, E. Dadali1, M. Skoblov1
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics
at the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation,3Russian
Children's Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation,
4Far East Federal University, Vladivostok, Russian
Federation
Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PME) are a group of
clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders charac-terized by myoclonus, seizures, and neurological deteriora-
tion. PME type 3 is an autosomal recessive disease and is
associated with pathogenic variants in the gene KCTD7 thatencode potassium channel tetramerization domain-
containing protein 7. Disruption of the function of this
gene can lead to a change in the potassium ion current in theneurons of the brain. We investigate 9 patients with an
average age of debut of the ﬁrst attacks between 1 and 2
years of life and try to establish gene phenotype correlation.Theﬁrst symptoms started after an episode of febrile fever:
sudden falls without loss of consciousness, and with
episodes of fading. All patients had the drug-resistantgeneralized myoclonic seizures. MRI of the brain, long-
term video EEG monitoring, examination by various
clinical specialists were performed for each patient. NGSsequencing revealed seven previously undescribed non-
synonymous variants and one previously undescribed
dinucleotide frame shift deletion in the last exon. Fourchromosomal microarray analysis were performed for
patients with large deletions suspected by NGS affecting
the locus of the KCTD7 gene. Segregation analysis bySanger sequencing were performed for all families and
conﬁrmed genotypes. Most of known likely pathogenic or
pathogenic variants are located in BTB/POZ domain.However, we observed several variants located outside of
this domain. It is necessary to conduct a functional analysis
to con ﬁrm the pathogenic effect of the substitutions on the
protein function.
A. Borovikov: None. A. Sharkov: None. I. Akimova:
None. S. Michailova: None. A. Filatova: None. A. Mar-
akhonov: None. E. Dadali: None. M. Skoblov: None.P09.068C
Genome wide association study for late-onset
Alzheimer's disease in Japanese population
K. Ozaki, R. Mitsumori, S. Niida, D. Shigemizu
National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu,
Japan
By 2025, the number of people living with dementia in
Japan is expected to increase to 7 million. Most common
form of dementia is late-onset Alzheimer ’s disease
(LOAD). The pathogenesis of LOAD is result from
interactions among multiple environmental and genetic
factors which consist of considerable hereditary compo-nents. Recent large scale genome wide association studies
(GWAS) in Caucasian have revealed more than 30 genetic
loci for LOAD susceptibility. In contrast, GWAS for Asiangroups including Japanese are relatively modest, and have
poor reproducibility of associations for identi ﬁed loci in
Caucasian due to possible difference of genetic architectureamong ethnicity in addition to lack of study power. In this
context, we launched GWAS using an ethnicity speci ﬁc
SNP array, Japonica. To date, we obtained the genotypedata for approximately 7,000 Japanese individuals (includ-
ing 2,400 LOAD, 1,400 other dementia and 3,200 controls)
and imputed the data with a Japanese reference panel(ToMMo 3.5KJ) constructed using whole genome
sequences from 3,500 Japanese. We tentatively conducted
a GWAS using the imputed genotype data (~10,000,000SNPs) for approximately 2,400 LOAD cases and 3,200
controls. We combined this GWAS result and the data of
another Japanese GWAS reported elsewhere for meta-analysis (a total of 8,000 individuals), and found GWAS
signiﬁcance for the APOE and SORL1 loci and a novel
locus with LOAD. We further identi ﬁed several new
candidate susceptible loci for LOAD with suggestive
signiﬁcance. We also found convincing associations for
several known AD loci, such as CLU ,PICALM andABCA7
discovered in Caucasian population.
K. Ozaki: None.
R. Mitsumori: None. S. Niida: None.
D. Shigemizu: None.
P09.069D
Leukocyte telomere length in Huntington's Disease. Astudy in fully penetrant and reduced penetrant alleles
M. Peconi
1, D. Scarabino2, E. Mantuano1, M. Frontali1,
M. Morello3, A. Copponi4, R. M. Corbo5, L. Veneziano1
1Institute of Translational Pharmacology. National
Research Council of Italy, Rome, Italy,2Institute of
Molecular Biology and Pathology. National ResearchAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1441Council of Italy, Rome, Italy,3Clinical Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology. Dpt of Experimental Medicine and
Surgery. Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy,4Clinical
Biochemistry. Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy,5Dpt of
Biology and Biothechnology. La Sapenza University, Rome,
Italy
Introduction: Huntington ’s Disease (HD), an autosomal
dominant neurodegenerative disease, is caused by anexpanded CAG repeat in the ﬁrst exon of HTT gene. The
disease is fully penetrant in individuals with 40 or more
CAG repeats, and has reduced penetrance in the range of36-39 repeats. Overall the age at onset, usually at midlife,
inversely correlates with the number of CAG repeats, and
severity of symptoms vary widely between individuals. Inthe present study, we investigated the relationship between
Leukocyte Telomere Length (LTL) and disease progression.
Methods: LTL (T/S ratio) was measured in manifest HD
patients (HD, n =62) and pre-manifest HD patients (pre-HD,
n=38) with fully penetrant alleles, in subjects with reduced
penetrant alleles (rp-HD, n =23), and age-matched controls
(n=76).
Results: Mean LTL values of controls, pre-HD and HD
patients were signi ﬁcantly different (p< 0.0001), in the
order: HD (0.58 ± 0.07) <pre-HD (0.78 ± 0.16) <controls
(0.92 ± 0.09). Mean LTL values of rp-HD subjects (0.82±
0.16) were signi ﬁcantly lower than controls (p =0.003), but
similar to pre-HD patients. An inverse relationship between
mean LTL and CAG repeat number was found in the pre-
HD (p=0.03).
Conclusion: In pre-HD patients, LTL shorten gradually
according to advancing age and CAG number, up to the low
values observed in HD patients. A similar LTL shorteningseems to be present in rp-HD, but at more advanced age.
The possible use of LTL as biomarker of disease progres-
sion is discussed.
Supported by: grant EHDN 0942 to LV; grants 2017 La
Sapienza University to RMC
M. Peconi: None. D. Scarabino: None. E. Mantuano:
None. M. Frontali: None. M. Morello: None. A. Copponi:
None. R.M. Corbo: None. L. Veneziano: None.
P09.070A
Novel variants causing inherited leukodystrophies in
Sudanese families
M. Amin
1, I. Dorboz2, I. Mohamed3, A. Hamad3,
M. Elseed3, A. Yahia3, A. Babai3, E. Badi3, M. Hassan3,
E. Emad3, S. Samaan2, L. Elsayed3, A. Ahmed3,
O. Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy1,2,41University Paris Diderot, Paris, France,2INSERM U1141,
Paris, France,3University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan,
4Hospital Robert Debre, Paris, France
Background: Leukodystrophies are a group of inherited
disorders primarily affecting the white matter of the CNS.There are currently 30 recognized forms of leukodystro-
phies with distinct clinical, biochemical and radiological
characteristics. However, the genetics of these classicalforms of leukodystrophies remain unknown in many parts
of the world especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Methods: In this study, we selected 5 consanguineous
leukodystrophic families from Sudan using clinical and
MRI recognition pattern. Genomic DNA was extracted and
screened for mutations using NGS panel testing 153 leu-kodystrophies and leucoencephalopathies causing genes
(NextSeq500 Illumina).
Results: Three novel homozygous variants were dis-
covered: one (c.380G>C, p.Arg127Pro) in PSAP gene
causing MLD, and two (c.831_838DUPATATCTGT, p.
Ser280Tyrfs*8 and c.971T>G, p.Ile324Ser) in MLC1 gene
in the two families with MLC. The segregation pattern was
consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. The
pathogenicity of these variants was predicted usingbioinformatics tools.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst study to underlie the genetics
of leukodystrophies in Sudan. Analysis of additionalfamilies are in progress in order to establish the whole
spectrum of genetic variations causing inherited leukody-
strophies in Sudanese families.
M. Amin: None. I. Dorboz: None. I. Mohamed: None.
A. Hamad: None. M. Elseed: None. A. Yahia: None. A.
Babai: None. E. Badi: None. M. Hassan: None. E. Emad:
None. S. Samaan: None. L. Elsayed: None. A. Ahmed:
None. O. Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy: None.
P09.071B
Two associated mutations in the glutamyl-prolyl and
isoleucyl -tRNA synthetases in patients with a fatalleukodystrophy
I. DORBOZ
1, K. Boussaid2, F. Renaldo2, A. Odoul1,
M. Abuawad1, S. Samaan2, E. Eymard-Pierre3,
M. Elmaleh- Bergès2, O. Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy2,1
1INSERM, Paris, France,2CHU APHP Robert-Debré,
Paris, France,3CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-
Ferrand, France
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) have been implicated
in leukodystrophies. We report a consanguineous familywith two affected children. Both children presented a
neurodegenerative disorder with a motor degradation and1442nystagmus after 15 months, spastic quadriplegia after 3y
and epilepsia after 7y leading to death at respectively 8 and
10y of age. MRI demonstrated a progressive atrophy of the
spinal cord, the optic nerve, the corpus callosum and the
cortex associated with a demyelinating aspect of the
sustentorial periventricular WM. Axonal peripheral neuro-pathy was observed in both patients. Biochemichal analysis
were negative
Homozygosity mapping combined to whole-exome
sequencing revealed two homozygous mutations in two
ARSs. One mutation in EPRS (c.3344C>T/p.Pro1115Leu) a
bifunctional aminoacyl tRNA synthetase that catalyzes theaminoacylation of both glutamic acid and proline tRNA
species, recently involved in a hypomyelinating Leukody-
strophy and a second mutation in IARS2 encodes a mito-
chondrial isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase reported to cause
CAGSSS that is characterised by cataracts, growth hormone
deﬁciency, sensory neuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss,
and skeletal dysplasia. Co-segregation analysis con ﬁrmed
that the two mutations were inherited from heterozygous
carrier parents. In silico analysis predicted these variation tobe deleterious. The phenotype of our patients were more
severe than the reported patient with the same mutation in
ERPS gene. Our patients had no cataract or dysplasia or
growth hormone de ﬁciency reported in IARS2 patient. The
phenotype may be the result of the mutation of the two
genes. Further analysis are required to gain a better under-standing of the interaction or not of the two ARSs.
I. Dorboz: None. K. Boussaid: None. F. Renaldo:
None. A. Odoul: None. M. Abuawad: None. S. Samaan:
None. E. Eymard-Pierre: None. M. Elmaleh- Bergès:
None. O. Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy: None.
P09.072
CKIF1A variants are a frequent cause of autosomal
dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia
E. Kamsteeg
1, M. Pennings1, M. Schouten1, R. Meyer1,
J. van Gaalen1, S. T. de Bot2, M. Kriek2, C. G. J. Saris1,
L. H. van den Berg3, M. A. van Es3, D. M. H. Zuidgeest4,
M. W. Elting5, J. M. van de Kamp5, K. Y. van
Spaendonck-Zwarts5, C. de Die-Smulders6,
E. H. Brilstra3, C. C. Verschuuren7, B. B. A. de Vries1,
J. Bruijn8, K. Sofou9, B. P. van de Warrenburg1
1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands,3Utrecht University Medical Centre, Utrecht,
Netherlands,4Ikazia Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
5Amsterdam University Medical Centre, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,6Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, Netherlands,7Groningen University Medical
Centre, Groningen, Netherlands,8Skaraborg Hospital,Skövde, Sweden,9The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital,
Gotenborg, Sweden
Background: Pathogenic variants in the KIF1A gene have
been reported in autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 30,
autosomal recessive hereditary sensory neuropathy, andautosomal ( de novo ) dominant mental retardation type 9.
More recently, variants in KIF1A have also been described
in a few cases with autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia.
Methods: Clinical exome sequencing data of 315 unre-
lated patients with mostly ‘pure’spastic paraplegia were
analysed for KIF1A variants. Clinical characteristics of
patients with KIF1A variants were analysed, segregation
analyses were performed, and types of variants were
compared.
Results: In 21 patients we identi ﬁed 19 different KIF1A
variants. Patients and affected family members showed a
slowly progressive, mostly pure form of spastic paraplegia,but with a highly variable disease onset (0-57 years). Seg-
regation analyses showed a de novo occurrence in ﬁve
cases, and a dominant inheritance pattern in eight families.The motor domain of KIF1A seems to be the hotspot for
pathogenic variants in autosomal dominant spastic para-
plegia, similar to mental retardation type 9 and recessivespastic paraplegia type 30. Unlike these allelic disorders,
however, dominant spastic paraplegia was also caused by
loss-of-function variants outside this domain in six families.Three missense variants were identi ﬁed outside the motor
domain and need further characterization.
Conclusions: KIF1A variants are a frequent cause of
autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia in our cohort (5-
7%), with a high de novo rate. The identi ﬁcation of KIF1A
loss-of-function variants suggests haploinsuf ﬁciency as a
possible mechanism in autosomal dominant spastic
paraplegia.
E. Kamsteeg: None. M. Pennings: None. M. Schouten:
None. R. Meyer: None. J. van Gaalen: None. S.T. de Bot:
None. M. Kriek: None. C.G.J. Saris: None. L.H. van den
Berg: None. M.A. van Es: None. D.M.H. Zuidgeest:
None. M.W. Elting: None. J.M. van de Kamp: None. K.
Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts: None. C. de Die-Smulders:
None. E.H. Brilstra: None. C.C. Verschuuren: None. B.
B.A. de Vries: None. J. Bruijn: None. K. Sofou: None. B.
P. van de Warrenburg: None.
P09.073D
Obesity-related genes and the atypical symptoms of
major depressive disorder: ﬁndings from two large
European epidemiological studies
G. Pistis1, Y. Milaneschi2, D. I. Boomsma3, E. Castelao1,
M. Gholam-Rezaee1, Z. Kutalik4,5, A. M. Lasserre1,
B. W. J. H. Penninx2, M. Preisig1, C. L. Vandeleur1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 14431Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,2Department of
Psychiatry, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit and GGZ
inGeest, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Netherlands Twin
Register, Dept Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,4University Institute for Social
and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital,
Lausanne, Switzerland,5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland
Introduction: Disentangling the heterogeneity of depres-
sion by subtyping according to clinical manifestations hasbeen shown to be a pertinent approach to gain more insight
into relationships with obesity. Indeed, previous research
suggests that only the atypical MDD subtype, characterizedbyﬁve symptoms (increased appetite, hypersomnia, mood
reactivity, leaden paralysis and interpersonal rejection
sensitivity), is associated with obesity. We investigatedwhether the association between atypical MDD and genetic
variants related to obesity is accounted for by the appetite
criterion alone or whether the other atypical criteria alsocontribute to this association.
Materials and Methods: Two studies, CoLaus|PsyCo-
Laus (Switzerland) and NESDA|NTR (Netherlands), thatassessed MDD subtypes and symptoms, were meta-
analysed to evaluate the associations between atypical
MDD symptoms (386 and 179 participants, respectively)with the rs9939609 FTO polymorphism and the polygenic
risk score (PRS) from 76 loci signi ﬁcantly associated with
Body Mass Index according to a recent GWAS meta-analysis.
Results: Our meta-analysis shows positive associations
between the symptom increased appetite and both the FTOvariant and the PRS (odds ratio (OR) =1.37; 95% con-
ﬁdence interval (CI) =1.17-1.62, P=1.33x10
-04and
OR=1.15, 95%CI =1.03-1.29, P=0.014, respectively), a
negative association between the FTO and the symptom
leaden paralysis (OR =0.82, 95%CI =0.72-0.93, P=0.003)
and a negative association between the PRS and thesymptom rejection sensitivity (OR =0.92, 95%CI =0.85-
0.99, P=0.036).
Conclusions: The association between increased appetite
and obesity-related genetic variants drives the association
between these variants and the atypical subtype, suggesting
that other genes could be involved in the regulation of theother atypical symptoms, re ﬂecting the genetic hetero-
geneity of MDD.
G. Pistis: None. Y. Milaneschi: None. D.I. Boomsma:
None. E. Castelao: None. M. Gholam-Rezaee: None. Z.
Kutalik: None. A.M. Lasserre: None. B.W.J.H. Penninx:
None. M. Preisig: None. C.L. Vandeleur: None.P09.074A
Entire structure of MECP2 cDNA expressed in a patient
with Rett syndrome bearing a large deletion between the
exon 4 of MECP2 and the upstream region of IRAK
K. Yanagi
1, M. Minatogawa1, M. Takeshita1, K. Satou1,
N. Okamoto2, Y. Matsubara1, T. Kaname1
1National Center for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan,2Osaka Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital,
Osaka, Japan
Methyl-CpG- binding protein 2 (MECP2) is a responsible
gene for Rett syndrome (RTT, OMIM#312750) that is
inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Pathogenicvariant of MECP2 are found in approximately 80% of
patients with RTT. Partial and whole-gene deletions are
accounting for 7.3% in all variants observed. We encoun-tered a patient of RTT with large deletion of MECP2 .
A patient is 7-year-old girl born to non-consanguineous
parents at 40 weeks with birth weight of 2,484, height of 47cm and head circumstance of 31.5 cm. Amniotic ﬂuid
karyotyping showed 46,XX. She was clinically suspected
RTT based on neurodevelopmental disorder characterizedby psychomotor regression with the development of dis-
tinctive hand stereotypies. However, no pathogenic variant
was detected in the MECP2 gene by direct-sequencing
and MLPA.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed. Map-
ping images of WES suggested a heterozygous large dele-tion between the exon 4 of MECP2 and upstream region of
IRAK in the patient. The deletion was veri ﬁed by long-range
PCR and following sequencing. Transcripts of MECP2
were con ﬁrmed by 3 ’RACE analysis. The deletion was
occurred in father ’s allele. A novel transcript derived from
the deleted allele consisted of exon 3 and alternativelyspliced regions of exon 4 under GT-AT rule. Coding length
was expected 582 bp (194 amino acid). The translated
product lacked two AT-hook domains, which are essentialfor DNA binding. Brain speci ﬁc polyadenylation signal was
found 17 bp upstream of poly A site. This work was sup-
ported by grants from the AMED.
K. Yanagi: None. M. Minatogawa: None. M. Take-
shita: None. K. Satou: None. N. Okamoto: None. Y.
Matsubara: None. T. Kaname: None.
P09.075B
Molecular characterization of Spanish MECP2
duplication syndrome patients: more IRAK1 than we
thought1444L. Blasco1, S. Vidal1, A. Pascual-Alonso1, E. Gean2,
M. O'Callaghan2, A. Martínez2, A. Castells3, C. Xiol1,
N. Brandi4, P. Pacheco4, V. Català5, M. del Campo6,
E. Guillén7, P. Lapunzina8, E. Lloveras9, D. Ortigoza2,
H. Maortua10, F. Martínez11, A. Mesas12, J. Nevado8,
M. Obón13, C. Orellana11, A. Plaja14, M. Roselló11,
M. Tejada10, F. Santos8, M. Sánchez7, J. Fernández15,
E. Tizzano16, S. Alcántara3, J. Armstrong4
1Sant Joan de Déu research foundation, Barcelona, Spain,
2Unidad de Consejo Genético, Hospital Universitario San
Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain,3Departament de
Patologia i Terapèutica Experimental, Campus de
Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,
4Servicio de Medicina Genètica i Molecular, Hospital
Universitario San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain,5Unitad
de genética médica i biologia celular, Universidad
Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6Pediatrics,
Genetic Epidemiology, Hospital Vall d'Hebrón, Barcelona,
Spain,7Unidad de Genética, Hospital Virgen de la
Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,8Instituto de Genética Médica y
Molecular, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,9Departamento de
genètica, LABCO-Iberia, Barcelona, Spain,10Laboratorio
de Genética Molecular, Servicio de Genética, Hospital
Universitario de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain,11Unidad de
genètica, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe,Valencia, Spain,
12Gastroenterologia, Hospital Xanit,
Málaga, Spain,13Area de Genètica clínica i Consell
Genètic, Laboratoris ICS, Girona, Spain,14Institut de
Recerca (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,
15Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain,
16Area Genética Clínica y Molecular, Hospital Universitari
Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: MECP2 duplication syndrome
(OMIM#300260) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental dis-
order characterized by severe to profound intellectualdisability, early infantile hypotonia, autistic traits, seizures
and recurrent respiratory infections. Duplication could be de
novo or inherited from an asymptomatic carrier mother. We
have molecularly characterized 22 Spanish children with
MECP2 duplication syndrome and their carrier mothers.
Materials and Methods: Clinical characterization was
done using a checklist designed for the project. Duplications
were detected by MLPA and/or CGH-array and con ﬁrmed
by Real-Time qPCR. Localization of the duplication wasstudied by FISH. MECP2 expression was checked by RT-
qPCR in blood cells and skin ﬁbroblast cells when avail-
able. We performed XCI assay to affected females andcarrier mothers.Results: We have noticed that in the minimum duplicated
region (MDR) of all our patients there are MECP2 and
IRAK1 genes and both are overexpressed. The cohort was
classi ﬁed according to different chromosomal localizations
of the MDR: tandem in ChrXq28, ChrXp and ChrY. The
clinical severity seems to be related to the position of theduplication, where the insertion in ChrY leads to the most
severe phenotype.
Conclusions: Due to the fact that IRAK1 is present in all
the duplications we hypothesize that it must be implicated
in the disorder. We encourage the study of the pathways in
which IRAK1 participates. Besides, the point of insertion of
the duplication seems to be crucial for the severity of the
patient, as well as the genes involved in each rearrange-
ment. Grants: Miradas que Hablan-Duplicación MECP2
parents' association.
L. Blasco: None. S. Vidal: None. A. Pascual-Alonso:
None. E. Gean: None. M. O'Callaghan: None. A.
Martínez: None. A. Castells: None. C. Xiol: None. N.
Brandi: None. P. Pacheco: None. V. Català: None. M. del
Campo: None. E. Guillén: None. P. Lapunzina: None. E.
Lloveras: None. D. Ortigoza: None. H. Maortua: None.
F. Martínez: None. A. Mesas: None. J. Nevado: None. M.
Obón: None.
C. Orellana: None. A. Plaja: None. M.
Roselló: None. M. Tejada: None. F. Santos: None. M.
Sánchez: None. J. Fernández: None. E. Tizzano: None.
S. Alcántara: None. J. Armstrong: None.
P09.077D
Population incidence of congenital microcephaly in theCzech Republic
N. Friedova
1,2, A. Sipek Jr1,3, V. Gregor3,4, A. Sipek
Sr3,4,5,6, J. Klaschka7,8, M. Maly7,9
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department of Internal Medicine, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and Thomayer Hospital,Prague, Czech Republic,
3Department of Medical Genetics,
Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,4Department
of Medical Genetics, Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, CzechRepublic,
5Institute of Medical Genetics, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
6GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic,7Institute of Computer
Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech
Republic,8Institute of Biophysics and Informatics, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, CzechRepublic,
9National Institute of Public Health, Prague,
Czech Republic
Introduction: Microcephaly is de ﬁned as a congenital
anomaly of the central nervous system which isAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1445characterized by the decreased head circumference. The
exact de ﬁnition may be slightly different for different
countries, in the Czech Republic the microcephaly is
deﬁned as the head circumference under the 3rdpercentile
for speci ﬁc age and sex of the particular individual.
Methods: We present a retrospective epidemiological
study of the incidence of microcephaly (ICD-10 code Q02)
in the livebirths and in the prenatally diagnosed cases in the
Czech Republic (time period 1994-2015). The data wereobtained from the National Registry of Congenital
Anomalies. During the selected time period the registry
included only the cases of congenital anomalies in childrenunder 15 years of age. Surveillance program is
population based.
Results: There were 2 140 009 livebirths in the Czech
Republic during 1994-2015 time period. The average inci-
dence of microcephaly was 1.07 per 10 000 of livebirths
(highest was 1.72 in 2002 and lowest was 0.33 in 1998).The anomaly was more common amongst girls - F/M ratio
was 1.32/1.0. Only few cases of microcephaly were diag-
nosed prenatally (average incidence in prenatal diagnostics0.12 per 10 000).
Discussion: The overall incidence of microcephaly in the
Czech Republic is low - compared to the data from otherpopulation based registries. We believe, that the clinicians
tend to report only severe cases of congenital microcephaly
with neurological symptoms.
Acknowledgements: The study is supported by the
Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV
17-29622A
N. Friedova: None. A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV
17-29622A. V. Gregor: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; Ministry of
Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A.
A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Ministry of Health of
the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J.
Klaschka: None. M. Maly: None.
P09.078A
Application of genomic tools in understanding the
etiologies of microcephaly
S. Masih, M. Amita, A. Dwivedi, D. Saxena, K. Mandal,
S. R. Phadke
Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
Lucknow, IndiaIntroduction: Microcephaly is a genetically heterogenous
condition which may be an isolated trait or in combination
with other major malformations. The molecular diagnosis
remains unknown in about 40% cases.
Materials and Methods: Patients with microcephaly
with unknown etiology based on preliminary evaluation
were enrolled. CMA was done using Affymetrix 750K.
Where no pathogenic CNVs were identi ﬁed, WES
was done.
Results: Out of total 51 patients, CMA was done in 34
patients. Pathogenic/likely pathogenic CNVs were identi-ﬁed in 6 cases while candidate genes in ROH was identi ﬁed
in 4 cases. WES was done in 32 patients (12 con-
sanguineous). Pathogenic/likely pathogenic SNVs wereidenti ﬁed in 14 patients. Biallelic variations were identi ﬁed
inCIT, ANKLE2, ORC1, RNASEH2A, ASPM, PEX7,
CENPF, PCNT, AIMP2 and RNU4ATAC . Siblings with
likely pathogenic variation in CENPF had severe short
stature (-3.5SD) and microcephaly (-8SD) without oph-
thalmological abnormalities as reported in cases ofStromme syndrome suggesting that CENPF mutation can
result in phenotypes of isolated microcephaly. Previously
reported heterozygous pathogenic variations were identi ﬁed
in 3 patients (heterozygous in
MECP2 and TUBA1A and
hemizygous deletion in PQBP1 ). One patient showed
double heterozygous likely pathogenic variations inMCPH1 and ASPM inherited from asymptomatic parents
indicating the possibility of digenic inheritance.
Conclusions: Genomic techniques gave diagnostic yield
of 39% [20 out of 51]. The study identi ﬁed 8 novel likely
pathogenic SNVs and 4 likely pathogenic CNVs and
expanded the phenotypic spectrum of CENPF . Pathogenic
variations in X linked genes were identi ﬁed in 2 cases; one
with multiple affected family members. (ICMR: 63/8/2010-
BMS)
S. Masih: None. M. Amita: None. A. Dwivedi: None. D.
Saxena: None. K. Mandal: None. S.R. Phadke: None.
P09.079B
Genomic and phenotypic delineation of congenital
microcephaly
A. M. Alhashem
1,2,3, F. Alkuraya1,2, R. Shaheen3
1Prince sultan military and medical city, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3King
Faisal Specialist Hospital & research Center, Riyadh,Saudi Arabia
Background: Congenital microcephaly (CM) is an impor-
tant birth defect with long term neurological sequelae. We1446aimed to perform detailed phenotypic and genomic analysis
of patients with Mendelian forms of CM.
Methods: Clinical phenotyping, targeted or exome
sequencing, and autozygome analysis.
Results: We describe 150 patients (104 families) with 56
Mendelian forms of CM. Our data show little overlap withthe genetic causes of postnatal microcephaly. We also show
that a broad de ﬁnition of primary microcephaly —as an
autosomal recessive form of nonsyndromic CM with severepostnatal deceleration of occipitofrontal circumference —is
highly sensitive but has a limited speci ﬁcity. In addition, we
expand the overlap between primary microcephaly andmicrocephalic primordial dwar ﬁsm both clinically (short
stature in >52% of patients with primary microcephaly) and
molecularly (e.g., we report the ﬁrst instance of CEP135 -
related microcephalic primordial dwar ﬁsm). We expand the
allelic and locus heterogeneity of CM by reporting 37 novel
likely disease-causing variants in 27 disease genes, con-ﬁrming the candidacy of ANKLE2, YARS ,FRMD4A , and
THG1L , and proposing the candidacy of BPTF ,MAP1B ,
CCNH , and PPFIBP1 .
Conclusion: Our study re ﬁnes the phenotype of CM,
expands its genetics heterogeneity, and informs the workup
of children born with this developmental brain defect.
A.M. Alhashem: None. F. Alkuraya: None. R.
Shaheen: None.
P09.080C
Targeted gene panel for pediatric Movement Disorders
and Cerebral Palsy
M. Aspromonte
1,2, R. Polli1,2, E. Leonardi1,2, E. Bettella1,2,
F. Cesca1,2, M. Bellini1,2, M. Nosadini3, S. Bugin4,
M. Petrella5, S. Sartori3, A. Murgia1,2
1Laboratory Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment,
Department of Women ’s and Children ’s Health; University
of Padua, Padova, Italy,2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca
Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padova, Italy,
3Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit,
Department of Women's and Children's Health, University
of Padua, Padova, Italy,4UOC Pediatrics San Bortolo
Hospital, Vicenza, Italy,5UOC Pediatrics Angelo Hospital
Mestre, Venice, Italy
Childhood Movement Disorders (MD), represent a hetero-
geneous group of neurological conditions characterized by
abnormal voluntary or involuntary movements also recur-ring in Cerebral Palsy (CP), a permanent non progressive
neurodevelopmental condition involving movement and
posture alterations. Although the etiology is often unknown,this spectrum of conditions has a strong genetic component.
The aim of this study was to design a customized targetedgene panel to investigate the genetic bases of CP and MD
with childhood onset. The panel includes 59 genes
considered disease-causing or related with primitive MD/
CP conditions. In 9 of 18 subjects tested so far, we selected
14 new or low-frequency single nucleotide variants (SNVs)
in 10 of the 59 selected genes. Five variants in genesassociated with pediatric-onset MD ( ANO3 ,AP4S1 ,AP4E1
and VPS13D ), two (one missense and one intronic) in
GAD1 a gene considered to be associated to CP, and seven
missense variants in candidate CP genes ( ITPR1, NAA35,
MCPH1, PACRG, SCN8A, SPTBN2 andTENM1 ).A homo-
zygous truncating mutation, already described in literature,was found in AP4S1 . A few potentially disease-related
variants were detected in genes associated with recessive
phenotypes: an apparently homozygous missense variant inMCPH1 suspected to mask a heterozygous gene deletion is
currently under characterization. A VPS13D and a GAD1
likely pathogenic variants were detected as compoundheterozygous in association respectively with a samesense
and an intronic VUS both predicted as possibly altering
splicing mechanisms. Although preliminary these resultsmay contribute to the recently highlighted evidence of a
strong genetic base for these rare disorders.
M. Aspromonte: None. R. Polli: None. E. Leonardi:
None. E. Bettella: None. F. Cesca: None. M. Bellini:
None. M. Nosadini: None. S. Bugin: None. M. Petrella:
None. S. Sartori: None. A. Murgia: None.
P09.081D
The Genetic Basis of paediatric movement disorders:experience from the SYNaPS Study
R. Maroo ﬁan, V. Salpietro, H. Houlden
Molecular Neuroscience Institute of Neurology, london,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Pediatric movement disorders which are
usually part of complex neurodevelopmental disorderscomprise a wide group of neurological diseases with highly
variable, often complex clinical presentation. Although
causative mutations in >200 genes have been associatedwith various movement disorders, many patients remain
without a precise genetic diagnosis. The SYNaPS Study,
which is IRB/ethics approved and aimed at analysingunexplained ultra-rare neurological conditions, aim to
identify underlying genetic causes in patients with pediatric
movement disorders by high-throughput geneticinvestigations.
Materials and Methods: As part of SYNaPS study a
large cohort of well-phenotyped families recruited frommultiple paediatric neurology clinics around the world with
a diverse ethnic background affected by different childhoodAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1447and early-onset movement disorders were genetically and
clinically investigated. exome sequencing was performed
for probands of around 500 families with any forms of
movement disorders. Some of the unsolved individuals
were subjected to a combination of SNP-Array genotyping/
homozygosity mapping, whole genome sequencing andlong-read sequencing.
Results: Overall, in this study we resolved around 50% of
the patients with movement disorders. We also uncoverednovel disease-causing genes in various families. Re-anno-
tating/re-analysing the exome data along with more exten-
sive data sharing and also employing homozygositymapping in some of the families increased the rate of
diagnosis.
Discussion: We made a molecular diagnosis for around
half of the families and characterised multiple new genes
and ultra-rare movement disorders. A genetic diagnosis
provided either disease-speci ﬁc treatment or effected man-
agement for some patients with a genetic diagnosis, high-
lighting the importance of early and speci ﬁc diagnosis.
R. Maroo ﬁan: None. V. Salpietro: None. H.
Houlden: None.
P09.082A
Evaluating motor functions and biomarkers for
Fukuyama muscular dystrophy
M. Taniguchi-Ikeda
1, R. Harada2, M. Nagasaka3,
H. Kurahashi4, T. Toda5
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Fujita Health University,
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan,2Department of Rehabilitation,
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,Japan,
3Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan,4Molecular
Genetics, Fujita Health University, Toyoake,Aichi, Japan,
5Department of Neurology, The Tokyo University Graduate
School of Medicine, Toyoake,Aichi, Japan
Fukuyama muscular dystrophy (FCMD) is an autosomal
recessive, severe childhood muscular dystrophy with brain
anomaly. FCMD is mainly caused by an ancestral insertionof 3-kb retrotransposal element into the 3 ’untranslated
region of the causative gene, fukutin . Recently, we testi ﬁed
that pathogenic exon trapping by the transposon causesplicing abnormality in FCMD. We have testi ﬁed that
antisense oligonucleotides targeting this splicing could be a
possible therapy in the future. However, there has been nobiomarkers or few report on natural history for assessing the
disease level of FCMD. To ﬁnd speci ﬁc serum biomarkers
and to comprehend natural history of FCMD patients, wecollected serum and clinical data from patients. We tested
on serum biomarkers by measuring muscle speci ﬁcmicroRNAs. Clinical data contains motor function score,
muscle elastography (shear wave elastography (SWE)), and
whole body muscle computed tomography with ultralow
level irradiation. As a result, miR206 was signi ﬁcantly
overexpressed in FCMD patients compared to normal
controls. Correlation coef ﬁcient of miR206 with serum
CK level, serum creatinine level, and motor function scores
were also high. MiR 206 was especially high in FCMD
patients with high muscle contents, suggesting remainingsparing capacity of muscle regeneration. SWE showed
signiﬁcantly high elasticity in biceps brachii and brachial
muscle but not high in lower extremities in FCMD patients,compared to normal control, because of high content of fat
inﬁltration due to disuse of lower extremities. In conclusion,
serum miR206 and SWE is useful for monitoring musclewasting progression and motor function level of FCMD.
M. Taniguchi-Ikeda: None. R. Harada: None. M.
Nagasaka: None. H. Kurahashi: None. T. Toda: None.
P09.083B
New genes involved in diseases with neurodegenerationwith brain iron accumulation (NBIA)
D. Martínez-Rubio
1, C. Tello1, V. Lupo1, V. Rejas1,
A. Darling2, S. Aguilera3, B. Pérez-Dueñas4, C. Espinos1
1Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia,
Spain,2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,
3Complejo Universitario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain,
4Hospital U. Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumu-
lation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of inheritedneurologic disorders characterized by progressive move-
ment disorders and abnormal accumulation of iron in the
basal ganglia. There are 12 genes that resolve 80% of cases.Our clinical series comprises 134 probands who suffered
from NBIA and other movement disorders. After analyzing
the NBIA genes, we have achieved the genetic diagnosis in54 cases. The aim of the present study is to establish the
molecular bases in patients without mutation in known
NBIA genes.
Materials and Methods: Thirty-eight patients have been
studied by a customized gene panel based on SureSelect
Technology (Agilent), which comprises 498 genes involvedin NBIA, ataxia, chorea, dystonia, parkinson, spastic ataxia,
and spastic paraplegia.
Results: We have achieved a de ﬁnite diagnosis in 19
probands. Four of them presented with a neuroimaging
phenotype suggestive of NBIA and carried novel mutations
inGLB1, FUCA1 and TPP1 , and in one patient born to
consanguineous parents, homozygote mutations were
identi ﬁed in two genes, FBOX7 andDLD .1448Conclusions: We have solved 50% of cases. Except for
FUCA1 , these are the ﬁrst cases described of NBIA with
mutations in GLB1, TPP1 , and DLD/FBXO7 . According
new cases are reported, the clinical and genetic spectrum
associated with NBIA are expanding. Funding: Fundació
La Marató de la TV3, PROMETEO/2018/135, ISCIII-PI15/00187 and ISCIII-P18/00147, cofund with FEDER funds .
D. Martínez-Rubio: None. C. Tello: None. V. Lupo:
None. V. Rejas: None. A. Darling: None. S. Aguilera:
None. B. Pérez-Dueñas: None. C. Espinos: None.
P09.084C
Strong interest of exome sequencing in progressive
neurological diseases
Q. H. C. Thomas
1,2,3, F. Tran Mau-Them2,4, A. Bruel2,4,
A. Sorlin1,2,4, A. Fromont5, Y. Béjot3,6, M. Giroud3,
B. Daubail3, A. Jacquin-Piques3, M. Hervieu-Begue3,
T. Moreau5, G. Osseby3, P. Soichot3, S. Nambot2,1,
P. Callier2,4, A. Denomme-Pichon2,4, L. Faivre2,1,
A. Vitobello2,4, C. Philippe2,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet2,1,4,
S. Moutton1,2
1Genetics Center, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne
University Hospital, F-21000 Dijon, France, Dijon,
France,2INSERM, LNC UMR1231 team GAD, University
of Burgundy and Franche-Comté, F-21000 Dijon, France,Dijon, France,
3Service de Neurologie, Dijon University
Hospital, F-21000 Dijon, France, Dijon, France,
4Functional Unity of innovative diagnosis for rare disease,
Dijon Bourgogne University Hospital, F-21000 Dijon,
France, Dijon, France,5Service de Pathologies
Inﬂammatoires du système nerveux central, Neurologie
Général, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France,6Dijon
Stroke Registry, EA7460, Pathophysiology and
Epidemiology of Cerebro-Cardiovascular Diseases(PEC2), University Hospital of Dijon, University of
Burgundy, Dijon, France, Dijon, France
Introduction: Neurogenetics represents a vast, complex,
ever changing discipline whose diagnosis currently remains
challenging, since clinical and/or imaging features fre-quently appear very unspeci ﬁc, especially early in the
evolution (cerebellar ataxia, tremor, dystonia ⋯). In mole-
cular diagnosis, current strategies usually include sequentialinvestigations that may lead to long, tedious, expensive and
disappointing patients care. Exome sequencing (ES)
appears a promising approach for neurogenetics, apart fromwhen nucleotide motif expansion disorders can be
suspected.
Materials and Methods: We recruited 48 individuals
without cognitive development impairment, referred to our
center for suspected neurogenetic disease: 20 cerebellarataxia (42%), 12 neuromuscular diseases (25%), 8 spastic
paraplegia (17%), 2 abnormal movements (4%) and 6 others
(12%) for whom the phenotype could not be labelled under
a usual neurological syndrome. ES was interpreted in a
solo-based strategy (94%) or in trio with parental pool (6%).
Results: ES identi ﬁed a causal diagnosis in 4/8 indivi-
duals with spastic paraplegia (50%), 3/6 “other ”(50%), 1/2
with abnormal movements (50%), 5/12 with neuromuscular
diseases (42%), 4/11 with isolated cerebellar ataxia (37%)and 2/9 with spinocerebellar ataxia (22%). Overall diag-
nostic yield was of 40 %.
Conclusions: With such overall diagnostic yield, this
study reinforces the diagnostic interest of ES in neuroge-
netics, in all its ﬁelds, as this diagnostic yield ranges from
22% in spinocerebellar ataxia (which is higher than currentyield of gene panels) to 50% in spastic paraplegia. It also
includes situations in which clinical displays may be com-
plex and hard to systematize. First-tier implementationwould signi ﬁcantly improve diagnostic yield in
neurogenetics.
Q.H.C. Thomas: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A.
Bruel: None. A. Sorlin: None. A. Fromont: None. Y.
Béjot: None. M. Giroud: None. B. Daubail: None. A.
Jacquin-Piques: None. M. Hervieu-Begue: None. T.
Moreau: None. G. Osseby: None. P. Soichot: None. S.
Nambot: None. P. Callier: None. A. Denomme-Pichon:
None. L. Faivre: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. Philippe:
None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. S. Moutton: None.
P09.085D
Elevated impact of chromatin regulating genes in the
genetic diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disabilities
I. Diez, M. Martinez-Garcia, R. Sanchez-Alcudia,
C. Rodriguez-Solera, R. Perez-Carro, I. Sanchez-Navarro,
E. Mata, E. Fernandez-Tabanera, S. Rosenstone,D. Rodríguez, G. Benito, N. Sanchez-Bolivar,
M. Carcajona, P. Maietta, S. Alvarez
NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Exome trio analysis is an effective strategy
to identify potential causal variants in rare genetic disorders
with clinical heterogeneity. In this study, we focused on the
404 probands with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD)with causal variants on chromatin-regulating genes to
determine their frequency and their genotypic/phenotypic
characteristics by trio analysis.
Patients and Methods: A cohort of 259 males and 145
females, with a median of 7 years old, was studied by trio
whole exome sequencing. Libraries were generated with IonAmpliSeq
TMor SureSelectXTand sequenced with IonAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1449ProtonTM/S5TMXL or NovaSeq 6000. The data were pro-
cessed using an in-house pipeline.
Results: A genetic diagnosis was established in 129 of
the 404 studied probands, leading to a diagnostic yield of
32%. Among the positive cases, 82 and 47 variants, were
considered as casual or probably casual, respectively. Ofthat diagnosed patients cohort, 26 probands (20%) had
variants in chromatin-regulating genes (ARID1B, ATRX,
EHMT1, SATB2, SMARCA2, and KMT family). Of the 26variants identi ﬁed, 58% were loss of function de novo
variants associated with an autosomal dominant inheritance.
Clinically, these patients shared NDDs phenotypic char-acteristics (psychomotor delay and/or autism spectrum dis-
order) with short stature, dysmorphic features, epilepsy and/
or digital malformations.
Conclusions: The haploinsuf ﬁciency associated with loss
of function variants in the genes implicated in the regulation
of chromatin played a crucial role in neurodevelopmentdisorders. These deleterious variants seemed to be asso-
ciated with a common phenotype. A better delineation of
these clinical manifestations could help to better recognizethem in the clinical setting.
I. Diez: None. M. Martinez-Garcia: None. R. Sanchez-
Alcudia: None. C. Rodriguez-Solera: None. R. Perez-
Carro: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: None. E. Mata: None.
E. Fernandez-Tabanera: None. S. Rosenstone: None. D.
Rodríguez: None. G. Benito: None. N. Sanchez-Bolivar:
None. M. Carcajona: None. P. Maietta: None. S.
Alvarez: None.
P09.086A
Novel candidate genes in autosomal recessive
neurodevelopmental disorders: A three year cohortstudy
E. Ghayoor KarimianiNext Generation Genetic Clinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic
Republic of
In a three-year cohort study, 313 Families with autosomal
recessive pattern compatible with genetic disorders such asseizures, hypotonia, neurodegenerative disorder, progres-
sive brain atrophy, developmental regression have been
conducted. The progression in diagnosis of neurodevelop-mental disorders has undergone considerable in the past
decade. In this cohort study we aim to explain our broad
research on identi ﬁcation of six novel candidate genes
(PPP1R21, ADPRHL2, APC2, SLC10A7, APC2, DEAF1)
on the patients with autosomal recessive neurodevelop-
mental disorders. A complete clinical and paraclinicalexamination has been done by expert specialists and clinical
geneticist. Exome Sequencing was performed and followedby bioinformatic analysis. Parents and healthy offspring
were assessed for the candidate gene variants. We
delineated a novel neurodevelopmental disorders caused
by biallelic PPP1R21 loss of function variants, and
identi ﬁed four previously unreported homozygous truncat-
ing PPP1R21 alleles. Pathogenic variants have beenidenti ﬁed in a number of patients presenting broad clinical
phenotypes with autosomal recessive inheritance. By using
linkage analysis and exome or genome sequencing,recessive inactivating mutations in ADPRHL2 in six
families have been recognized. It has been demonstrated
that SLC10A7 mutations reduce SLC10A7 protein expres-sion by in vitro studies. We also described the participation
of the APC2 and DEAF1 Genes as potential functional
candidates in neurodevelopmental diseases based oncomputational prediction by using several cellular tools.
The current focus of our research is on neurodevelopmental
disorders, especially autosomal recessive. To further,workup with next generation technologies, using several
cellular tools is essential for precise phenotype de ﬁnition
and to understand the underlying disease mechanisms
E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None.
P09.087B
Neuro ﬁ
bromatosis type 1 mutational spectrum in
Macedonian patients: A report of seven novel
pathogenic variants
M. Dimishkovska1, V. Sabolic Avramovska2, E. Sukarova-
Angelovska2, M. Kocova2, D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska1
1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov ”, Skopje, Macedonia,
The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2University Pediatric
Clinic, Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and
Methodius ”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in NF1 gene are
associated with autosomal dominant Neuro ﬁbromatosis
type 1 (NF1) which is a multi-systemic, neurocutaneous
disorder with predisposition to benign or malignant lesionsof the skin, nervous system and bone. Here we present the
ﬁrst genetic study of NF1 in R. Macedonia.
Material and Methods: Since 2014, a total of 33 patients
suspected for NF1 were referred to our laboratory. The
methodology included cDNA sequencing, next-generation
sequencing using Illumina ’s TruSight Cancer panel, direct
DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation probe
ampli ﬁcation.
Results: A total of 21 different pathogenic variants were
detected in 22 unrelated patients. The variants comprised
nine nonsense, six frameshift, two splicing, two missense1450mutations, one multi-exon deletion (exons 9-51) and one
1.4 Mb deletion including the entire NF1 gene. All variants
were unique, detected in one patient/family with the
exception of 1.4 Mb deletion which was detected in two
unrelated patients. Genetic testing of family members was
available for 20 patients; the NF1 variation was inherited
from an affected parent in 11 (55%), while in nine patients
(45%) it has arisen as a de novo event. Seven mutations
were novel: one nonsense (c.5844C>G, p.Tyr1948Ter) andsix frameshift mutations that cause premature termination of
the protein (c.208delA; c.1104_1107delTCAG;
c.1480_1481delTT; c.2495_2496dupAC; c.4517delC;c.6971delA). Five of the novel mutations were inherited
from an affected parent, while c.2495_2496dupAC and
c.6971delA have occurred de novo .
Conclusion: Our study presents the NF1 mutational
spectrum in R. Macedonia and expands the global spectrum
ofNF1 pathogenic variants.
M. Dimishkovska: None. V. Sabolic Avramovska:
None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. Kocova:
None. D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska: None.
P09.088C
A novel IRF2BPL truncating variant is responsible for
infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-like phenotype
M. Ginevrino
1,2, R. Battini3,4, S. Nuovo5,2, A. Micalizzi6,
A. Simonati7, I. Contaldo8, E. M. Valente1,2
1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy,2Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa
Lucia, Rome, Italy,3IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa,
Italy,4Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,5Department of Medicine and
Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy,6Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome,Italy,
7Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine, Movement-
Neurology (Child Neurology) and Neuropathology,
Policlinico GB Rossi, University of Verona, Verona, Italy,
8Unit of Child Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico Gemelli
Foundation, Catholic University, Rome, Italy
Introduction: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are
neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders character-
ized by the progressive loss of both motor and cognitiveskills, myoclonic epilepsy and the presence of lysosomal
deposits with characteristic ultrastructural features, due to
mutations in thirteen distinct genes. Here, we report a childpresenting a neurological disorder characterized by motor
and cognitive regression, spastic-dystonic tetraparesis,
sporadic myoclonus, typical EEG abnormalities and lyso-some deposits of granular osmiophilic material with tubular
andﬁngerprint-like structures. A diagnosis of NCL wassuspected, but genetic analysis of known NCL genes
yielded negative results.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed on genomic DNA of the proband and both parents,
upon written informed consent. Variants were aligned, ﬁltered
and prioritized to identify candidate variants. Validation andsegregation analysis were performed with Sanger sequencing.
Results: The proband was found to carry a novel het-
erozygous truncating variant in the IRF2BPL (Interferon
regulatory factor 2 binding protein-like) gene, arisen de
novo . Very recently, de novo heterozygous variants in this
gene have been reported in 18 patients showing neurode-generative phenotypes variably de ﬁned as neurodevelop-
mental disorders with regression, abnormal movements,
loss of speech and seizures or developmental epilepticencephalopathies.
Conclusions: This case expands the phenotypic spectrum
ofIRF2BPL to include NCL-like phenotypes.
Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the Eur-
opean Research Council (ERC Starting Grant 260888), the
Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Foundation (PADAPORTproject) and the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca Fina-
lizzata 2013 NET-2013-02356160, Ricerca Corrente ‘Neu-
roscienze Sperimentali ’and 5x1000 Anno 2016 to
Fondazione Santa Lucia).
M. Ginevrino: None. R. Battini: None. S. Nuovo: None.
A. Micalizzi: None. A. Simonati: None. I. Contaldo:
None. E.M. Valente: None.
P09.089D
Genetic analysis of early-onset schizophrenia
D. Krgovi ć
1,2,Š. Stangler Herode ž1,2,N . Šenica3,
H. Gregori čKumper ščak3,2, B. Aleksi ć4, N. Nemec5,
A. Zagorac1, N. Kokalj Voka č1,2
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Medical Faculty,
University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,3Department of
Paediatrics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor,
Slovenia,4Graduate School of Medicine, Department of
Psychiatry, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan,
5Department of Animal Science, Chair of Genetics, Animal
Biotechnology and Immunology, Biotechnical faculty,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Early onset schizophrenia (EOS) is rare
complex psychiatric disorder with polygenic inheritance.Preliminary data suggest that EOS has higher genetic liability
to the disease. Therefore, we preformed genetic testing using
both molecular karyotyping (arrayCGH) and next generationsequencing (NGS) for determination of copy number
variations (CNVs) and single nucleotide variants (SNVs),Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1451affecting the possible schizophrenia-associated genes in a
small group of Slovenian children diagnosed with EOS.
Material and Methods: Our study included 49 patients.
In all patients molecular karyotyping was performed, fol-
lowing the medical exome sequencing (Illumina TruSight
One capture). Considering the polygenicity of the disorder,we also analysed enrichment of the list of genes harbouring
possibly deleterious variants in Gene Ontology terms (GO)
by using GeneMania version 3.4.1 Cytoscape plugin.
Results: In 12% (6/49) of children a clinically signi ﬁcant
CNV was detected, that could be associated with the disorder.
In 14% (6/43) of patients pathogenic SNV were detected,although no clear genotype-phenotype correlations could be
made. Therefore, using the GO terms, we assembled a list of
genes harbouring probably deleterious variants.
Conclusion: The aim of this study was to assemble a list of
genes harbouring probably pathogenic variants in Slovenian
patients with EOS by performing the molecular karyotypingand NGS method. A 12% of patients are carriers of clinically
signiﬁcant CNV. NGS analysis and enrichment analysis
showed that gene ontology terms related to schizophrenia areenriched in genes, selected by our ﬁltering. The over-
represented pathways could be associated with pathology of
schizophrenia in Slovenian population.
D. Krgovi ć:None. Š. Stangler Herode ž:None. N.
Šenica: None. H. Gregori čKumper ščak: None. B.
Aleksić:None. N. Nemec: None. A. Zagorac: None. N.
Kokalj Voka č:None.
P09.090A
Diagnostic yield of ngs-based epilepsy and
neuromuscular disease panel in russia population
I. V. Kanivets
1,2, A. A. Sharkov1,3, S. A. Korostelev4,1,
D. V. Pyankov1, F. A. Konovalov1, I. F. Komar'kov1,
K. V. Gorgisheli1, O. G. Novoselova1, L. O. Rash1,
V. V. Zakharova1
1Genomed ltd, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Fsbei russian
medical academy continuous professional education,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Veltischev Research and
Clinical Institute for Pediatrics of the Pirogov RNRMU,Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation,
4Federal
State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher
Education I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State MedicalUniversity of the Ministry of Health of the Russian
Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russian
Federation
Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) are a common cause of
congenital anomalies, developmental delay, epilepsy, neuro-muscular disorders, cardiovascular and other disorders. In
2014-2019 we are performed 6846 NGS-based tests forpatients with suspected monogenic disorders using Illumina
NextSeq 500 and in-house analysis software. 3110 samples
were sequenced using Illumina TruSightOne enrichment
(“clinical exome ”); 594 samples by whole-exome sequencing;
3142 samples using our custom 2000-genes platform, focused
on epilepsy and neuromuscular disorders. A de ﬁnitive
molecular diagnosis could be estimated in 2238 cases
(32,69%), 1043 (15,24%) having a possible diagnosis with
a need for additional testing. We compare a diagnostic yieldour epilepsy panel (Table 1) and neuromuscular diseases
panel (Table 2) with results of other published studies.
Table 1
GenomedKodera
et al., 2013Trump
et al., 2016Møller
et al., 2016Butler
et al., 2017
Deﬁnitive
diagnosis27,7% 23% 18,58% 22,67% 18,29%
Possible
diagnosis15,48%
No
diagnosis56,82%
Gene count 1081 35 46 46 110
Number of
patients1693 53 323 216 339
Table 2
GenomedEvilä
et al., 2016Chae
et al., 2015Dai
et al., 2015
Deﬁnitive
diagnosis44,67% 15% 48,8% 65%
Possible
diagnosis12,12%
No diagnosis 43,21%
Gene count 836 180 579 399
Number of
patients553 61 43 55
Mutation frequency analysis showed that the top 20 genes
account for 57,51% and 46,72% de ﬁnitive diagnosis in
epilepsy and neuromuscular disease panel respectively.
Nevertheless, the use of large panels is justi ﬁed due to
higher diagnostic yield and cost-effectiveness.
I.V. Kanivets: None. A.A. Sharkov: None. S.A. Kor-
ostelev: None. D.V. Pyankov: None. F.A. Konovalov:
None. I.F. Komar'kov: None. K.V. Gorgisheli: None. O.
G. Novoselova: None. L.O. Rash: None. V.V.
Zakharova: None.
P09.091B
Identi ﬁcation of potential new genes involved in
autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's disease1452C. Tesson, A. Honoré, H. Bertrand, V. Drouet, S. Lesage,
A. Brice
- INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, UPMC Université
Paris 06 UMR S1127, Sorbonne Université Institut du C,
Paris, France
Parkinson disease (PD) affects 1% of the population above
65 years. It is characterized by the triad of symptoms:tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. To date the identi ﬁed
genes associated with early-onset (EO, >40 years) auto-
somal recessive (AR) PD only explain 45%, other genesremain to be discovered. The aim of the work is to identify
new genes involved in AR EO PD, using consanguineous
PD families and applying genotyping on DNA microarraysand NGS technologies.
Using a series of 99 families with con ﬁrmed con-
sanguinity, we looked for homozygous loss of function ormissense mutations predicted deleterious in region of loss of
homozygosity. Then we ﬁrst focused on variant shared by at
least two families. We identi ﬁed mutations in PSMF1 an
interactor of FBXO7 . In one family, only this variant
remains, moreover both mutations code for amino acid
highly conserved upon evolution.
Most of the candidate ’s genes are private genes high-
lighting genetic heterogeneity of PD. Therefore, in a second
time we hypothesized that some candidate ’s genes can be
involved in a common pathway. Using ClusterPro ﬁler we
performed GO term enrichment analyses, then we were able
to grouped together some genes and were able to see anstatistical enrichment in autophagy pathway.
We identi ﬁed a strong candidate gene for AR-PD:
PSMF1 . Further functional data are needed to strengthen the
role of this gene in PD, possibly affecting the proteasome
activity and α-synucleine aggregation. We will also con-
tinue to investigate pathway analyses in order to identifycandidates for PD in our families.
C. Tesson: None. A. Honoré: None. H. Bertrand:
None. V. Drouet: None. S. Lesage: None. A. Brice: None.
P09.093D
PEHO syndrome caused by compound heterozygotevariants in ZNHIT3 gene
K. Muru
1,2, E. Õiglane-Shlik3, P. Ilves4,5, S. Pajusalu1,2,6,
I. Kuus7, M. H. Wojcik8,9, T. Reimand1,2, K. Õunap1,2,8
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Children`s Clinic, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,4Radiology Clinic of
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,5DepartmentRadiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,6Yale University School of Medicine,
Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States,
7Eye Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,
8Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
United States,9Division of Genetics and Genomics,
Department of Medicine, Boston Children`s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States
PEHO syndrome (MIM 260565) is characterized by
progressive encephalopathy with edema, hypsarrhythmia,
and optic atrophy, ﬁrst described in 14 Finnish patients. A
homozygous missense substitution c.92C>T (p.Ser31Leu)
inZNHIT3 was identi ﬁed as the primary cause of PEHO
syndrome in Finland.
Case report: The index patient was hospitalised at 1m
due to muscular hypotonia and lethargy. Brain MRI showed
mildly dilated lateral ventricles, a porencephalic cyst on theleft, hypoplastic occipital lobes and absence of myelin in the
cerebellar white matter. At 10m, generalized seizures started
(myoclonus and infantile spasms). EEG showed hypsar-rhythmia. The child was blind at 17m; she had pale and
small disks, and temporal disk pallor. At 8y, she has severe
microcephaly (-4SD), no active movements, severe spasti-city, and scoliosis. Her face is edematous with an opened
mouth appearance. Brain MRI showed severe cerebral,
cerebellar and brainstem atrophy, thin and short corpuscallosum and almost absent periventricular white matter. To
identify the underlying etiology of this phenotype, trio
exome was performed and negative, after which trio gen-ome sequencing was performed.
Result: Two high quality heterozygous missense variants
inZNHIT3 gene were identi ﬁed: the c.92C>T p.(Ser31Leu)
variant (NM_004773.3), which was previously described in
Finnish patients and the novel variant c.41G>T p.(Cys14-
Phe). There are eight heterozygotes and no homozygotes forthe latter variant in gnomAD database and multiple in-silico
pathogenicity predicting algorithms indicated a damaging
effect.
Conclusion: We reported the ﬁrst patient outside Finland
with con ﬁrmed ZNHIT3 variants causing PEHO syndrome.
Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PUT355,PRG471, and PUTJD827.
K. Muru: None. E. Õiglane-Shlik: None. P. Ilves:
None. S. Pajusalu: None. I. Kuus: None. M.H. Wojcik:
None. T. Reimand: None. K. Õunap: None.
P09.094A
Exome-based bottom-up approach of molecular
diagnostics in a clinically ambiguous family with a
polystigmatized patient revealed ultra-rare NEDD4L
associated periventricular nodular heterotopiaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1453M. Pecimonova1,2, D. Smolak1,2, J. Budis1,3,4, M. Lichvar1,
J. Turna2,3,4, J. Radvanszky1,4,5, T. Szemes1,2,4
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Department of
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Bratislava, Slovakia,3Slovak Centre of
Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,
5Institute for Clinical and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Periventricular nodular heterotopia-7
(PVNH7) is an ultra-rare neurodegenerative disorder
affecting proper neuronal migration during neurogenesis.Only seven patients carrying pathogenic variants in the
NEDD4L gene, associated with PVNH7, were reported so
far. We report a polystigmatized 2-year-old boy havingsigniﬁcant symptomatologic overlap with PVNH7, how-
ever, showing also symptoms falling outside
PVNH7 symptomatology. His brother presents with someof the proband´s symptoms, speci ﬁcally those falling
outside PVNH7 symptomatology.
Materials and Methods: The boy, his brother and their
parents were subjected to whole-exome sequencing. Variant
prioritization was performed using an inheritance-pattern
and phenotype-driven top-down approach, or by a bottom-up approach, beginning with the identi ﬁed known patho-
genic variants in the proband ’s data.
Results: Because of uncertainties in symptomatology and
inheritance pattern, the top-down approach was hard to
apply. The bottom-up approach, however, identi ﬁed a
known pathogenic variant, NM_001144967.2(NEDD4L):c.2677G>A:p.Glu893Lys, in the proband ’s genome,
absenting in any other analyzed family member. This de
novo variant explained symptoms overlapping those repor-
ted for PVNH7, such as delayed psychomotor development
and intellectual disability, absenting speech and walking,
hypotonia, strabismus, cleft palate, microretrognathia, and2-3 toe syndactyly. Symptoms shared with the brother, on
the other hand, were not explained by this variant. These are
most probably not extended phenotypes of PVNH7, ratheran independent clinical entity.
Conclusion: Our case highlights: 1) the usefulness of a
bottom-up approach of causative variant identi ﬁcation
during differential diagnostics of patients/families having
unclear/overlapping phenotypes; 2) the importance of
reporting yet undescribed symptoms of known disorders,found in single patients/families, with special care.
M. Pecimonova: None. D. Smolak: None. J. Budis:
None. M. Lichvar: None. J. Turna: None. J. Rad-
vanszky: None. T. Szemes: None.P09.095B
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome caused by a pathogenic splicing
variant
P. Sparber
1, A. Filatova1, I. Anisimova1, A. Chuhrova1,
M. Skoblov1,2
1Research center of medical genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal
University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation
Introduction: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rare inherited
neurological condition, associated with heterozygous patho-
genic variant in the TCF4 gene or with deletion of the
18q21.2 chromosome region, in which the TCF4 gene is
located. In the present study we report a novel clinical case
of a 7-year-old patient with global development delay and
multiply minor dysmorphic features.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed on Ion S5 next-generation sequencing system.
The identi ﬁed variant was con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
RT-PCR analysis was performed using total RNA isolated
from patient ﬁbroblasts. HEK293 cells were transfected
with minigene plasmid vector containing the variant ofinterest. Splicing alterations were validated using RT-PCR
with further Sanger sequencing.
Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a previously
undescribed heterozygous variant in the intron 11 of the
TCF4 gene - NM_001083962: c.922 +5G>C. Segregation
analysis showed that the variant is de novo . Functional
analysis using two independent approaches: RT-PCR ana-
lysis of total RNA extracted from patient ﬁbroblast and a
splicing minigene assay, showed that c.922 +5G>C variant
disrupt the donor splicing site of the intron 11 leading to a
complete skipping of exon 11, resulting in a frame shift and
premature stop codon formation p.(Ser264GlnFsTer83).
Conclusion: Therefore, after performing functional ana-
lysis we classify the c.922 +5G>C variant as pathogenic and
disease causing in our patient.
P. Sparber: None. A. Filatova: None. I. Anisimova:
None. A. Chuhrova: None. M. Skoblov: None.
P09.096C
Expanding the phenotypic spectrum associated to
PMPCA mutations
V. Serpieri
1, R. Battini2,3, S. Nuovo4,5, M. Ginevrino1,4,
F. Tinelli2, E. Valente1,4
1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy,2IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy,3Dept.
of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa,
PIsa, Italy,4Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa1454Lucia, Rome, Italy,5Dept. of Medicine and Surgery,
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy
Introduction: Biallelic missense mutations in the PMPCA
gene, encoding mitochondrial processing peptidase alpha-
subunit, were initially identi ﬁed in 19 individuals from ﬁve
families with early onset, non-progressive cerebellar ataxia,
developmental delay and intellectual disability. Brain MRI
showed non-progressive cerebellar atrophy; muscle biopsywas normal, although mitochondrial complexes activity was
mildly decreased in some cases. Subsequently, two cousins
were reported with a more severe phenotype of progressivemitochondrial encephalopathy, including profound devel-
opmental delay, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, weakness, respira-
tory insuf ﬁciency, blindness and lactic acidemia. Brain MRI
showed progressive cerebral-cerebellar atrophy, with a
lactate peak at spectroscopy. Muscle biopsy demonstrated
enlarged, structurally abnormal mitochondria. Finally, a 7-year-old boy was recently reported with psychomotor delay,
spastic-ataxic gait and regression. He had elevated blood
lactate and abnormal muscle biopsy with mitochondrialdamage. Besides cerebellar atrophy, brain MRI showed
bilateral symmetric hyperintensity in the striatum (Leigh-
like features).
Case Report: We report a 12-year-old girl carrying two
novel, likely pathogenic PMPCA missense variants, who
presented a complex, non-progressive early-onset pheno-type of spastic ataxia with superimposed generalized
hyperkinetic movements, intellectual disability, micro-
cephaly and epilepsy. Several brain MRIs showed non-progressive cerebellar atrophy and bilateral symmetric T2-
hyperintensity and hypotrophy of both caudate and puta-
men, resembling striatal necrosis. Blood lactate and MRIspectroscopy were normal.
Conclusions: This case further expands the clinical
spectrum associated with PMPCA mutations to include a
complex encephalopathy without obvious mitochondrial
involvement. The association of non-progressive cerebellar
atrophy with bilateral striatal hyperintensity may represent a“redﬂag”for this genetic condition.
Acknowledgements: Mariani Foundation, Italian Ministry
of Health
V. Serpieri: None. R. Battini: None. S. Nuovo: None.
M. Ginevrino: None. F. Tinelli: None. E. Valente: None.
P09.097D
Novel association of biallelic ATOH1 variants with
pontocerebellar hypoplasia, developmental delay andhearing loss
T. Vi šnjar
1, K. Writzl1, G. Bergant1, O. Maloku2,
F. Fogolari2, A. Maver1, B. Peterlin11Clinical institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
2University of Udine, Udine, Italy
The pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCH) represent a hetero-
geneous group of conditions characterized by structural
abnormalities of central nervous system, typically involvingcerebellum and ventral pons. In the present study, we
propose a novel association between biallelic variants in
ATOH1 and PCH with severe neurodevelopmental dis-order. We report a family with two children affected with
pontocerebellar dysplasia, severe motor and speech delay
and sensorineural hearing loss. Using exome sequencing,we identi ﬁed a homozygous rare missense variant in
ATOH1 in both affected probands. ATOH1 encodes atonal
bHLH transcription factor 1, a core neurogenic transcriptionfactor that regulates cell differentiation in cerebellum, drives
development of inner ear hair cells and is essential in
development of neurosensory systems. Disruption of Atoh1in mouse models was previously shown to result in severe
cerebellar hypoplasia and hearing loss. The identi ﬁed
variant (NM_005172.1:c.481C>G, p.Arg161Gly) substi-tutes a highly conserved residue in the DNA binding
domain of Atoh1. It is absent from control populations of
the gnomAD project and our in-house database of 3000exomes. We performed molecular modelling, which
predicted that this change can affect DNA binding af ﬁnity
of Atoh1 through distortion of its contacts to DNA andthrough remodelling of the helical part of HLH domain. In
conclusion, we report a novel potential genetic cause of
developmental brain anomalies, due to mutations inATOH1. Although the evidence is currently too limited to
conclusively establish its causality, this report may present
basis for further studies on the role of ATOH1 in humandisease.
T. Vi šnjar: None. K. Writzl: None. G. Bergant: None.
O. Maloku: None. F. Fogolari: None. A. Maver: None. B.
Peterlin: None.
P09.098A
The effect of APOE in Alzheimer ’s disease is age
dependent; demonstrated in the UK Biobank data
E. A. Baker
1, M. Bracher-Smith2, G. Menzies1,
J. Williams1,2, V. Escott-Price1,2
1UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom,2Medical Research Council
Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical
Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United
KingdomAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1455Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenera-
tive condition with signi ﬁcant genetic heritability. The
apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) gene is the strongest genetic risk
factor for AD. The risk of APOE in AD varies with age.
This age-related genetic heterogeneity has been shown in
the Alzheimer ’s Disease Genetics Consortium data; there is
little genetic correlation between two age groups (60-79
years vs. 80 +years) and the heritability explained by SNPs
on chromosome-19 was larger at younger ages.
We aim to further demonstrate that APOE impacts the risk
of AD in younger subjects, whereas older subjects are
inﬂuenced by the polygenic effect of variants outside the
APOE region.
The UK Biobank data is a large (N =443,019) prospective
cohort of individuals containing genetic data for 7,654,308imputed SNPs. Individuals in Biobank are relatively young,
with only 92 AD cases. Polygenic risk score (PRS) is a
method to combine the effect of genetic variants. Wecomputed the PRS for individuals in Biobank, using sum-
mary statistics from the largest AD GWAS to weight
the score.
AD PRS shows an association with AD, but this effect is
removed when the PRS excludes chromosome-19. When
considering family proxies of AD; sibling proxies show thesame pattern, however, parental proxies remain associated
with PRS even after the removal of chromosome-19. This is
similarly shown in biological pathways; beta-amyloid reg-ulation, protein-lipid complex and APP regulation. This is
also demonstrated using age-strati ﬁed analyses which dis-
play a stronger association with AD and higher mean PRSin AD cases in the older cohort.
E.A. Baker: None. M. Bracher-Smith: None. G.
Menzies: None. J. Williams: None. V. Escott-
Price: None.
P09.099B
DNA methylation as link between life adversities and
emergence of psychopathology
L. M. Spíndola
1, D. Micali1, M. L. Santoro1, J. Schafer2,
P. M. Pan1,V .K .O t a1, G. Xavier1, C. M. Carvalho1,
F. Talarico1, R. Pellegrino3, E. Brietzke1, R. Grassi-
Oliveira4, J. J. Mari1, A. Gadelha1, E. C. Miguel5,
L. A. Rohde2, R. A. Bressan1, D. R. Mazzoti6,J .R .S a t o7,
G. A. Salum2, H. Hakonarson3, S. I. Belangero1
1Universidade Federal de S ão Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil,
2Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
Brazil,3The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States,4Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil,
5Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de S ão Paulo,
Sao Paulo, Brazil,6University of Pennsylvania,Philadelphia, PA, United States,7Universidade Federal do
ABC, Santo André, Brazil
DNA methylation plays a role in the regulation of gene
expression in response to environmental factors. A previous
longitudinal study of our group found 66 genes differen-tially expressed in the blood of youths who presented an
increase of dimensional psychopathology after a 3-year
follow-up. These genes were exclusively found in the groupwith the emergence of psychopathology and were not
differentially expressed in the longitudinal control groups.
Here, we aimed to identify whether the gene expression ofthese 65 genes were in ﬂuenced by changes in DNA
methylation in the blood of the same individuals. Moreover,
for those markers associated with gene expression, weveriﬁed whether DNA methylation was in ﬂuenced by
adversities experienced by the youths during the 3-year
follow-up. Then, we compared gene expression and DNAmethylation data in peripheral blood samples (n =44)
obtained from 22 youths before and after developing severe
psychopathology. Life adversities variables were generatedby using a latent modelling approach with a bifactor
structure. We identi ﬁed 11 differentially expressed genes
regulated by DNA methylation. Among these 11 genes, themethylation of LMF2 andETS1 was in ﬂuenced by factors
describing adversities related to interpersonal, context
change, school, health/loss and unpredictable events. Also,these in ﬂuences persisted when modelling a general
adversity factor. LMF2 methylation has been associated
with Alzheimer's disease and ETS1 is a transcriptional
factor involved in downstream biological pathways. These
results provide further evidence that life adversities and the
emergence of psychopathology are functionally linked bychanges in DNA methylation and, consequently, in gene
expression.
L.M. Spíndola: None. D. Micali: None. M.L. Santoro:
None. J. Schafer: None. P.M. Pan: None. V.K. Ota:
None. G. Xavier: None. C.M. Carvalho: None. F.
Talarico: None. R. Pellegrino: None. E. Brietzke: None.
R. Grassi-Oliveira: None. J.J. Mari: None. A. Gadelha:
None. E.C. Miguel: None. L.A. Rohde: None. R.A.
Bressan: None. D.R. Mazzoti: None. J.R. Sato: None. G.
A. Salum: None. H. Hakonarson: None. S.I.
Belangero: None.
P09.100C
No individual prediction of clinical outcome of ultra-
high-risk individuals by the polygenic risk scores
Q. He
1, O. Kebir2,3, G. Houle1, P. A. Dion1,
G. A. Rouleau1, M. Krebs2,4, B. Chaumette1,2,414561Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada,
2Université Paris Descartes; Bio Sorbonne Paris Cité;
INSERM, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie des Maladies
Psychiatriques, Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences,
UMR 894, GDR3557-Institut de Psychiatrie, Paris, France,
3Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Service d ’Addictologie «
Moreau de Tours », GHU Paris Psychiatrie et
Neurosciences, Paris, France,4Centre Hospitalier Sainte-
Anne, Service hospitalo-universitaire, GHU ParisPsychiatrie et Neurosciences, Paris, France
Introduction: The identi ﬁcation of clinical ultra-high-risk
state for psychosis (UHR) is now allowed in clinical
practice by assessing attenuated symptoms. Prediction of
the emergence of psychosis and dimensional clinicaloutcomes is important for early intervention. The results
of recent large-scale genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) expanded our knowledge of the genetic factorsand suggested a polygenic model of inheritance of
psychiatric disorders. We aimed to test if the individual
polygenic risk scores (PRS) could predict for conversion topsychosis and dimensional outcomes and if the converters
to psychosis have polygenic risk for psychiatric disorders.
Materials and Methods: In the French cohort ICAAR,
we collected longitudinal data of 104 individuals with at-
risk mental state enrolled in a 1-year follow-up study.
Clinical assessments included CAARMS, PANSS,MADRS, YMRS, SOFAS and CGI. The conversion to
psychosis was characterized using the CAARMS-de ﬁned
psychosis onset threshold. We genotyped more than500,000 common variants and computed four different PRS
based on the data of four GWAS from the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium.
Results: The PRS from currently available GWAS were
poor predictors of the conversion to psychosis, and there
was no signi ﬁcant difference between converters and non-
converters. The PRS were not correlated with any pheno-
typic scale at the baseline measurement (M0) and at the last
measurement (after 6 months or 12 months).
Conclusion: The PRS cannot be used in clinical practice
to predict the individual risk of conversion to psychosis.
Further studies are needed to examine the correlationbetween genetic variance and clinical outcomes in psy-
chiatric disorders.
Q. He: None. O. Kebir: None. G. Houle: None. P.A.
Dion: None. G.A. Rouleau: None. M. Krebs: None. B.
Chaumette: None.
P09.101D
Mineral absorption is an enriched pathway in the brain
regions of restless legs syndrome patients with lowerMEIS1 expressionF. Sarayloo, A. Dionne-Laporte, H. Catoire, D. Rochefort,
P. Dion, G. Rouleau
McGill University, Montreal, QC, CanadaRestless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common complex
disorder for which different genes and environmental
elements are considered risk factors. Such a mixed nature
makes it challenging to characterize the defective pathwaysassociated with the condition. Here we conducted a
genome-wide transcriptome (RNA-Seq) study and observed
how the gene reported to present the most signi ﬁcant
association with RLS, MEIS1 , acts as a regulator over the
expression of additional genes. Interestingly these addi-
tional genes appear to entail some of the pathogenicpathways known to be linked to RLS. Our data revealed
HMOX1 ,TFR2 and VDR , three genes encoding products
with RLS relevant functions, to be regulated by MEIS1 inhuman cells where the expression of MEIS1 was either
increased or prevented. These manipulations of MEIS1 in
cells revealed mineral absorption to be an enriched pathwayin regard to MEIS1 regulatory role as a transcription factor.
The same enrichment is observed in postmortem brain
regions (thalamus and pons) obtained from a subset of RLSpatients presenting changes in MEIS1 expression. The
expression of genes encoding metallothioneins (MTs) was
observed to be affected across the different RNA-Seqdatasets. MTs are highly relevant to RLS as they bind
intracellular metals and interact with ferritins which manage
iron levels. Overall, our study suggests that in a subset ofpatients, the contribution of MEIS1 to RLS is associated to
its transcriptional regulation of other genes more directly
involved in cellular pathways relevant to RLS.
F. Sarayloo: None. A. Dionne-Laporte: None.
H.
Catoire: None. D. Rochefort: None. P. Dion: None. G.
Rouleau: None.
P09.102A
Alterations in GABA A1 Receptor in Rett syndrome: thenecessity of early GABAergic modulation as a
therapeutic strategy
A. Oyarzabal
1,2,3, C. Xiol-Viñas2,4, A. Castells5, C. Grau1,2,
M. O'Callaghan2,3,6, G. Fernández5, A. Pascual-Alonso2,4,
S. Alcántara7, M. Pineda2, J. Armstrong2,5, X. Altafaj8,À .
García-Cazorla1,2,3
1Synaptic Metabolism Lab, Neurology Department,
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,2Institut
Pediàtric de Recerca, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain,3CIBERER (Biomedical Network
Research Center for Rare Diseases), Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,4Sant Joan de Déu researchAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1457foundation, Barcelona, Spain,5Genetics Department,
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,6Neurology
Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,
7Neural Development Lab, Departament de Patologia i
Terapèutica Experimental, Institut de Neurociències,
Universidat de Barcelona, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain,
8Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute,
Neuropharmacology and Pain Unit, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT; OMIM #312750) is a
severe neurological disorder which mainly affects youngfemales and is usually caused by mutations in the gene
MECP2 . However, not much is known about which
pathways can be disrupted in RTT downstream MeCP2dysfunction. Nevertheless, recent studies demonstrate the
possible implication of a disturbance in inhibitory circuits,
especially of the GABAergic inhibitory neurons, in RTTpathophysiology.
Methods: This work analyses changes in expression of
the most common subunits of GABA(A) ionotropic recep-tors in different models of RTT ( in vitro cell culture and
in vivo mouse model) by shRNA knock-down, qRT-PCR,
western blot and immunocytochemistry, as well as in post-mortem brain samples of RTT patients by RNAseq, with the
aim of ﬁnding a suitable therapeutic target for treating RTT.
Results: We observed a direct relationship between
MeCP2 and GABA (A) receptor subunit a1 (Gabra1)
expression in cell lines and primary cultured neurons. Pro-
tein analyses of female Mecp2
+/-and control mice at dif-
ferent developmental stages con ﬁrmed our previous
ﬁndings and pointed towards the importance of the devel-
opmental status in this relationship, highlighting synapticprotein expression changes in presymptomatic stages of
RTT. RNAseq results in brain samples of RTT patients
conﬁrmed the importance of the time frame when studying
RTT unbalanced neurotransmission.
Conclusions: Our results strongly support Gabra1 as a
novel therapeutic target for treating RTT. Protein expressionchanges in presymptomatic stages of RTT highlight the
importance of early therapeutic strategies targeting neuro-
transmission. Grants: Mi Princesa Rett and FIS (PI15/01159, PI16/00851 and PI15/01082 ISCIII and FEDER).
A. Oyarzabal: None. C. Xiol-Viñas: None. A. Castells:
None. C. Grau: None. M. O'Callaghan: None. G. Fer-
nández: None. A. Pascual-Alonso: None. S. Alcántara:
None. M. Pineda: None. J. Armstrong: None. X. Altafaj:
None. À. García-Cazorla: None.
P09.103B
Absence of Heterozygosity Flags BRAT1 and Leads to
the Diagnosis of Neonatal Lethal Rigidity and Multifocal
Seizure SyndromeL. Li
1, A. Knickle2, J. Dooley1,2, K. Harrison1,2,
L. Penney1,2
1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada,2IWK Health
Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada
Neonatal Lethal Rigidity and Multifocal Seizure Syndrome
(RMFSL) is a rare autosomal recessive condition character-
ized by intractable seizures, hypertonia, autonomic instabil-ity and early death. Mutations in BRAT1 (Breast Cancer 1-
associated ataxia telangiectasia mutated activation-1) have
been associated with severe RMFSL as well as relatedphenotypes of varying clinical severity. We report on a
female baby who presented with mild dysmorphic features,
striking hypertonicity, seizures with a burst suppressionpattern on EEG and apneic spells shortly after birth who
died at 2 months of age. Chromosomal microarray analysis
using a combined non-polymorphic /SNP probe basedplatform (Affymetrix CytoScan HD) did not identify any
copy number variations but several stretches of absence of
heterozygosity (AOH) were identi ﬁed including a region on
chromosome 7p22.3p22.1. As BRAT1 is contained within
this region and the clinical phenotype was suggestive of
RMFSL, BRAT1 sequencing was performed. A homozy-
gous, previously unreported pathogenic mutation
(c.1013dupC) was identi ﬁed, con ﬁrming the diagnosis of
RFMSL. To our knowledge, this is the seventh report ofRFMSL due to a homozygous BRAT1 mutation in the
literature, and the ﬁrst one reported in a family of French
Acadian background from Atlantic Canada. This casedemonstrates the utility of SNP-based microarrays which
can detect regions of AOH and help narrow the differential
diagnosis and approach to subsequent diagnosticinvestigations.
L. Li: None. A. Knickle: None. J. Dooley: None. K.
Harrison: None. L. Penney: None.
P09.104C
Changes in expression levels of some microRNAs in therat frontal lobe at different times of healing period after
experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage
F. B. Ergen
1, D. Turgut Cosan2,1, T. Kandemir3,
F. Mutlu4, T. E. Cosan3,1
1Department of Interdisciplinary Neuroscience, Health
Science Institute, Eski şehir Osmangazi University,
Eskisehir, Turkey,2Department of Medical Biology, Health
Science Institute, Eski şehir Osmangazi University,
Eskisehir, Turkey,3Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of
Medicine, Eski şehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir,
Turkey,4Department of Biostatistics, Health Science
Institute, Eski şehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey1458Introduction: The expression of certain miRNAs, such as
miR-132, miR-134 and miR-138, which are thought to be
associated with synaptic plasticity and neurological func-
tions, can affect the density and volume of dendritic spines.
In this study, it was aimed to observe how the levels ofdifferent miRNAs in the frontal lobes of experimental
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) induced rats were changed
in different time intervals
Materials and Methods: Adult female Sprague-Dawley
rats (n=21) are divided into 3 groups: control-group (n =7),
7th day post-SAH-group (n =7) and 14th day post-SAH-
group (n =7). Experimental-SAH was induced in SAH-
groups. The levels of miR-132, miR-134 and miR-138 in
the frontal lobes were determined by qPCR and statisticaldifferences were calculated using one-way ANOVA test.
Results: A statistically signi ﬁcant increase in expression
levels of miR-132,miR-134 and miR-138 was observed onday7 post-SAH (p<0,001). On the 14th day, it was deter-
mined that the level of miRNAs which were increased
earlier, decreased to the control values (p>0.05).
Conclusions: Expressions of microRNAs are elevated
during 1-7 days post-SAH, and decreased again in the
interval of 7-14 days. These results show that miR-132,miR-134 and miR-138 levels were affected during the ﬁrst
week of recovery post-SAH. This increase in microRNA
levels, which have different effects on synaptic connections,in the short-term after SAH may play a role in the inaccurate
arrangement of synaptic structures and in the emergence of
neurological dysfunctions. Further studies needed to sup-port our data.
This study was supported by ESOGÜ Scienti ﬁc Research
Project Committee with project support number:201611003.
F.B. Ergen: None. D. Turgut Cosan: None. T. Kan-
demir: None. F. Mutlu: None. T.E. Cosan: None.
P09.105D
Screening for spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36) in
the Greek population
D. Katsimpouris, C. Kartanou, M. Breza, M. Panas,
G. Koutsis, G. Karadima
Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology,
University of Athens Medical School, Eginition Hospital,ATHENS, Greece
Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36) is an
autosomal dominant (AD) disorder, characterized by late-
onset cerebellar ataxia (5
thand 6thdecade of life),
dysarthria, sensorineural hearing loss and lower motorneuron involvement, particularly tongue atrophy. A
GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat expansion in intron1 ofthe NOP56 gene causing RNA gain of function is
responsible for the disease. Normal size alleles vary from
3 to 14 repeats, pathogenic alleles have more than 650
repeats, and intermediate alleles are of uncertain
signiﬁcance.
Materials and Methods: Our cohort consisted of
98 selected index patients. 92 patients came from an ataxia
cohort (n =600), negative for the most common SCAs
(SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7), with pedigree andphenotype consistent with SCA36 and 6 came from a sus-
pected Kennedy ’s disease cohort (n =200), negative for the
CAG trinucleotide repeat in ARand pedigree consistent
with SCA36. The number of GGCCTG hexanucleotide
repeats was determined with conventional PCR for the
smaller alleles and RP-PCR for the larger alleles. Fragmentlength analysis was performed and positive controls were
used in every run.
Results: No pathologic repeat expansions in NOP56 were
detected in our cohort.
Conclusion: Supplementary to our previous study of AD
spinocerebellar ataxias in the Greek population, wescreened a less common gene causing inherited ataxia. In
line with SCA3, SCA36 seems to be a very rare ﬁnding in
the Greek population.
D. Katsimpouris: None. C. Kartanou: None. M. Breza:
None. M. Panas: None. G. Koutsis: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-
niﬁcant; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Genesis Pharma. Other;
Signi ﬁcant; Novartis, Genesis Pharma, Sano ﬁ-Genzyme,
Teva Pharmaceuticals, Merck. G. Karadima: None.
P09.106A
Rare genetic variants in SHANK1 andSHANK2 genes
found in Bulgarian patients with schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder
R. Bozhilova
1, I. Popov1, M. Penchev2, G. dzhebir1,
O. Beltcheva1, V. Stoyanova2, G. Kirov3, V. Milanova2,
R. Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University - So ﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,2Clinic of Psychiatry, Alexandrovska
University Hospital, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,3Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom
Genes associated in postsynaptic plasticity have been
shown to contribute to schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolaraffective disorder (BAD), so is reasonable to hypothesize
that the etiology of psychiatric diseases is linked to synapse
structure, transmission and postsynaptic density. Shanks areadapter proteins in the postsynaptic density that intercon-
nect receptors of the postsynaptic membrane.The membersAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1459ofSHANK gene family are candidate genes for psychiatric
disorders.
A total of 300 individuals with BAD, 151 with SCZ,
15SAD diagnosed based on DSMIV, 85 healthy controls
and 40 healthy relatives were recruited. The samples were
sequenced on the IonPROTON. The sequencing panelcomprised of 187 genes, including SHANK1 andSHANK2
genes.Only samples with coverage of at least 95% were
included in the analyses.SIFT&PolyPhen2 were used toidentify pathogenic variants. The identi ﬁed rare variants
within SHANK1 and SHANK2 genes were validated by
Sanger sequencing and tested in group of 100 patients and100 controls.
Altogether 17 rare variants in SHANK1 and SHANK2 ,
present in affected only were found.Among the 16missensevariants, 12 were potentially damaging. One splice variant
was detected. Two of the missense variants in SHANK2 ,
rs117843717 and rs150857128, were found both in schi-zophrenia and BAD patients. In the mutation burden ana-
lysis, SHANK1 was one of the genes with more variants
than expected in the BAD patients compared to controls.
SHANK1 andSHANK2 mutations have been previously
implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders. Recent functional
analysis of SHANK2 mutations found in schizophrenia
patients support their causative role. The current data adds
to the evidence that postsynaptic plasticity is involved in the
pathogenesis of psychiatric disorder. The work was sup-ported by projects DUNK01-2/2009 and D-131/2018MU-
Soﬁa
R. Bozhilova: None. I. Popov: None. M. Penchev:
None. G. dzhebir: None. O. Beltcheva: None. V. Stoya-
nova: None. G. Kirov: None. V. Milanova: None. R.
Kaneva: None.
P09.107B
Identi ﬁcation of New Genes Associated with Childhood-
Onset Schizophrenia, ATP1A3 and the FXYD Gene
Family
B. Chaumette
1,2, V. Ferra ﬁat3, A. Ambalavanan1,
A. Goldenberg3, A. Dionne-Laporte1, D. Spiegelman1,
P. Dion1, P. Gerardin3, C. Laurent4, D. Cohen4,
J. Rapoport5, G. Rouleau1
1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,2INSERM
U1266, Paris, France,3CHU, Rouen, France,4Hôpital
Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France,5NIMH, Bethesda, MD,
United States
Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) is a rare and severe
form of schizophrenia starting before age of 13. Weidenti ﬁed two unrelated cases diagnosed with both COS and
alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC), a rare diseasecharacterized by repeated episodes of hemiplegia. Genes
associated with AHC are known and guided our genetic
exploration of these two patients using the targeted
sequencing of the ATP1A3 gene. Then, we replicated our
ﬁndings in a database of whole exome sequencing of 17
independent COS cases. In the cases with comorbid AHC,two distinct pathogenic de novo variants were identi ﬁed in
the ATP1A3 gene. In the replication cohort, we identi ﬁed a
third case with a possibly damaging missense variant in thesame exon of ATP1A3. Three other cases with predicted
pathogenic missense variants in the FXYD gene family
(FXYD1, FXYD6, and FXYD6-FXYD2 readthrough) werefound. ATP1A3 encodes the α-subunit of a neuron-speci ﬁc
ATP-dependent transmembrane sodium-potassium pump.
The function of this pump is modulated by proteins encodedby the FXYD genes. Our report is the ﬁrst to identify
variants in the same pathway for COS. It illustrates the
interest of exploring medical comorbidities and stratifying acomplex condition according to the age of onset for the
identi ﬁcation of deleterious missense variants. Whereas
ATP1A3 is a replicated gene in rare neuropediatric diseases,we extended the phenotype to a pure psychiatric presenta-
tion. Our study highlights the interest of DNA sequencing
in psychiatry and opens the way to develop geneticcounseling in COS.
B. Chaumette: None. V. Ferra ﬁat:None. A. Ambala-
vanan: None. A. Goldenberg: None. A. Dionne-Laporte:
None. D. Spiegelman: None. P. Dion: None. P. Gerardin:
None. C. Laurent: None. D. Cohen: None. J. Rapoport:
None. G. Rouleau: None.
P09.108C
Transcriptome analysis of post-mortem brain tissuereveals up-regulation of immune response genes in a
subset of schizophrenia patients
M. Etemadikhah
1, E. Lindholm Carlström1,
J. Halvardson1, A. Niazi1, S. Enroth1, A. Stockmeier
Craig2, G. Rajkowska2, B. Nilsson1, L. Feuk1
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, Uppsala University,Uppsala, Sweden,
2Department of Psychiatry and Human
Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, United States
Introduction: Schizophrenia is a genetically complex
neuropsychiatric disorder. While the heritability of schizo-phrenia is around 80%, the precise underlying molecular
mechanisms and pathways are still unclear. To investigate
pathways associated with schizophrenia, we performedgene expression study and we are now following up by
measurement of protein expression.1460Materials and Methods: Whole transcriptome poly-A
selected paired-end RNA sequencing was performed on
post-mortem brain tissue samples from 68 schizophrenia
patients and 44 matched controls. Differential RNA
expression was detected between cases and controls. The
results were validated with RT-qPCR. Expression analysisfor >100 proteins is currently under way using proximity
extension assay.
Results: Signi ﬁcant differential expression was found for
71 genes in cases compared to unaffected controls. Gene
ontology of differentially expressed genes revealed an up-
regulation of multiple genes in immune response among thepatients as the most signi ﬁcant category. Several genes of
complement system, including C1R, C1S, C7 ,FCN3 and
SERPING1 were also in the category. The increased com-
plement expression was stronger in a subgroup of patients
which might be due to differences in disease etiology within
patients. Speci ﬁc proteins were also associated with dif-
ferential expression in this subgroup of patients. Weighted
gene co-expression network analysis highlighted networks
associated with synaptic transmission and activation ofimmune response.
Conclusions: Our results implicate upregulation of the
complement cascade as a crucial pathway associated withschizophrenia pathology.
This work was supported by grants from the European
Research Council ERC Starting Grant Agreement n.282330 and the Swedish Medical Research Council to
Lars Feuk.
M. Etemadikhah: None. E. Lindholm Carlström:
None. J. Halvardson: None. A. Niazi: None. S. Enroth:
None. A. Stockmeier Craig: None. G. Rajkowska: None.
B. Nilsson: None. L. Feuk: None.
P09.109D
SCN8A- related epilepsies: phenotypic overview and
correlation with antiepileptic treatment
K. M. Johannesen
1,2, Y. Liu3, C. Tronhjem1, K. Stêrbová4,
C. Høi-Hansen5, P. Striano6, H. Verhelst7, J. Verhoeven8,
R. Oegema9, A. Harder10,11, M. Pendziwiat12, S. Lebon13,
M. Vaccarezza14, C. Heine15, J. Lemke15,N .L e16,
J. Christensen17, A. Berger18, M. Trivisano19,
N. Specchio20, D. Hoffman-Zacharska21,
M. Mastrangelo22, E. Brilstra23, M. Vecchi24, A. Vallø25,
M. Motazacker26, P. Lakeman26, M. Nizon27, C. Betzler28,
S. Masnada29, P. Vegiotti30, C. Marini31, R. Guerrini31,
G. Rubboli1, G. Lesca32, E. Gardella1, H. Lerche33,
R. S. Møller1
1Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized
Treatment, Dianalund, Denmark,2Institute for Regional
Health Services, University of Southern Denmarkj, Odense,Denmark,3Department of Neurology and Epileptology,
Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of
Tuebingen,, Tuebingen, Germany,4Department of Child
Neurology, Charles University, 2nd Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Motol, P, rague, Czech Republic,
5Department of Pediatrics, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,6Pediatric Neurology and
Muscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurosciences,
Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal andChild Health, University of Genoa, Genova, Italy,
7Department of Paediatrics, Divison of Paediatric
Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium,
8Academic Center for Epileptology, Heeze, Netherlands,
9Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,10Department of Neurology,
Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,
11Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,12: Department of
Neuropediatrics, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig Holstein
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany,13Pediatric Neurology Unit,
Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne University Hospital,Lausanne, Switzerland,
14Department of Neurology,
Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Bueno Aires, Argentina,
15Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig
Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany,16Center for
Pediatric Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH,
United States,17Department of Neurology, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,18Department of
Neuropediatrics, Klinikum Weiden, Weiden, Germany,
19Department of Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation,
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,20:
Department of Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation,
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,
21Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and
Child, Warsaw, Poland,22Pediatric Neurology Unit, Vittore
Buzzi Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy,
23Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands,
24Child Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology Unit,
Department of Women's and Children's Health, University
Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy,25Department of
Pediatrics, Østfold Hospital, Graalum, Norway,
26Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical
Center at the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,27Unit of Medical Genetics, Necker Enfants-
Malades Hospital, Paris, France,28Clinic for
Neuropediatrics and Neurorehabilitation, Epilepsy Center
for Children and Adolescents, Schön Klinik, Vogtareuth,Germany,
29Department of Brain and Behavioural
Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,30Department of
Child Neurology, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Universityof Milan, Milan, Italy,
31Pediatric Neurology,
Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1461Meyer Children's Hospital, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy,32Service de génétique clinique, Centre de
Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes
Malformatifs Centre Est- HCL, Lyon, France,
33Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie
Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University ofTuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany
Introduction: SCN8A is well-known gene being the
monogenic cause of SCN8A -related developmental and
epileptic encephalopathy, as well as self-limiting epilepsies
and epilepsies with an intermediate phenotype, with mildintellectual disability and treatable seizures. Reports so far,
suggest that sodium channel blockers (SCBs) have a
positive effect on seizure in SCN8A -related epilepsy. In
this overview, we sought to describe the complete
phenotypic spectrum, provide novel data on functional
studies, as well as evaluate treatment response in thepatients suffering from epilepsy.
Methods: Clinical information on cognitive status, epi-
lepsy onset, epilepsy type and treatment response was col-lected via standardized spreadsheets. Clinicians and
geneticists worldwide participated in the study. Previously
published cases were included via a PubMed search. Allpatients signed informed consent, and the study was
approved by the local ethical committee.
Results: In total, we investigated 36 previously unpub-
lished patients, and 246 patients in total. We found ﬁve
distinct clinical subgroups; BFNIS, intermediate epilepsy,
DEE, severe DEE (non-ambulant, no speech, corticalblindness) and patients without epilepsy. The DEE sub-
groups comprise 74% of the total cohort. SCBs were the
most ef ﬁcient anti-epileptic drug. Several recurrent variants
were found. Some of these variants showed a persistent
phenotype and others not. The underlying reasons for this
remain unexplained.
Conclusion: The phenotypic range of SCN8A is wide
ranging from self-limiting epilepsies to severe DEEs, and
also including patients without epilepsy. Phenotypic varia-bility within the same genetic variants are common, so
genetic counselling must be done carefully. SCBs should be
ﬁrst-line treatment in SCN8A -related epilepsy.
K.M. Johannesen: None. Y. Liu: None. C. Tronhjem:
None. K. Stêrbová: None. C. Høi-Hansen: None. P.
Striano: None. H. Verhelst: None. J. Verhoeven: None.
R. Oegema: None. A. Harder: None. M. Pendziwiat:
None. S. Lebon: None. M. Vaccarezza: None. C. Heine:
None. J. Lemke: None. N. Le: None. J. Christensen:
None. A. Berger: None. M. Trivisano: None. N. Spec-
chio: None. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. M. Mas-
trangelo: None. E. Brilstra: None. M. Vecchi: None. A.
Vallø:
None. M. Motazacker: None. P. Lakeman: None.
M. Nizon: None. C. Betzler: None. S. Masnada: None. P.Vegiotti: None. C. Marini: None. R. Guerrini: None. G.
Rubboli: None. G. Lesca: None. E. Gardella: None. H.
Lerche: None. R.S. Møller: None.
P09.110A
Severe neurodevelopmental disorder with intractableseizures due to a novel SLC1A4 homozygous mutation
L. Sedlackova
1, K. Sterbova2, M. Vlckova3,
P. Lassuthova1, P. Seeman1
1DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of
Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,Charles University in Prague and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Biallelic mutations in the SLC1A4 gene have
been identi ﬁed as a very rare cause of neurodevelopmental
disorders with or without epilepsy and almost exclusivelydescribed in the Ashkenazi-Jewish population. That is why
theSLC1A4 gene is not routinely included in the genetic
diagnostic panels for neurological diseases or epilepsy.Patients and Methods: Here we present a 5-year-old Czech
boy with microcephaly, severe psychomotor retardation and
intractable seizures who remained unsolved using clinicalexperience and standard diagnostic methods including
examination by an epilepsy targeted gene panel. Whole-
exome sequencing (WES) was ﬁnally used to obtain genetic
diagnosis.
Results: A novel mutation, p.Arg457Gln (c.1370G>A) of
theSLC1A4 gene, was detected in homozygous state by
WES in the patient, and afterwards by Sanger sequencing in
heterozygous state in both parents con ﬁrming the biallelic
origin of the mutation. This variant is not reported in ExAC/gnomAD databases in homozygous state, in heterozygous
state in a very low frequency (0.002%), it affects a highly
conserved aminoacid predicted to be deleterious. Mutationin the same codon but different aminoacid exchange was
previously described in a patient with very similar pheno-
type, however, without epilepsy. Our patient suffers frommicrocephaly, global developmental delay, axial hypotonia
with acral spasticity, brain and corpus callosum atrophy,
impaired visual function and drug-resistant epilepsy.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that the SLC1A4 gene
should be considered in the diagnosis of patients with
severe early onset neurodevelopmental impairment withepilepsy and encourages SLC1A4 gene variants ’analysis1462via targeted gene panel or WES. Supported by: NV19-08-
00194
L. Sedlackova: None. K. Sterbova: None. M. Vlckova:
None. P. Lassuthova: None. P. Seeman: None.
P09.111B
Molecular genetic and cellular characterization of a
missense mutation in SLITRK1 associated with non-
syndromic autosomal recessive intellectual disability
M. A. Khan1, J. Blatterer2, M. Z. Ali1, L. Baufeld2,
E. Petek2, K. Wagner2, J. Ramadani-Muja3, R. Malli3,
M. Muzammal1, C. Windpassinger2
1Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Gomal
University, D.I.Khan, Pakistan,2Diagnostic & Research
Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria,3Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Division
of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical University
of Graz, Graz, Austria
Introduction: Intellectual disability is a phenotypically and
genetically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder
with an estimated prevalence of 1 % in the generalpopulation. So far sixty-nine gene loci have been reported
to be involved in autosomal recessive non-syndromic
intellectual disability (NS-ARID).
Materials and Methods: A novel disease locus was
identi ﬁed using homozygosity by descent (HBD) mapping
coupled with whole exome sequencing in a large con-sanguineous Pakistani family. On the cellular level, the
impact of the novel mutation on protein expression was
characterized in subcellular colocalization experiments.
Results: Herein this study, HBD mapping identi ﬁed a
single shared homozygous region on chromosome 13
between markers rs9531043 to rs7318889. The subsequentexome sequence analysis identi ﬁed a novel SLITRK1 gene
mutation, which segregated with the disease phenotype.
SLITRK1 is an adhesion molecule located in the post-synaptic membrane of excitatory synapses. Cellular assays
showed that the identi ﬁed novel mutation results in loss of
protein function by trapping mutated SLITRK1 intracellu-larly in the endoplasmic reticulum and thus preventing
surface transport and ligand-binding. Additionally, several
reported mutations showing decreased surface expression ofSLITRK1 were selected for colocalization analysis. We
proof that all variants are transported into the plasma
membrane with the exception of SLITRK1 harboring the
novel mutation.
Conclusions: SLITRK1 has previously been associated
with a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. However, ourﬁndings suggest a possible, to date unreported, association
of SLITRK1 in NS-ARID. Thus, in the light of our ﬁndings,the gene ’s implication in complex neuropsychiatric dis-
orders should be re-evaluated.
M.A. Khan: None. J. Blatterer: None. M.Z. Ali: None.
L. Baufeld: None. E. Petek: None. K. Wagner: None. J.
Ramadani-Muja: None. R. Malli: None. M. Muzammal:
None. C. Windpassinger: None.
P09.112C
Somatic mutation that affects transcription factorbinding upstream of CD55 in the temporal cortex of a
late-onset Alzheimer disease patient
H. T. Helgadottir
1, P. Lundin2, E. Wallén Arzt1,
A. Lindström3, C. Graff3, M. Eriksson1
1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for
Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden,2Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden,
3Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society,
Center for Alzheimer Research, Division for
Neurogeriatrics, Solna, Sweden
Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) is the most common neurode-
generative disease worldwide. Familial cases suggestgenetic components, however monogenetic causes are few
and the vast majority of incidences have unknown cause.
Sequencing efforts have focused on germline mutations, butimproved technology has opened up for studies on somatic
mutations in affected brain tissue samples. Here we use
ultra-deep sequencing on brain and blood from early andlate onset AD patients, and non-AD individuals (n =16). In
total 2.86 Megabases of genomic regions, previously
associated with AD was targeted, included 28 genes andupstream and downstream regulatory regions. Tailored
downstream bioinformatics ﬁltering identi ﬁed 11 somatic
single nucleotide variants in the temporal cortex in ADpatients and none in the controls. One variant was validated
to be present at 0.4% allele frequency in temporal cortex of
a late-onset AD patient. This variant was predicted to affecttranscription factor binding sites upstream of the CD55
gene, contributing to AD pathogenesis by affecting the
complement system. Our results suggest that future studiestargeting larger portions of the genome for somatic mutation
analysis are important to obtain an increased understanding
for the molecular basis of both early and late onset AD.
H.T. Helgadottir: None. P. Lundin: None. E. Wallén
Arzt: None. A. Lindström: None. C. Graff: None. M.
Eriksson: None.
P09.113D
Ddhd1 knockout mouse as a model for familial spastic
paraplegiaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1463T. Morikawa1, S. Miura2,3, H. Ohishi4, K. Kosaka1,
T. Shimojo1, A. Nagano1, R. Fujioka5, K. Moriyama6,
M. Unoki4, M. Takahashi7, M. Nakao7, Y. Izumi7,
T. Bamba7, H. Sasaki4, H. Shibata1
1Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of bioregulation,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan,2Division of
Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of
Medicine, Kurume University, Fukuoka, Japan,
3Department of Geriatric Medicine and Neurology, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Japan,
4Division of Epigenomics and Development Medical
Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan,5Department of Food and Nutrition, Beppu
University Junior College, Beppu, Japan,6Department of
Nutritional Sciences, Nakamra Gakuen University,
Fukuoka, Japan,7Division of Metabolomics, Medical
Institute of bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,Japan
We have previously identi ﬁed a homozygous 4-bp deletion,
in exon2 in DDHD1 as the responsible variant for spastic
paraplegia type 28 (SPG28) (Miura et al 2016). The variant
is expected to cause a premature termination resulting in afunctionally null allele. DDHD1 encodes phospholipase A
1
(PA-PLA 1), an enzyme catalyzing phosphatidylinositol (PI)
to lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI). Towards the clari ﬁcation
of the pathogenic mechanism of SPG28, we established
Ddhd1 knockout (KO) mice carrying a 1-bp deletion in exon
2i n Ddhd1 , resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination at the very similar position with the patient.
Since we observed no obvious abnormalities in their
locomotion, we measured foot-base-angle (FBA) which isan established character to evaluate SPG phenotypes. We
observed a signi ﬁcant decrease of FBA in the homozygous
KOs, as a partial replication of SPG phenotypes. By RNAsequencing, we identi ﬁed 22 genes showing signi ﬁcantly
changed expressions in cerebrum of the homozygous KOs.
The 22 genes are characterized by a GO term, ”positive
regulation of GTPase activity ”and a KEGG pathway, ”NF-
kappa B signaling pathway ”. By lipidome analyses using
supercritical ﬂuid chromatography mass spectrometry (SFC/
MS) we observed signi ﬁcant increase of PI and signi ﬁcant
decrease of LPI in cerebrum of the homozygous KOs. LPI
is known to be the agonist for a G protein coupled receptor,GPR55 triggering mobilization of intracellular Ca
2+. Our
current data suggest the mechanism of SPG that the reduced
LPI level in cerebrum triggers abnormal reduction ofintracellular Ca
2+, resulting in neural apoptosis by abnormal
NF-kappa B signaling.
T. Morikawa: None. S. Miura: None. H. Ohishi: None.
K. Kosaka: None. T. Shimojo: None. A. Nagano: None.
R. Fujioka: None. K. Moriyama: None. M. Unoki: None.M. Takahashi: None. M. Nakao: None. Y. Izumi: None.
T. Bamba: None. H. Sasaki: None. H. Shibata: None.
P09.114A
Blood-based gene expression analysis in children with
speci ﬁc language impairment
I. Y. Hristo1, I. G. Sotkova-Ivanova1, T. Vachev2,
N. Popov3, I. Ivanov1, I. Pacheva1, R. Yordanova1,
V. Stoyanova1
1Medical University Plovdiv, Departament of Pediatrics
and Medical Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,2University of
Plovdiv, Department of Plant Physiology and Molecular
Biology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,3State Phsychiatry Hospital
Pazardzhik, Psychiatric ward for active treatment,
Pazardzhik, Bulgaria
Introduction: Comparative gene expression pro ﬁling dis-
covers differentially expressed genes associated with
various diseases, including neurodevelopment disorders.Speci ﬁc language impairment (SLI) is de ﬁned as an
unexpected and persistent impairment in language ability
despite adequate social environment and intelligence and inthe absence of any explanatory medical conditions. This
condition is highly heritable and affects around 7% of pre-
school children.
Materials and Methods: The study aimed to examine
gene expression pro ﬁling in the peripheral blood of 60
individuals divided into two groups: children with SLI andage- and gender-matched healthy controls. A genome-wide
sequencing of copy DNA molecules was conducted in the
pooled probes of the two groups investigating the quanti-tative expression of the genes and Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway-based analysis was
used to further understand genes ’biological functions.
Results: As a result of the conducted expression analysis,
60 differentially expressed genes and 7 KEGG signaling
pathways with statistical signi ﬁcant change were identi ﬁed.
The KEGG names of these pathways were: "Hepatitis C",
"Herpes simplex infection", "Leukocyte transendothelial
migration", "Primary immunode ﬁciency", "Calcium sig-
naling pathway" and "Tight junction".
Conclusions: Clear and signi ﬁcant abnormalities exist in
the gene expression in peripheral blood samples of childrenwith SLI compared to healthy controls. We suggest that not
only cellular signaling but immune mechanisms may also
be involved in the pathogenesis of SLI.
I.Y. Hristo: None. I.G. Sotkova-Ivanova: None. T.
Vachev: None. N. Popov: None. I. Ivanov: None. I.
Pacheva: None. R. Yordanova: None. V.
Stoyanova: None.1464P09.115B
Overview of molecular diagnostic testing of
spinocerebellar ataxias in Estonia
T. Kahre1,2, Ü. Murumets1, H. Roomere1, S. Sarv2,
K. Gross-Paju3, K. Õunap1,2,4, S. Pajusalu1,2,5
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Neurology Clinic, West Tallinn
Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia,4Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard,, Cambridge, MA, United States,5Yale
University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics,
New Haven, CT, United States
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterogeneous group
of neurodegenerative disorders. Due to extensive clinicaloverlap among different forms of hereditary ataxia
(>35 subtypes known), genetic testing is required to
establish a diagnosis. The most common causes of SCAsare expansions of trinucleotide CAG repeats within genes
ATXN1, ATXN2, ATXN3, ATXN7 and CACNA1A . Next-
generation sequencing (NGS) assays have abled to delineateother types of hereditary ataxias caused by other variant
types. The aim of this study was to clarify which types of
SCAs are most prevalent in Estonia and to compare thediagnostic yield of trinucleotide repeat assay and
(NGS) panel.
Patients and methods: The SCA repeat expansion assay
was performed in 317 Estonian patients referred to the Tartu
University Hospital during the years 2000-2018. All indi-
viduals were tested for triplet expansions in ATXN1,
ATXN2, ATXN3, CACNA1A genes with PCR based frag-
ment analysis, and since 2012 ATXN7 was added to the
standard panel. Since 2016, 72 patients were studied usingNGS based panel (Illumina TruSight One) with ataxia
subpanel (151 genes included).
Results: In 35 (11.0%) patients, repeat extension (34
SCA2 cases, 1 SCA1 case) was detected. From NGS-based
panel testing, 7 (9.7%) diagnostic ﬁndings were reported in
6 different genes ( PRKCG, TGM6, ITPR1, SACS ,2 x
ANO10 , and XPA).
Conclusion: The most prevalent form of SCAs in Estonia
is SCA2. Triplet repeat expansion assay and NGS panelsequencing showed similar diagnostic yields, but it is more
cost-ef ﬁcient to start with repeat expansion assay. Funding:
Estonian Research Council grants PRG471, andPUTJD827.
T. Kahre: None. Ü. Murumets: None. H. Roomere:
None. S. Sarv: None. K. Gross-Paju: None. K. Õunap:
None. S. Pajusalu: None.P09.116C
Identi ﬁcation of genetic factors that modify age at onset
of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3
F. Akcimen
1, S. Martins2, C. V. Bourassa3, C. Liao1,
M. Lima4, I. Lopes-Cendes5, L. B. Jardim6, J. Sequeiros7,
P. A. Dion3, G. A. Rouleau1
1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University;
Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada,
2Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada,4Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Ponta Delgada,Portugal,
5Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of
Medical Genetics, (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil,
6Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto
Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil,7Institute for
Molecular and Cell Biology, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal
Introduction: There is a strong correlation between CAG
repeat size of ATXN3 and the age at onset (AAO) of
spinocerebellar ataxia type-3 (SCA3). However, AAO
variability is not entirely explained by the length of the
repeat, suggesting the existence of additional modifyingfactors.
Materials and Methods: To examine the residual
variability in AAO, a genome-wide association study(GWAS) was conducted across a cohort of 700 SCA3 cases
from North America, Brazil and Portugal. The ﬁrst phase of
the study established the CAG repeat size in cases as itassessed the proportion of AAO variability that could be
accounted to the repeat size. In the second phase, a linear
regression analysis tested for genomic factors affecting theresidual AAO.
Results: The inverse relationship between CAG repeat
size and AAO was con ﬁrmed ( ρ=0.62). No loci reached
genome-wide signi ﬁcance but eight suggestive loci
(p<1×10
-5). We also observed 80 loci with a p<1×10-4;
some of which revealed associations with genes causingother forms of ataxia. The later would be good candidates
for the AAO of SCA3.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst GWAS to focus on the
identi ﬁcation of variants that could reveal modi ﬁers of AAO
in SCA3. We con ﬁrmed the known inverse correlation
between CAG repeat size and AAO as we provided evi-dence for other modifying factors. A replication study using
a well-powered independent cohort is now required to
conﬁrm our results.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1465Acknowledgement: F.A. is supported by a Healthy Brains
and Healthy Lives (HBHL) scholarship and the Department
of Human Genetics of McGill University.
F. Akcimen: None. S. Martins: None. C.V. Bourassa:
None. C. Liao: None. M. Lima: None. I. Lopes-Cendes:
None. L.B. Jardim: None. J. Sequeiros: None. P.A. Dion:
None. G.A. Rouleau: None.
P09.117D
Distance between oculomotor patterns in premanifest
spinocerebellar ataxias re ﬂects disease onset
G. Coarelli1,2, S. Rivaud-Pechoux1, S. Sayah1, P. Pouget1,
C. Cazeneuve2, M. Monin1,2, M. Anheim3,4, B. Gaymard5,
T. Klockgether6,7, S. Tezenas du Montcel8, A. Durr1,2
1ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Paris, France,
2Department of Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles-Foix
University Hospital, Assistance Publique –Hôpitaux de
Paris (AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Paris, France,
3Department of Neurology, Hôpital de Hautepierre,
Strasbourg, France,4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM-U964/CNRS-
UMR7104; Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle deStrasbourg (FMTS), Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,
5Department of Neurophysiology, AP-HP,
Assistance Publique –Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP),
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France,6Department of
Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,7German
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn,Germany,
8INSERM U 1136, Sorbonne Universités, Institut
Pierre Louis d ’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique,
Assistance Publique –Hôpitaux de Paris AP-HP, Hôpitaux
Universitaires Pitié-Salpêtrière –Charles Foix, Paris,
France
Introduction: Knowledge about premanifest stage of
spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) will guide therapeutic
preventive interventions. The aim of this work was tofollow oculomotor and cognitive changes over time in
unaffected premanifest SCAs carriers.
Materials and Methods: As part of the RISCA study, we
assessed preclinical SCA1-2-3 carriers and non-carriers at
baseline and at 72 months follow-up. Distance between
Oculomotor Patterns (DOP) were determined by combiningvalues of standard deviation from the norm of prosaccades
latency, velocity and gain for leftward and rightward pro-
saccade, antisaccade latencies and square-wave jerks(pathological if >4) and correlated with cognitive outcomes.
Quantitative motor battery and volumetric MRI were
performed.
Results: There were 16 carriers (3 SCA1 carriers, 4
SCA2 carriers, 9 SCA3 carriers) and 16 non-carriers,similar in age (mean age at baseline 35.7±7.8), quantitative
cerebellar functional score (CCFS), cognitive evaluation
(MMS, BREF and Stroop) and DOP at the baseline. Inter-
estingly, SARA score at baseline was below ﬁve but higher
in carriers (1.47±0.85 vs 0.78±0.72, p<0.05). At follow-up,
DOP increased from 2.2±1.7 to 2.2±3.8 in non-carriers andfrom 3.5±3.6 to 8.2±8.2 in carriers (p<0.05). For the con-
verters with SARA>5, mean DOP reached 12.5±8.2 while it
remained at 3.3±5.3 in non-converters (p =<0.01). There
was a positive correlation between DOP and CCFS
(p=0.01) and SARA (p =0.001). No changes in cognitive
assessments were found at follow-up.
Conclusions: DOP and CCFS re ﬂect disease conversion
and are independent from the rater thus more reliable in pre-
symptomatic carriers.
Grant references: NCT01037777, Institut National de la
Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale.
G. Coarelli: None. S. Rivaud-Pechoux: None. S.
Sayah: None. P. Pouget: None. C. Cazeneuve: None. M.
Monin: None. M. Anheim: None. B. Gaymard: None. T.
Klockgether: None. S. Tezenas du Montcel: None. A.
Durr: None.
P09.118A
Novel glycine receptor variants identi ﬁed in startle
disease patients
G. Aboheimed
1,2,3, M. ALRasheed2, M. Salih4,
M. AlOwain5, M. Alsagob1, R. Almass1, L. AlQuait1,
R. Harvey6,7, H. AlDhallaan8, O. Dabbagh5, A. Ruiz3,
N. Kaya1
1Department of Genetics, KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2College of Pharmacy, Clinical Pharmacy Department,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3UCL School of Pharmacy,
Department of Pharmacology, London,WC1N 1AX, UnitedKingdom,
4Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of
Pediatrics, College of Medicine,, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
5Department of Medical Genetics, KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,6School of Health and Sport Sciences, University of
the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs, QLD, Australia,
7Sunshine Coast Health Institute, Birtiny,QLD, Australia,
8Department of Neurosciences, KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia
Startle disease, also known as hyperekplexia, is a rare
inherited neurological disorder that affects newborn chil-
dren. The predominant genetic causes are mutations in thegenes GLRA1 andGLRB , encoding glycine receptor alpha
and beta subunits, respectively, and SLC6A5 encoding the
glycine transporter GlyT2. The disease has hallmarkcharacteristics of noise- or touch-induced non-epileptic
seizures resulting in muscle stiffness and apnea. However,1466cases are often misdiagnosed as spastic quadriplegia or
epilepsy. Our study focuses on likely disease causative
mutations in startle disease patients in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. Sanger sequencing, homozygosity mapping,
and targeted next-generation sequencing were conducted in
ﬁfteen patients. Functional analysis of selected variants was
performed using whole-cell recordings and confocal micro-
scopy in acutely transfected N2A cells. We identi ﬁed one
novel (p.A455P) and two (p.Q195X and p. M177R)recurrent variants in the GLRB . We also identi ﬁed one
novel frameshift mutation in the SLC6A5 (p.I692fs) and
three recurrent variants in GLRA1 (p.G342S, p.R252H, and
p.R218Q). Cells transfected with mutant GLRB showed a
reduction in glycine-evoked currents compared to those of
wild type. Tagging of glycine receptor subunits furtherrevealed disrupted membrane localisation of the mutated
proteins. Our results uncover novel mutations in glycine
receptor genes that are potentially linked to the aetiology ofstartle disease
G. Aboheimed: None. M. ALRasheed: None. M. Salih:
None. M. AlOwain: None. M. Alsagob: None. R. Almass:
None. L. AlQuait: None. R. Harvey: None. H. AlDhal-
laan: None. O. Dabbagh: None. A. Ruiz: None. N.
Kaya: None.
P09.119B
Characterization of STUB1 in zebra ﬁsh - development of
a new knock-out model to study neurodegeneration
Y. Pakdaman
1,2,3, E. Austad3, E. Denker3, S. Johansson1,2,
I. Aukrust1,2, P. M. Knappskog1,2, S. Ellingsen3
1Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway,2Department of Medical Genetics,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway,
3Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway
Introduction: Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar
Ataxia-16 (SCAR16) is caused by de ﬁciencies in the
STUB1 gene encoding the ubiquitin E3 ligase and co-
chaperone CHIP. There is limited knowledge regarding thepathogenic role of mutant CHIP in vivo . This study aims to
establish a zebra ﬁsh model for SCAR16 by CRISPR/Cas9-
mediated mutagenesis of the zebra ﬁsh orthologue of human
STUB1 .
Material and Methods: Single guide RNAs targeting
a 20 nucleotide-sequence in stub1 gene were injected
together with Cas9 proteins into wild type zebra ﬁsh
embryos at one-cell stage. Offspring ﬁsh were analyzed for
transmitted germline mutations. The expression of CHIPprotein was also examined in WT ﬁsh brain using
immunohistochemistry.Results: All injected eggs showed high frequency of
modiﬁcations at the stub1 locus at 48 hours post injection.
F1 heterozygous carriers with a 7 nucleotide-deletions at
position 10800 in the stub1 gene were produced from the
founder ﬁsh, and further used to obtain homozygous off-
spring. Immunohistochemistry studies provided initial evi-dences regarding localization of CHIP protein in Purkinje
cells in the cerebellum of WT ﬁsh.
Conclusions: We here described the use of CRISPR/
Cas9 system to induce modi ﬁcations of the stub1 gene in
zebra ﬁsh and contribute to establishing a new animal model
for studying STUB1 -related ataxia diseases. Future work
will focus on phenotypic and behavior analysis of homo-
zygous mutant zebra ﬁsh lines.
This study has received funding from Helse Vest (grant
911810) and the University of Bergen.
Y. Pakdaman: None. E. Austad: None. E. Denker:
None. S. Johansson: None. I. Aukrust: None. P.M.
Knappskog: None. S. Ellingsen: None.
P09.120C
Proposal for a new subcategory in the classi ﬁcation of
the Copy Number Variants as Factor of susceptibility
N. Baena
1, E. Gabau2, N. Capdevila2, A. Ruiz1, L. Capel1,
C. Aguilera1, S. Ourani2, N. Spataro1, M. Guitart1
1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc
Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma deBarcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain,
2Paediatric Unit.
Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma deBarcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: The interpretation of variants of uncertain
signiﬁcance (VOUS) remains a challenge for geneticists
since the criteria used and the continuous updating of the
databases may change their classi ﬁcation. We reviewed the
postnatal recurrent CNV in neurodevelopmental disorders
with lack of agreement in the interpretation across databases
and labelled as VOUS, probably pathogenic or probablybenign with the aim of reclassifying them as a susceptibility
factor.
Materials and Methods: A CGH array (8x60K ISCA,
Agilent Technologies) was performed on 2,858 patients
with neurodevelopmental disorders. We de ﬁne a suscept-
ibility factor as a CNV with reduced penetrance, variableclinical expressivity and complex to associate with a spe-
ciﬁc phenotype.
Results: A total of 69 (2.4%) patients with a CNV clas-
siﬁed as a susceptibility factor have been identi ﬁed.
Dup3p26.2 ( CNTN4 /CNTN6 ) in 7 cases, del15q11.2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1467(NIPA1 ) in 22 cases, dup15q13.3 ( CHNRNA7-OTUD7A )i n
17 cases, dup16p13.11 ( NDE1, NTAN1 ) in 5 cases,
dup16p13.3 ( RBFOX1 ) in 3 cases and dupXp22.33
(SHOX1 ) in 16 cases. A second CNV was detected in 11
cases and was classi ﬁed mostly as VOUS. The variable
clinical expression observed in each of these variants agreeswith what is described in the literature.
Conclusions: A new subcategory of susceptibility factor
is proposed for these CNVs classi ﬁed in the VOUS group.
Its clinical signi ﬁcance is subject to the penetrance and
expression in each individual. Given the wide hetero-
geneity, the clinical geneticist must decide if the CNV isresponsible for the phenotype and determine if the family
segregation study is necessary.
N. Baena: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevila: None.
A. Ruiz: None. L. Capel: None. C. Aguilera: None. S.
Ourani: None. N. Spataro: None. M. Guitart: None.
P09.121D
Expanding the “Angelman-like ”spectrum: patients with
SYNGAP1-related disorders show EEG ﬁndings most
often attributed to Angelman syndrome
A. K. Petersen
1, A. Golden2, K. Magnussen1, L. Durham1
1Divison of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of
Development and Rehabilitation, Randall Children ’s
Hospital, Portland, OR, United States,2Department of
Pediatric Neurology, Randall Children ’s Hospital,
Portland, OR, United States
Introduction: The group of Angelman-like neurodevelop-
mental syndromes continues to expand. In patients withcharacteristic behaviors, developmental delays, speech
impairment and seizures, speci ﬁc EEG patterns have been
proposed as having relative speci ﬁcity for Angelman. Here
we report on two patients with Angelman-associated
phenotypes and EEG ﬁndings who were ultimately
diagnosed with SYNGAP1 syndrome.
Materials and Methods: Patient 1 is a female with
infantile onset oropharyngeal dysphagia, hypotonia, global
developmental delays, and early childhood epilepsy. EEGﬁndings appeared to suggest Angelman syndrome, how-
ever, targeted testing was negative. Further molecular test-
ing con ﬁrmed a pathogenic variant in SYNGAP1.
Patient 2 is a male with similar history of oropharyngeal
dysphagia, hypotonia, global developmental delays, and
childhood onset epilepsy in addition to tremors and ataxia.EEG ﬁndings showed patterns suggestive of Angelman,
with a ﬁnal diagnosis of SYNGAP1 syndrome.
Results: Patient 1 EEG: rhythmic posterior delta slowing
with embedded spikes, generalized epileptiform activityPatient 1 molecular testing (via Whole Exome Sequen-
cing): De Novo, SYNGAP1 p.Q1106X
Patient 2 EEG: Rhythmic posterior notched delta slowing
increased with eye closure, generalized and left central focal
epileptiform activity
Patient 2 molecular testing (via Whole Exome Sequen-
cing): De Novo, SYNGAP1 p.R967X
Conclusions: Given the degree of clinical and EEG
ﬁnding overlap, SYNGAP1 syndrome should be considered
in patients with an Angelman-like phenotype.
A.K. Petersen: None. A. Golden: None. K. Magnussen:
None. L. Durham: None.
P09.122A
Familial Adult Myoclonic Epilepsy linked tochromosome 5p15 (FAME3) is caused by an intronic
ATTTT/ATTTC expansion in MARCH6
R. T. Florian
1, F. Kraft2, S. Klebe3, E. Magnin4, A. F. Van
Rootselaar5, S. Kaya1, J. Buratti6, E. Leitao1,
S. Giesselmann2, I. Kurth2, N. Tschernoster7,
J. Altmueller7, A. Lamiral4, L. Thivard8,9, FAME
consortium, E. Leguern6, P. Labauge10, P. S. Reif11,
F. Rosenow11,12, K. M. Klein11,12, M. Bennett13,14,
M. Bahlo13,14, J. Gecz15,16, M. A. Corbett15,M .A .J .
Tijssen17, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg18,
C. DEPIENNE1
1Institüt für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany,2Institüt für
Humangenetik, Aachen, Germany,3Department of
Neurology, UK Essen, Essen, Germany,4Department of
Neurology, CHU Jean Minjoz, Besançon, France,
5Departments of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam
Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands,6Département de
Génétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris,France,
7Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne,
Germany,8Département de Neurologie, AP-HP, Hôpital
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,9Sorbonne Université,
Faculté de Médecine; CNRS UMR 7225, UMR S 1127,
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris, France,
10MS Unit. Montpellier Universitary Hospital, Montpellier,
France,11Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center
Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Frankfurt, Germany,12Department
of Neurology, Epilepsy Center Hessen, Philipps University,Margburg, Germany,
13Department of Medical Biology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
14Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne,
Australia,15University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,
16School of Biological Sciences, School of Medicine,
Robinson Research Institute, and South Australian Health
and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia,146817University Medical Centre Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,18Department of
Neurology and Department of Human Genetics, Leiden,
Netherlands
Introduction: Familial Adult Myoclonic Epilepsy (FAME)
is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by cortical
or myoclonic tremor occurring in association with general-
ized seizures typically beginning in adulthood. Despite theearly identi ﬁcation of multiple loci on chromosomes 8, 2
and 5, the genetic basis of this condition has remained
elusive for 20 years. Recently, intronic expansions ofATTTT/ATTTC pentanucleotide repeats in SAMD12 on
chromosome 8 have been identi ﬁed as a major cause of
FAME in Asia.
Methods and Results: In this study, we used genome
sequencing (Illumina, short-read technology) and repeat-
primed PCR to identify a new expanded site in MARCH6 on
chromosome 5p15 in four European families. Further ana-
lysis of single DNA molecules using long-read nanopore
sequencing and, in parallel, molecular combing combinedwithﬂuorescent staining of the ATTTC repeats and ﬂanking
regions, revealed that the expansions range on average from
4 to 13 kb. However, we observed a high variability inexpansion length and structure, compatible with the exis-
tence of different expansion con ﬁgurations in the blood
cells of the same individual. Moreover, the largest expan-sions were associated with complex microrearrangements
occurring at the expanded site in up to 20% of the cells.
Conclusion: This study provides further evidence that
FAME is homogeneously caused by intronic ATTTT/
ATTTC expansions in distinct genes and shows that
expansions exhibit a high somatic instability that can ulti-mately result in genomic rearrangements.
R.T. Florian: None. F. Kraft: None. S. Klebe: None. E.
Magnin: None. A.F. Van Rootselaar: None. S. Kaya:
None. J. Buratti: None. E. Leitao: None. S. Giesselmann:
None. I. Kurth: None. N. Tschernoster: None. J. Alt-
mueller: None. A. Lamiral: None. L. Thivard: None. E.
Leguern: None. P. Labauge: None. P.S. Reif: None. F.
Rosenow: None. K.M. Klein: None. M. Bennett: None.
M. Bahlo: None. J. Gecz: None. M.A. Corbett: None. M.
A.J. Tijssen: None. A.M.J.M. van den Maagdenberg:
None. C. Depienne: C. Other Research Support (supplies,
equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support);
Modest; Genomic Vision.
P09.123B
A signi ﬁcant in ﬂation inTGM6genetic risk casts doubt in
its causation in spinocerebellar ataxia type 35
H. Chung, J. Fung, M. Tsang, M. YuDepartment of Paediatrics, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
An autosomal dominant type of spinocerebellar ataxia
(SCA), SCA35, has been associated with pathogenic
mutations in the gene TGM6. In a Chinese exomesequencing cohort with 116 indexes and 135 asymptomatic
parents, we identi ﬁed 8 families with reported TGM6
variants sharing no features of SCA35. Considering thisﬁnding, we reviewed the public database gnomAD, these
reported pathogenic variants are signi ﬁcantly more com-
monly found in the East Asians than in other ethnic groups(P<0.0001). Bioinformatics analysis of gene constraint
showed that both missense and loss-of-function variants in
TGM6 are likely to be tolerated with no regional constraint.By performing in ﬂation analysis to empirically evaluate the
pathogenicity of TGM6, it is found that there is an over-
representation of reported pathogenic variants in thepopulation. The cumulative frequency of reported patho-
genic TGM6 variants is at least 111-fold in ﬂated over the
combined prevalence of all autosomal dominant SCAs(<5.6 per 100,000), indicating a high chance of misdiag-
nosis or very low penetrance. Misclassi ﬁcation of benign or
low penetrant variants as pathogenic is a signi ﬁcant problem
that often results in genetic misdiagnosis and premature
ending of diagnostic odyssey. This highlights the necessity
of evaluating variant pathogenicity with sequencing ofgenomes from diverse populations, both from asymptomatic
controls and phenotypically different patients, in order to
ensure accurate classi ﬁcation of variants.
H. Chung: None. J. Fung: None. M. Tsang: None. M.
Yu: None.
P09.124C
Autosomal recessive tubulinopathy-like disorder caused
by loss of function of the tubulin-modifying enzymeTubulin Tyrosine Ligase
R. De Mori
1, M. Magiera2, S. Tardivo1, P. Accorsi3,
M. Ginevrino1,4, S. Bodakuntla2, S. Nuovo1,5,
L. Giordano3, E. Lore ﬁce6, R. Liserre7, L. Pinelli7,
T. Biagini8, A. Micalizzi9, A. Casella4, T. Mazza8,
M. O. Steinmetz10, C. Janke2, E. Valente1,4
1Neurogenetic Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome,
Italy,2Institut Curie, Dept. "Genotoxic stress and Cancer",
Orsay Cedex, France,3UOC Neuroradiologia, UOS
Neuroradiologia Pediatrica, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy,
4Detp. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy,5Dept of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno,
Salerno, Italy,6Dept. Of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy,7UOC Neuroradiologia,
Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy,8IRCCS Casa Sollievo dellaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1469Sofferenza, Laboratory of Bioinformatics, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy,9Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino
Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy,10Laboratory of
Biomolecular Rese rach, Division of Biology and
Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland
Introduction: Tubulin Tyrosine Ligase (TTL) is a
ubiquitous enzyme that catalyzes the convertion of
detyrosinated to tyrosinated α-tubulin, a process that
regulates multiple essential microtubule functions. Deletion
of TTL in mice causes perinatal death due to a strong
accumulation of detyrosinated α-tubulin in the brain, which
leads to massive aberrations in brain development. More-
over, TTL has recently been demonstrated to be crucial for
post-injury axon regeneration.
Materials and Methods: We describe two sisters from
healthy consanguineous parents, presenting with global
developmental delay, intellectual disability, cerebellarataxia, hypotonia and microcephaly. Brain MRI ﬁndings
was suggestive of a tubulinopathy, showing dysmorphic
basal ganglia, commissural agenesis or hypoplasia, dys-plasia of the cerebellar vermis and brainstem. After
excluding mutations in tubulin genes, whole exome
sequencing analysis was performed.
Results: Both siblings shared the homozygous missense
variant c.1013G>A (Cys338Thr) in the TTL gene
(NM_153712.4). The variant was predicted as pathogenicby all prediction software and was absent from population
databases. Molecular dynamics simulation demonstrated
that the mutant protein is more ﬂexible than wild type,
which could lead to impaired interaction with α-tubulin, and
thus, impaired enzymatic function. Indeed, enzymatic
activity assays showed that mutant TTL protein is inactive,while patient ﬁbroblasts show signi ﬁcantly higher levels of
detyrosinated α-tubulin compared to healthy controls.
Conclusion: We report the ﬁrst recessively inherited
tubulinopathy-like disorder, caused by biallelic loss of
function mutations in the TTL gene. Funding: ERC Starting
Grant 260888; Ricerca Finalizzata NET-2013-02356160
R. De Mori: None. M. Magiera: None. S. Tardivo:
None. P. Accorsi: None. M. Ginevrino: None. S. Boda-
kuntla: None. S. Nuovo: None. L. Giordano: None. E.
Loreﬁce:None. R. Liserre: None. L. Pinelli: None. T.
Biagini: None. A. Micalizzi: None. A. Casella: None. T.
Mazza: None. M.O. Steinmetz: None. C. Janke: None. E.
Valente: None.
P09.125D
Reduced VPS13C protein expression caused by
recessive missense and splice site mutations is associatedwith Lewy body disease and Parkinson diseaseS. Smolders
1,2, S. Philtjens1,2, D. Crosiers1,2,3, S. Van
Mossevelde1,2,3,4, B. Heeman1,2, A. Sieben1,2,5, P. Pals2,3,
S. Engelborghs2,4, P. De Deyn2,4, P. Cras2,3, C. Van
Broeckhoven1,2, BELNEU Consortium
1VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,2Institute Born-Bunge,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,3Department of
Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium,
4Memory Clinic, Department of Neurology, Hospital
Network Antwerp Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp,
Belgium,5Department of Neurology, University Hospital
Ghent and University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: Lewy body disease (LBD) and Parkinson
Disease (PD) share clinical and pathological features.
VPS13C was identi ﬁed as a risk factor for PD in GWAS,
and premature termination codon (PTC) mutations inVPS13C were associated with recessive PD. We identi ﬁed
in whole genome sequencing data of a recessive early-onset
age LBD family (AAO: 41-42 years) compound hetero-zygous VPS13C missense mutations reducing VPS13C
protein expression.
Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of cod-
ingVPS13C in 230 LBD patients (AAO: 70.8±9.7 years),
612 PD patients (AAO: 60.5±11.1 years) and 663 control
individuals (AAI: 72.0±9.4 years). Protein analysis wasperformed in lymphoblast cells and brain lysates of LBD
compound heterozygous VPS13C mutations carriers.
Results: We identi ﬁed 4 LBD carries of compound het-
erozygous missense mutations in VPS13C . Two mutant
alleles decreased protein expression by near 90% in lym-
phoblast cells. VPS13C reduction was also observed inautopsy brain of two LBD carriers. In the PD cohort, we
identi ﬁed 7 patients compound heterozygous (splice site/
missense or missense/missense) and 1 patient homozygous(missense) for VPS13C mutations. In control individuals,
we observed 6 carriers of compound heterozygous muta-
tions of which 3 shared the same variants suggesting cis
conﬁguration. Trans /cisposition of the heterozygous
VPS13C alleles are being determined by long-read
sequencing on VPS13C cDNA.
Conclusion: Our genetic and expression data suggest that
alsoVPS13C missense mutations contribute to risk for LBD
or PD by loss-of-function mechanism. Additional functionalstudies will be needed to understand the contribution of the
different mutated VPS13C alleles to LBD and PD.
S. Smolders: None. S. Philtjens: None. D. Crosiers:
None. S. Van Mossevelde: None. B. Heeman: None. A.
Sieben: None. P. Pals: None. S. Engelborghs: None. P.
De Deyn: None. P. Cras: None. C. Van
Broeckhoven: None.1470P09.126A
Comprehensive rare variant analysis of individuals with
neurodevelopmental disorders by whole-genome
sequencing
A. Sanchis-Juan1, C. Armirola1, K. Megy1, K. Low1,
C. E. French2, D. Grozeva3, E. Dewhurst1, J. Stephens1,
K. Stirrups1, M. Erwood1, C. Penkett1, O. Shamardina1,
G. Ambegaonkar4, M. Chitre3, D. Josifova5, M. Kurian6,
A. Parker7, J. Rankin8, E. Reid9, E. Wakeling10,
E. Wassmer11, G. Woods3, NIHR Bioresource,
W. H. Ouwehand1, F. Raymond3, K. J. Carss1
1Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Department of Paediatrics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,4Child Development Centre,
Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
5Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,6Department
of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,
7Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
8Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
United Kingdom,9Department of Clinical Genetics,
Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
10North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London
North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Harrow, UnitedKingdom,
11Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham
Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom
Despite the signi ﬁcant progress in unravelling the origins of
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), up to 50% ofaffected individuals remain without a genetic diagnosis.
Here we demonstrate the power of using whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) to identify pathogenic variants in NDDs,in one of the largest studies to date. WGS was performed on
691 individuals (488 affected and 201 unaffected relatives).
Initially, pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 31%
individuals, and 21% had a variant of uncertain signi ﬁ-
cance. Reanalysis of the data two years later increased the
yield to 36% and 23% respectively. Of all reported variants,90% were SNVs/indels in coding regions of NDD-
associated genes. However, WGS provided power to detect
three additional categories of variants: structural, intronicand mitochondrial variants. Structural variants (SVs)
comprised 25 deletions, 6 duplications, 2 inversions, one
partial uniparental isodisomy and one complex SV.Nanopore long-read WGS was used to resolve the genetic
architecture of SVs that could not be resolved by othermethods. Furthermore, 7 pathogenic intronic variants were
identi ﬁed, as well as 3 likely pathogenic variants in the
mitochondrial genome. This study demonstrates the value
of using WGS to investigate the genetic causes of NDD as a
single pass investigation. It also corroborates previous
reports that reanalysis of data allows more patients toreceive genetic diagnoses. WGS provides comprehensive
and unbiased coverage facilitating identi ﬁcation of all types
of variants throughout the human nuclear and mitochondrialgenome. Importantly, this includes variants that would not
have been identi ﬁed using the more commonly used whole
exome sequence approach.
A. Sanchis-Juan: None. C. Armirola: None. K. Megy:
None. K. Low: None. C.E. French: None. D. Grozeva:
None. E. Dewhurst: None. J. Stephens: None. K. Stir-
rups: None. M. Erwood: None. C. Penkett: None. O.
Shamardina: None. G. Ambegaonkar: None. M. Chitre:
None. D. Josifova: None. M. Kurian: None. A. Parker:
None. J. Rankin: None. E. Reid: None. E. Wakeling:
None. E. Wassmer: None. G. Woods: None. W.H.
Ouwehand: None. F. Raymond: None. K.J. Carss: None.
P09.127B
De novo , heterozygous missense variants in YWHAG as a
novel cause of developmental and epileptic
encephalopathy
F. Kanani
1, H. Titheradge2, N. Cooper2, F. Elmslie3,
M. Lees4, J. Juusola5, L. Pisani6, C. Mignot7, S. Valence8,
B. Keren9, I. Guella10, DDD Study,
M. Balasubramanian1,11
1Shefﬁeld Clinical Genetics Service, Shef ﬁeld Children ’s
NHS Foundation Trust, Shef ﬁeld, UK, Shef ﬁeld, United
Kingdom,2Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,3South
West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George's
Hospital, London, United Kingdom,4North East Regional
Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,United Kingdom,
5Clinical Genomics and Research
Programs, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
6Human Genetics and Genomics, Northwell Health System,
New York, NY, United States,7Assistance Publique –
Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Génétique Médicale, Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié Slapêtrière, Paris, France,8APHP,
Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau,
Paris, France,9Département de génétique, hôpital Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Assistance publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,France,
10Centre for Applied Neurogenetics, Djavad
Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,11Academic Unit of
Child Health, University of Shef ﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, United
KingdomAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1471Introduction: Developmental and Epileptic encephalopa-
thies (DEE) describe heterogeneous epilepsy syndromes,
characterised by early-onset, refractory seizures and devel-
opmental delay (DD). With increased access to whole
exome sequencing (WES), new candidate genes are beingidenti ﬁed.YWHAG (*605356) on Chr 7q11.23 encodes for
YWHAG, from the 14-3-3 protein family, playing impor-
tant roles in signal transduction and cellular proliferation.YWHAG is highly expressed in brain, skeletal and heart
muscle. Mouse models suggest alterations in Ywhag level
cause delayed neuronal migration and interstitial deletionsat Chr 7q11.23 result in infantile seizures and cardiomyo-
pathy, suggesting haploinsuf ﬁciency as an explanation.
Materials and Methods: We present 12 patients with
YWHAG de novo missense variants. We describe a syn-
dromal phenotype, report novel and a recurrent p.Arg132-
CysYWHAG variant and compare developmental trajectory
and treatment strategies in this cohort. Patients 1-9 had
WES via Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study.
Patients 10-12 were identi ﬁed via Genematcher and AnnEX
databases. De novo variants from exome data were vali-
dated using Sanger sequencing.
Results: 12/12 patients in the cohort have de novo , het-
erozygous missense variants in YWHAG including 4/12
patients with a recurrent c.394C >T, p.Arg132Cys variant.
Characteristic features included: early-onset seizures, pre-dominantly generalised tonic-clonic and absence type with
good response to standard anti-epileptic medications; DD;
Intellectual Disability (ID) and a recognisable facial gestalt.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings support the hypothesis that
YWHAG loss-of-function causes a neurological phenotype.
Although the exact mechanism of YWHAG is not fullyknown, it is likely that YWHAG haploinsuf ﬁciency in
developing cerebral cortex leads to abnormal neuronal
migration resulting in DEE.
F. Kanani: None. H. Titheradge: None. N. Cooper:
None. F. Elmslie: None. M. Lees: None. J. Juusola: None.
L. Pisani: None. C. Mignot: None. S. Valence: None. B.
Keren: None. I. Guella: None. M.
Balasubramanian: None.
P10
Neuromuscular disorders
P10.01D
Analysis of miRNA promoter methylation pro ﬁles in
ALS patients
A. Dolinar
1, K. Vrabec1, B. Koritnik2,3, D. Glava č1,
M. Ravnik-Glava č1,41Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, Division of
Neurology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Department of Neurology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
4Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Many micro RNAs (miRNAs) are aberrantly
expressed in ALS patients as a result of interrupted miRNA
biogenesis and processing or due to other changes thataffect miRNA expression levels, including DNA methyla-
tion. Several studies showed global methylation changes in
ALS patients that could lead to altered expression levels.However, none of them focused on the in ﬂuence of
promoter methylation on miRNA expression.
Materials and Methods: We identi ﬁed methylated
regions in the genome of ALS patients through MeDIP
sequencing (methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and
sequencing of precipitated DNA fragments).
Results: Sequenced fragments were mapped to a total of
1321 miRNA promoters. Based on the methylation differ-
ences between samples we selected 358 of them for furtherassessment. Using KEGG analysis it turned out that miR-
NAs with altered methylation status in promoter region
target numerous genes including those involved in ErbBsignalling pathway (p =1*10
-8), Hippo signalling pathway
(p=2*10-8), prion diseases (p =9*10-6), long-term depres-
sion (p =9*10-6), endocytosis (p =2*10-5), adherens junc-
tions (p =3*10-5), and axon guidance (p =4*10-5).
Conclusions: Promoter methylation of miRNA genes
could be an important factor for their aberrant expression inALS. Since miRNA target genes are involved in diverse
biochemical pathways and processes, aberrant expression of
miRNAs may contribute to ALS pathology. However, fur-ther validation studies are needed to con ﬁrm this.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Slove-
nian Research Agency (ARRS) under PhD thesis grants foryoung researchers Ana Dolinar and Katarina Vrabec, and
under research program P3-0054. Authors thank all the
patients and healthy controls for their participation inthe study.
A. Dolinar: None. K. Vrabec: None. B. Koritnik: None.
D. Glava č:None. M. Ravnik-Glava č:None.
P10.02A
Comprehensive genetic analysis in a cohort of 107Hungarian patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
K. Tripolszki
1, P. Gampawar2, H. Schmidt2, Z. F. Nagy1,
P. Klivenyi3, J. I. Engelhardt3, M. Szell114721University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics,
Szeged, Hungary,2Research Unit for Genetic
Epidemiology, Gottfried Schatz Research Center,
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria,3Department of Neurology, University
of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary
Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal
neurodegenerative disease characterized by the degenera-tion of upper and lower motor neurons. The frequency of
mutations in ALS patients has been extensively investigated
in populations of various ethnic origins. Patients andmethods: All investigated ALS patients (n =107) were of
Hungarian origin. Repeat sizing of C9orf72 and ATXN2
genes and targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) wereused to comprehensively assess genetic variation in 35
major ALS genes. The cohort was previously screened for
SOD1 andTARDBP genes, with negative results. Variants
from whole-exome sequencing data of other studies (200
individuals of Hungarian or Austrian origin) were used as
in-house control database.
Results: Pathogenic repeat expansions in the C9orf72
gene were detected in 10 patients (9.3%); intermediate
polyQ lengths (27-33) in the ATXN2 gene were identi ﬁed in
9 (8.4%) patients. Using panel sequencing, 31 rare, poten-
tially pathogenic variants were detected in 16 genes.
According to the NGS results, the most frequently mutatedgenes were NEK1 (5.6%), NEFH ,SQSTM1 (3.7%), KIF5A,
SPG11 (2.8%), ALS2, CCNF, FUS, MATR3, TBK1 and
UBQLN2 (1.9%). Furthermore, potentially pathogenic var-
iants were found in ERBB4, FIG4, GRN and SIGMAR1
genes in single patients.
Conclusion: Combining targeted NGS and repeat sizing,
potentially causative variants were detected in 41% of
patients including patients with variants considered to be of
uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS). Our ﬁndings highlight the
necessity for large-scale multi-center studies on ALS
patients to better understand the underlying genetic causes.
Funding: Hungarian Brain Research Program (Grant No.2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002).
K. Tripolszki: None. P. Gampawar: None. H. Schmidt:
None. Z.F. Nagy: None. P. Klivenyi: None. J.I. Engel-
hardt: None. M. Szell: None.
P10.03B
Bringing genetics into clinical practice: antisense
oligonucleotide (ASO) therapy in 5q-associated spinal
muscular atrophy (SMA)
A. Osmanovic
1, G. Ranxha1, M. Kumpe1, K. Kollewe1,
L. Müschen1, O. Abu-Fares2, F. Götz2, O. Schreiber-
Katz1, S. Petri11Department of Neurology, Hannover, Germany,2Institute
of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology,
Hannover, Germany
Introduction: The neuromuscular disorder SMA is the
most frequent genetic cause of death in children. Due tolower motor neuron loss caused by homozygous deletions
in the survival of motor neuron (SMN) 1 gene patients
suffer from progressive muscular atrophy and paralysis.Whereas SMA 1 and 2 patients never walk independently,
SMA 3 patients present with a milder phenotype and later
onset mainly attributable to higher copy numbers of theonly partially functional SMN2 gene. In 2017 the
intrathecally administered antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)
Nusinersen has been approved as ﬁrst treatment for all types
of SMA by the EU, based on results from phase 3 trials in
pediatric patients. Nusinersen alters the splicing of SMN2
pre-mRNA in order to increase production of full-lengthSMN protein. Long term evaluation of treatment effects and
impact of SMN2 carrier status in adult SMA patients under
ASO therapy is urgently needed.
Materials and Methods: In our center, 24 patients aged
18-65 years have been treated with intrathecal loading doses
of Nusinersen at day 1, 14, 28 and 63, followed by main-tenance doses every 4 months so far. Treatment ef ﬁcacy
was assessed by monitoring of muscular functions and
patient reported outcome measures in correlation to theSMN2 carrier status.
Results: Intrathecal administration either by conventional
or computed tomography (CT)-guided lumbar puncture waswell tolerated. No patient has developed communicating
hydrocephalus. First objective and subjective results indi-
cate a bene ﬁt in motor function in dependence of disease
severity and SMA type which correlates to the SMN2 copy
number.
A. Osmanovic: None. G. Ranxha: None. M. Kumpe:
None. K. Kollewe: None. L. Müschen: None. O. Abu-
Fares: None. F. Götz: None. O. Schreiber-Katz: None. S.
Petri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Biogen, Cytokinetics Inc,
GlaxoSminthKline GmbH,, Orion Pharma. D. SpeakersBureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert
witness); Modest; Desitin Arzneimittel GmbH, TEVA,
Novartis, Biogen.
P10.04C
Ade novo mutation of the stress granules-associated
CAPRIN1 causes a novel progressive neurodegenerative
disorder
A. Delle Vedove
1,2,3, M. Storbeck1,2,3, M. Eckenweiler4,
S. Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, N. Mendoza Ferreira1,2,3,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1473R. Heller1, I. Hölker1,2,3, O. Magnusson5, F. Körber6,
M. Kye1,2, J. Kirschner4, B. Wirth1,2,3
1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany,2Center
for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
3Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany,4Clinic for
Neuropediatrics and Muscular Disorders, Freiburg,
Germany,5deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland,6Institute
of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Cologne,Germany
Introduction: Motor neuron disorders (MNDs) are neuro-
logical diseases whose diagnosis is still challenging due to
their highly overlapping phenotypes and genetic
heterogeneity.
Materials and Methods: An eight year-old girl born
from a non-consanguineous couple, presented a progressive
motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy and subsequentlydeveloped cerebellar ataxia, dysphagia and cognitive
decline. She underwent SMN1 deletion testing, NMD-gene
panel analysis and a trio WES.
Results: WES led to the identi ﬁcation of a de novo
c.1535C>T variant (p.Pro512Leu) in the CAPRIN1 (Cell
Cycle Associated Protein 1) gene. This variant is not presentin 1000G and gnomAD. CAPRIN1 has reduced tolerance to
missense (Z =1.79) and is intolerant to nonsense variants
(pLI=1.0). CAPRIN1 is abundant in the adult brain, where
it regulates the transport and translation of mRNAs of genes
involved in synaptic plasticity. Moreover, it contains an LC/
ID domain and it is a component of stress granules.Mutations in proteins containing LC/ID domains (TDP43,
TIA1, hnRNPA1/2) cause MNDs and increase the like-
lihood of protein aggregates formation. Several in silico
tools predict that the p.P512L mutation to increase the
aggregation propensity. Indeed, experiments in
HEK293T cells show that CAPRIN1
P512Lforms bulky
aggregates as compared to CAPRIN1WT. Moreover, an
insoluble protein extraction assay demonstrates that
CAPRIN1WTelutes in the RIPA-soluble fraction while
CAPRIN1P512Lin the urea-soluble one.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that CAPRIN1P512Lis
prone to aggregation. As CAPRIN1 de ﬁciency is linked to
autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) in human and mice, we
propose CAPRIN1P512Las a novel gain-of-function NMD
candidate gene.
A. Delle Vedove: None. M. Storbeck: None. M. Eck-
enweiler: None. S. Hosseinibarkooie: None. N. Mendoza
Ferreira: None. R. Heller: None. I. Hölker: None. O.
Magnusson: None. F. Körber: None. M. Kye: None. J.
Kirschner: None. B. Wirth: None.P10.05D
Neuropathy related genes as possible modi ﬁers of
PMP22 related neuropathies
B. W. van Paassen1, F. van Ruissen2, A. J. van der Kooi2,
M. de Visser2, C. Verhamme2, F. Baas3
1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2,
Amsterdam University Medical Center, location AcademicMedical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
3Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) and
hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies
(HNPP) are autosomal dominantly inherited peripheralneuropathies caused by copy number variation of the
PMP22 gene. Considerable phenotypic variation is known
for both disorders, suggesting modi ﬁers.
We undertook a search for genetic modi ﬁers of PMP22
related neuropathies by selecting the extremes of the spec-
trum of CMT1A and HNPP patients, based on disabilityassessed by the Overall Neuropathy Limitation Scale
(ONLS). The ONLS data of 287 patients (184 CMT1A and
103 HNPP patients) showed a Gaussian distribution forboth disorders. The median score for CMT1A patients was
4 and for HNPP patients 3. Twenty-one mild CMT1A
(ONLS <2), 26 severe CMT1A (ONLS >5), 25 mild HNPP(ONLS <2) and 25 severe HNPP patients (ONLS >4) were
clinically evaluated to further characterize disease severity.
A next generation sequencing gene panel containing 147genes related to neuropathies and hereditary motor syn-
dromes was tested in this selection of patients.
Missense, frameshift, nonsense and intronic mutations
possibly affecting splicing were selected. No signi ﬁcant
difference was found in the mean number of variants
(mutation burden) per patient between the mild and severegroups. Further selection of variants with an allele fre-
quency of ≤4% in a control population was done. A sig-
niﬁcant difference between the mild and the severe HNPP
group was found. In several patients double trouble was
found (another likely pathogenic mutation in a neuropathy
related gene). Replication of these results in a larger cohortare needed.
B.W. van Paassen: None. F. van Ruissen: None. A.J.
van der Kooi: None. M. de Visser: None. C. Verhamme:
None. F. Baas: None.
P10.06A
A novel ddPCR method for the copy number variation
analysis of the segmental duplication regions in nebulin
and titin1474L. J. Sagath1, V. Lehtokari1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1,
K. B. Pelin2, K. J. Kiiski1
1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland,2Faculty
of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: The giant genes nebulin ( NEB) and titin
(TTN) both harbour large expressed segmental duplication
(SD) regions. Mutations in NEB cause nemaline myopathy
(NM), and mutations in TTN cause myopathies and
cardiomyopathy. Using custom, targeted ComparativeGenomic Hybridization arrays for NM and other neuro-
muscular disorders, we have shown that copy number
variations (CNVs) in the NEB SD are potentially patho-
genic. We have also shown that the TTN SD harbours
recurrent and potentially pathogenic CNVs. For validation,
we have established custom Digital Droplet PCR (ddPCR)assays targeting the SD regions of NEB andTTN.
Materials and Methods: We created custom assays for
exons 4 and 8 of the NEB SD, and exon-intron regions 1-2
and 7-8 of the TTN SD. The ddPCR method was validated
using 70 controls previously run on our CGH-arrays.
Results: We show that CNVs in the TTN SD are recurrent
and appear in 25 % of both healthy and affected individuals.
The ddPCR method is sensitive, and reliably detects CNV
in both NEB andTTN SDs.
Conclusions: Our ddPCR assay for the SD regions of
NEB and TTN allows for rapid, speci ﬁc and inexpensive
assessment of CNVs within these regions. Currently, we areinvestigating the potential pathogenicity of TTN SD
region CNVs.
Funding: This study is supported by Muscular
Dystrophy UK
L.J. Sagath: None. V. Lehtokari: None. C. Wallgren-
Pettersson: None. K.B. Pelin: None. K.J. Kiiski: None.
P10.07B
Expectations and anxieties of Duchenne musculardystrophy patients and their families during the ﬁrst-in-
human clinical trial of NS-065/NCNP-01
R. Shimizu, M. Ohata, H. Tachimori, E. Kimura,
Y. Harada, E. Takeshita, A. Tamaura, S. Takeda,
H. Komaki
National Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a recessive X-
linked genetic disease caused by a mutation in the
dystrophin gene. The new drug NS-065/NCNP-01 utilizingexon-skipping therapy targeting speci ﬁc deletions has been
used in a ﬁrst-in-human trial for the treatment of DMD. Wesurveyed 10 pairs of DMD participants and their parents
within this clinical trial via an iPad survey form and through
interviews regarding their understanding of the trial,
expectations, anxieties, and reasons for participating in the
trial. Approximately half of the participants actively decided
to participate of their own volition, and none consideredquitting the trial. This indicates that participants participated
more positively in this clinical trial than previously
expected. However, some potential concerns were alsorevealed, with one being that the desire to please those
around them might be more important to the DMD
participants than the effects of the drug. Another issue is
the possibility of biased information originating from the
study subjects ’parents; while seven out of 10 of the parents
told their children that the study drug might work, only fourof these parents also explained that it might not work. Only
two study participants received an explanation concerning
the drug ’s side effects from their parents. This result implies
that caution should be taken when family expectations are
high, and there is a possibility that subjects will be given
biased information from their parents. This work wassupported grant from the [Intramural Research Grant (26-6)
for Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders of National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry]
R. Shimizu: None. M. Ohata: None. H. Tachimori:
None. E. Kimura: None. Y. Harada: None. E. Takeshita:
None. A. Tamaura: None. S. Takeda: None. H.
Komaki: None.
P10.08C
Genomic pro ﬁling of adult onset isolated focal dystonia
in a group of Romanian patients
R. Cocos
1, I. Popescu-Olaru2,3,O .B ăjenaru4,5,
L. Cozma4,3, L. Dumitrescu4,3,R .T ănăsescu4,3,6,
F. Raicu1,7, B. Popescu4,3,8
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Department of
Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania,2University of
Medicine and Pharmacy -Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Bucharest, Romania,3Colentina Clinical
Hospital - Department of Neurology, Bucharest, Romania,
4University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, Bucharest, Romania,5“Ana Aslan ”
National Institute of Geriatrics and Gerontology,Bucharest, Romania,
6University of Nottingham - Academic
Clinical Neurology, Division of Clinical Neuroscience,
Nottingham, United Kingdom,7Institute of Anthropology
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania,8“Victor Babe ş
National Institute of Pathology - Laboratory of
Ultrastructural Pathology, Bucharest, RomaniaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1475Introduction: We proposed to identify the relevant
genomic pro ﬁles of adult-onset isolated focal dystonia by
gaining insights into the interplay of potential causative
disease-associated genetic variants at the genomic level.
Isolated focal dystonia is the third most common movement
disorder after Parkinson ’s disease and essential tremor. The
etiology is genetic in some cases, but over 75% are
idiopathic.
Materials and Methods: In the ﬁrst stage of our study,
we analyzed onto the Ion Torrent PGM platform a well-
described homogenous group of 120 Romanian dystonia
cases using our own designed Targeted SequencingAmpliSeq panel of 30 genes previously found to be asso-
ciated with dystonia (DYT) and other movement disorders.
All samples had 97.85% average of target regions withcoverage by at least 30 folds. Data were analyzed using a
bioinformatics in house pipeline based on GATK, Picard
and Annovar software for reading alignments, variant call-ing,ﬁltering and annotation.
Results: Molecular genetic screening identi ﬁed mutations
in 46/120 (38%) of the clinically diagnosed adult-onsetisolated focal dystonia subjects. All identi ﬁed mutations
were previously reported to be associated with DYTs.
Conclusions: The subsequent analysis of negative-known
DYTs patients for the genes in the customized panel using
the Whole Exome Sequencing could offer the opportunity
to assess extensively the genomic pro ﬁles of adult-onset
idiopathic isolated focal dystonia and could result in iden-
tiﬁcation of new genes and variants causing-disease. This
work was supported by the CNCS-UEFISCDI grant PN-III-P4-ID-PCE-2016-0696.
R. Cocos: None. I. Popescu-Olaru: None. O. Băjenaru:
None. L. Cozma: None. L. Dumitrescu: None. R.
Tănăsescu: None. F. Raicu: None. B. Popescu: None.
P10.09D
Cellular heterogeneity in FSHD
A. van den Heuvel
1, A. Mahfouz2,3, S. L. Kloet1, J. Balog1,
B. G. M. Van Engelen4, R. Tawil5, S. J. Tapscott6,
S. M. van der Maarel1
1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,2Leiden
Computational Biology Center, Leiden University MedicalCenter, Leiden, Netherlands,
3Bioinformatics Lab, Delft
University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands,4Department
of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition andBehaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,
5Department of Neurology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States,6Division of
Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA, United StatesSingle-cell analyses have become increasingly important for
uncovering cellular dynamics during health and disease.
Not only have they began to unravel a greater level of
cellular heterogeneity than previously could have been
appreciated, it also enables the identi ﬁcation of sporadic
cellular aberrations involved in disease etiology and
development.
One prime example of disease-associated cellular het-
erogeneity is found in facioscapulohumeral muscular dys-
trophy (FSHD), which is characterized by sporadic de-
repression of the cleavage-stage transcription factor DUX4in ~1:200 myonuclei. Yet, with the sporadic nature of
DUX4 de-repression limiting the resolution of bulk RNA-
seq analyses, essential insights in the cascade of eventsleading to apoptosis and severe muscle wasting observed in
patients are currently limited.
We used single-cell RNA-sequencing combined with
pseudotime trajectory modeling to generate a detailed
FSHD cellular progression model. We show that our model
detects FSHD-associated cellular progression in approx. 1%of all cells, and faithfully re ﬂects both the burst-like DUX4
expression as well as the downstream activation of various
pathways previously implicated in FSHD. In addition, usingour model we were now able to identify new expression
signatures that are likely related to both direct and indirect
effects of DUX4.
Our data therefore highlights the potential for single-cell
transcriptomics in studying disease etiology in genetic dis-
eases, even when hallmarked by high cellular heterogeneityas in FSHD, and shows that pseudotime trajectories like our
FSHD pseudotime model may contain valuable information
for further unraveling the role of cellular heterogeneity indisease etiology and progression.
A. van den Heuvel: None. A. Mahfouz: None. S.L.
Kloet: None. J. Balog: None. B.G.M. Van Engelen: None.
R. Tawil: None. S.J. Tapscott: None. S.M. van der
Maarel: None.
P10.10A
Functional analysis of an intronic variant of uncertain
signiﬁcance c.911-13A>G in the FKTN gene
V. Freire
1, A. Filatova1, I. Akimova1, M. Bulakh1,
M. Skoblov1,2
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal
University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation
Introduction: Next generation sequencing methods allow
the identi ﬁcation of previously ignored deep intronic
variants, but it is still dif ﬁcult to determine their1476pathogenicity. In a patient with congenital muscular
dystrophy and cardiomyopathy, two heterozygous variants
in the FKTN gene were identi ﬁed: previously described
pathogenic variant NM_001079802.1(FKTN_v001):
c.509C>A p.(Ala170Glu) and a previously undescribed
intronic variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance NG_008754.1
(FKTN_v001): c.911-13A>G, inherited from the mother.
Materials and Methods: In order to study the effect of
c.911-13A>G on FKTN splicing and con ﬁrm its patho-
genicity, we performed RT-PCR of total RNA isolated from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and ﬁbroblasts obtained
from the proband, his mother and healthy donors, as well asusing a FKTN minigene expression system in a HEK293T
cell model line.
Results: When studying the obtained mRNA structure,
three FKTN isoforms were identi ﬁed: two normal (present
in control samples of healthy donors) and one aberrant with
exon 9 skipping. The minigene expression analysis con-ﬁrmed this data. The short isoform can be explained by the
destruction of the intron 8 acceptor splice-site. Thus, the
work showed that the presence of a deep intronic variantc.911-13A>G in the FKTN gene leads to the loss of 133
nucleotides, with an open reading frame shifting and a 145
amino acid shortening (p.W301Rfs*13) of the protein.
Conclusions: Functional analysis of intron variants
allows to establish the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain
clinical signi ﬁcance and con ﬁrm the diagnosis in patients.
In this study, the pathogenicity of the c.911-13A>G variant
in the FKTN gene was demonstrated.
V. Freire: None. A. Filatova: None. I. Akimova: None.
M. Bulakh: None. M. Skoblov: None.
P10.12C
Methods of the DNA diagnostics for
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)
M. Y. Skoblov
1, N. V. Zernov1, A. A. Guskova1, P. J. van
der Vliet2, G. E. Rudenskaya1, I. A. Sharkova1,
I. A. Akimova1, R. J. Lemmers2, N. A. Semenova1,
N. A. Demina1, V. A. Galkina1, T. V. Markova1,
O. E. Zinovyeva3, E. L. Dadali1
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Department of Human Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3Sechenov
First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: In 95% FSHD caused by a partial contraction
of the D4Z4 array up to 10 - 1 repeats at a 4qA haplotype of
chromosome 4q35. The size of D4Z4 repeats and its highsimilarity with the D4Z4 locus on chromosome 10q26makes diagnostic of FSHD complicated for basic diagnostic
laboratories.
Materials and Methods: Blood-derived DNA was iso-
lated from 55 FSHD patients and its relatives. For the
molecular-genetic diagnostic, we used three methods:
Southern blotting, molecular combing and a newly devel-oped PCR based method.
Results: Totally 55 individuals were analyzed by the
Southern blotting, among them 12 parents/children,28 sporadic cases. Six patients with dif ﬁcult interpretation
of the Southern blotting results were further analyzed by
molecular combing. For all cases we determined the D4Z4repeat size and haplotype. The PCR based diagnostic was
applied to 7 FSHD patients with one 4qA repeat below 10
units and to 8 healthy relatives with normal-sized D4Z4repeats. The PCR results were concordant with the Southern
blotting in 57.1% for the patients and in 88% for the healthy
relatives. We suggest that the discordant results wereobtained due to high background of ampli ﬁcation or to
DNA quality issues.
Conclusions: The Southern blot and the molecular
combing results are highly correlated. The PCR-based
method shows potential to diagnose FSHD; however needs
further optimization. Improvement of the PCR-basedmethod may simplify FSHD diagnostic for basic diag-
nostic laboratories.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Genomic Vision
Company for the ability to test DNA samples.
M.Y. Skoblov: None. N.V. Zernov: None. A.A. Gus-
kova: None. P.J. van der Vliet: None. G.E. Rudenskaya:
None. I.A. Sharkova: None. I.A. Akimova: None. R.J.
Lemmers: None. N.A. Semenova: None. N.A. Demina:
None. V.A. Galkina: None. T.V. Markova: None. O.E.
Zinovyeva: None. E.L. Dadali: None.
P10.13D
Genetic analysis of autosomal dominant motor and
sensory neuropathy with proximal dominancy in the
lower extremities, urinary disturbance, and paroxysmaldry cough
S. MIURA
1,2, K. Kosaka3, R. Fujioka4, S. Mori1,
H. Shibata5
1Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of
Medicine, Kurume, Japan,2Department of Geriatric
Medicine and Neurology, Ehime University GraduateSchool of Medicine, Toon, Japan,
3Division of Human
Molecular Genetics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan,4Department of Food
and Nutrition, Beppu University Junior College, Beppu,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1477Japan,5Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
We have reported a clinically new type of autosomal
dominant disorders of motor and sensory neuropathy
(Miura et al. J Neurol Sci 2008). The cardinal clinicalfeatures of the disease were slow progression, muscular
weakness with dominancy in the proximal portion of the
lower limbs and in the distal portion of the upper limbs,sensory involvement with dominancy in the lower limbs
(glove and stocking type), are ﬂexia, ﬁne postural and action
tremors, painful muscle cramps, elevated serum creatinekinase levels, urinary disfunction, and recurrent paroxysmal
dry cough. Sural nerve biopsy showed moderate, chronic,
mainly axonal neuropathy. To identify the causativenucleotide variant for the disease, we studied the Japanese
pedigree with the disease of 19 family members including
nine patients in ﬁve generations. By the linkage analysis, we
mapped the disease locus to 1p13.3-q23 (maximum
logarithm-of-odds score =2.24). The whole-exome sequen-
cing upon ﬁve patients and one healthy relative from the
pedigree revealed 2,526 patient-speci ﬁc single nucleotide
variants (SNVs). By the ﬁltering processes using the public
SNP databases, our linkage analysis, validation by Sangersequencing, con ﬁrming cosegregation, genotyping 520
healthy Japanese individuals, and functional predictions,
we identi ﬁed one SNV located in IQGAP3 which is known
to be associated with neurite outgrowth. Immunohistochem-
istry show increased expression of IQGAP3 in lymphocytes
and sural nerves of a patient compared to those of a control.We conclude that IQGAP3 is a causative gene for the
disease. This is the ﬁrst record of a disease caused by an
IQGAP3 variant.
S. Miura: None. K. Kosaka: None. R. Fujioka: None.
S. Mori: None. H. Shibata: None.
P10.14A
Genetics heterogeneity and novel genes in autosomal
recessive Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (AR-HSP)
M. Rahimi Bidgoli
1, A. Alavi1, M. Rohani2, L. Javan
Parast1, M. Pashaei1, F. Fatehi3,S .N a ﬁssi3, K. Kahrizi1,
H. Najmabadi1
1Genetics research center, University of Social Welfare and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2Department of Neurology, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Iran, IslamicRepublic of,
3Department of Neurology, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSPs) is a
group of inherited neurodegenerative disorderscharacterized by progressive spasticity and weakness in
lower limbs. The mode of inheritance in HSP can be
autosomal-dominant, autosomal-recessive, X-linked, or
mitochondrial. There is signi ﬁcant genetic heterogeneity
in HSP, with at least 65 genes and 80 loci identi ﬁed thus far.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) has been used for genediscovery in HSP since 2011, resulting in a marked increase
in the rate of novel disease-causing genes being identi ﬁed.
Despite the use of WES, genetic analysis has failed inﬁnding of causative genes in ~45%-60% in the autosomal
dominant-HSP (AD-HSP) and ~71%-80% in the autosomal
recessive-HSP (AR-HSP) groups, indicating that, themajority of HSP-genes especially AR-HSPs have remained
unknown.
Materials and Methods: In order to identi ﬁcation of
novel HSP-disease causing genes, we investigated the
causes of AR-HSP in 12 unrelated Iranian families
using WES.
Results: This approach led us to identify the mutations in
seven known disease-causing genes including SPG7 (two
cases) , CAPN1, CYP7B1, ENTPD1, GJC2, ERLIN2 , and
SPG11 (two cases) and three novel candidate HSP genes.
Functional analyses to evaluate of the biological implication
of the novel genes are ongoing.
Conclusions: Here, we could ﬁnd nine variations in
seven known HSP-causing genes in 12 cases (75%) and
three novel HSP-genes in the remaining ones using WESmethod. Identi ﬁcation of novel genes and novel molecular
pathways will greatly enhance our understanding of the
cellular pathways that are critical for axonal health and ourknowledge about pathogenesis of the disease.
M. Rahimi Bidgoli: None. A. Alavi: None. M. Rohani:
None. L. Javan Parast: None. M. Pashaei: None. F.
Fatehi: None. S. Na ﬁssi:None. K. Kahrizi: None. H.
Najmabadi: None.
P10.15B
Clinical background of hyper creatine kinase in girls
without a family history of genetic muscular disease
T. Lee
1, S. Tokunaga1, C. Mure1, M. Misaki1,
H. Shimomura1, I. Nishino2, K. Ito3, Y. Takeshima1
1Department of Pediatrics, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Japan,2National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan,3Department of Pathology and
Applied Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto,Japan
Persistent elevated plasma creatine kinase (CK) raises the
suspicion of various conditions such as genetic muscular
disease, in ﬂammatory muscular disease, metabolic1478myopathy, or hypothyroidism. In girls, carrier status of
Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) should
be taken into consideration so that the diagnostic process
might include both technical and ethical aspects. Therefore,
no diagnostic system has been established and the clinical
background is still unclear. This study aimed to investigatethe clinical background of hyper-creatine-kinase-emia girls.
Fifteen girls, who were referred to our hospital between
April 2014 and August 2018 with persistent elevatedplasma CK without a family history of muscular disease,
were included. Age and Value of CK at the ﬁrst visit were
0-12 years old and 740-21,944 IU/L. Eight cases exhibitedclinical symptoms (symptomatic group), while seven cases
showed no symptoms (asymptomatic group). Genetic
muscular disease was diagnosed using muscle biopsy orgenetic analysis. In the symptomatic group, diagnoses were
DMD/BMD carrier (3 cases), Fukuyama congenital mus-
cular dystrophy (1 case), sarcoglycanopathy (1 case),dermatomyositis (1 case), and undiagnosed (2 cases). One
girl presenting with marked elevated CK and developmental
delay was diagnosed with balanced translocation with thebreakpoint located within the DMD gene and skewing of X-
chromosome inactivation. Diagnoses in the asymptomatic
group were DMD/BMD carrier (3 cases), calpainopathy(1case), and undiagnosed (3cases). Both groups included
patients affected by muscular disease and DMD/BMD
carriers, suggesting that both conditions should be con-sidered regardless of presence of symptoms. Building a
diagnostic system is necessary based on the clinical
background shown in this study.
T. Lee: None. S. Tokunaga: None. C. Mure: None. M.
Misaki: None. H. Shimomura: None. I. Nishino: None.
K. Ito: None. Y. Takeshima: None.
P10.16C
Expanding the molecular characterization of theCMT2Z disease associated gene MORC2
P. Sancho
1, L. Bartesaghi2,3, O. Moissec2,3, F. García-
García4, L. Ramírez-Jiménez5, A. Siddell6,7, E. Åkesson8,9,
E. Hedlund2,P .L a ššuthová10, S. Pascual-Pascual11,
T. Sevilla12,13, M. Kennerson6,7,14, V. Lupo1,5,15,
R. Chrast2,3, C. Espinós1,5,15
1Unit of Genetics and Genomics of Neuromuscular and
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Centro de Investigación
Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain,2Department of
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
3Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,4Unit of Bioinformatics and
Biostatistics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe(CIPF), Valencia, Spain,
5Department of Genomics and
Translational Genetics, Centro de Investigación PríncipeFelipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain,6Northcott Neuroscience
Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute, Concord NSW,
Australia,7Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia,8The R&D Unit, Stiftelsen Stockholms
Sjukhem, Stockholm, Sweden,9Division of
Neurodegeneration, Department of Neurobiology, CareSciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden,
10Department of Pediatric Neurology, DNA
Laboratory, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University inPrague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic,
11Neuropediatrics Department, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,12Department of
Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, and
CIBER of Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain,
13Department of Medicine, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain,14Molecular Medicine Laboratory,
Concord Hospital, Concord NSW, Australia,15INCLIVA &
IIS-La Fe Rare Diseases Joint Units, Centro deInvestigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain
Introduction: Mutations in MORC2 lead to an axonal form
of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT2Z). To date,
thirty-one families have been reported, showing that this
gene is frequently involved in CMT. However, thephenotypic consequences of MORC2 in patients and its
role in neuronal biology remain to be clari ﬁed.
Materials and Methods: A gene capture panel was
performed to screen undiagnosed patients with CMT. To
determine the effect of the most common MORC2 muta-
tions in a neural context, p.S87L and p.R252W, we used avirus-based system in vitro to overexpress MORC2 in
sensory neurons. ATPase activity of MORC2 was measured
by colorimetric assay. A patients-derived ﬁbroblasts and rat
sensory neurons overexpressing clinical mutations were
investigated by both transcriptomics and proteomics studies
to gain an insight into the pathogenic mechanismsof MORC2.
Results: Here, we report the MORC2 mutations detected
in our clinical series, including a review of the reportedliterature. Moreover, we show that the overexpression of p.
S87L mutant in sensory neurons induced signi ﬁcant axonal
phenotype. In addition, we observed that p.S87L mutant hasan impaired ATPase activity. The data analysis of tran-
scriptomic and proteomic approach in sensory neurons and
patients ’ﬁbroblasts indicate complex changes affecting
transcripts involved in neuronal and axonal functions.
Conclusions: Our data expand the spectrum of clinical
mutations in MORC2 and provide an important insight intothe pathophysiological role of MORC2 in the nervous
system. Funds: AFM-Téléthon, ISCIII (Grant PI15/00187)
co-funded with FEDER funds, Prometeo Program from theGeneralitat Valenciana and Fundación Ramón Areces.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1479P. Sancho: None. L. Bartesaghi: None. O. Moissec:
None. F. García-García: None. L. Ramírez-Jiménez:
None. A. Siddell: None. E. Åkesson: None. E. Hedlund:
None. P. La ššuthová: None. S. Pascual-Pascual: None. T.
Sevilla: None. M. Kennerson: None. V. Lupo: None. R.
Chrast: None. C. Espinós: None.
P10.17D
Molecular analysis of sarcoglycanopathies in RussianLGMD patients
M. V. Bulakh, O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. PolyakovFederal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for
Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Sarcoglycanopathies (SGCs, LGMD2C-F)
are a subgroup of autosomal-recessive limb-girdle musculardystrophies (LGMD), caused by mutations in four sarco-
glycan genes ( SGCG, SGCA, SGCB, SGCD ). These forms
are characterized by childhood onset and rapidly progres-sive course with loss of ability to walk during a second
decade of progression. In general, SGCs could hardly be
distinguished from Duchenne/Becker myopathy and otherpseudohypertrophic LGMDs due to quite similar clinical
symptoms.
Materials and Methods: Targeted massive parallel
sequencing was performed in 290 Russian patients with
progressive muscle weakness using a custom gene panel
covering four sarcoglycan genes.
Results: Genetic analysis revealed homozygous and
compound-heterozygous mutations in 16 patients in 3 of
4 sarcoglycan genes. The SGCA mutations have been
detected in 13 cases (4,5%); the SGCB andSGCG muta-
tions have been found in 2 (0,7%) and 1 (0,3%) cases
respectively. Mutation spectrum of SGCA gene was repre-
sented by 12 different mutations, 4 of them are recurrent.
Previously we also identi ﬁed 4 patients with SGCA muta-
tions in a Duchenne/Becker myopathy cohort. As the result,two pathogenic SGCA variants c.229C>T (p.Arg77Cys) and
c.271G>A (p.Gly91Ser) were de ﬁned as the most common
SGCA mutations in Russian patients accounting 29,4% and
26,5% of all mutant alleles respectively.
Conclusions: This study revealed that LGMD2D is the
most common form of SGCs in Russian LGMD cohort. Tosum up, SGCs account 5,5% of all LGMDs in total that
make them the third LGMD subgroup following LGMD2A
and LGMD2I. However, in contrast to other Europeanpopulations, SGCs are very uncommon in Russia.
M.V. Bulakh: None. O.P. Ryzhkova: None. A.V.
Polyakov: None.P10.18A
Identi ﬁcation of CAPN3 gene novel variations in Iranian
LGMD patients
M. Fadaee1, Z. Fattahi1,2, R. Vazehan1, F. Ahangari1,
A. Abolhassani1, Z. Kalhor1, S. Dehdahsi1, E. Parsimehr1,
M. Faraji Zonooz1, M. Beheshtian1,2, A. Kariminejad1,
H. Najmabadi1,2
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2Genetics Research
Centre, University of Social Welfare and RehabilitationSciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type2A
(LGMD2A), caused by mutations in CAPN3 gene, is the
most common LGMD form worldwide (30-40% of all
LGMD2 cases). LGMD2A is an autosomal recessivedisorder highlighted by weakness of the pelvic and shoulder
girdle muscles. Recently, CAPN3 heterozygous mutations
have been known to cause dominant LGMD type4(LGMDD4).
Materials and Methods: We investigated a large cohort
of 192 Iranian patients with different grades of musculardystrophy who referred to Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathol-
ogy and Genetics Center during 2012-2018 by exome and
targeted next-generation sequencing.
Results: Twenty nine LGMD2A cases were identi ﬁed,
carrying 22 different CAPN3 gene variants. Approximately
15% of participants possessed variations in CAPN3 gene;
including 10 missense, 5 frameshift, 1 inframe, 2 nonsense
and 4 splice site changes; in which 9 variants were novel
compromises p.Gly127Glu, p.Ile266_Asp267del, p.Ser265Pro, p.Gly221Cys, p.Ser432*, p.Tyr507Cys, p.
Gln545Serfs*50, c.1115 +1dup and c.1353A>G at splice
donor site. Moreover, 4 variants occurred multiple times inthe cohort (p.Ile266_Asp267del, p.Ser432*, p.Arg748Gln
and c.1115 +1dup). In 3 patients, the second causative
variant has not been found which suggests diagnosing ofLGMDD4.
Conclusions: Based on ﬁndings, it seems that prevalence
of LGMD2A is high in Iranian LGMD patients and somemutations are more frequent. Besides, most of the variants
have been occurred in Domain III and the catalytic domain
(domain II) of the calpain3 protein involved in Ca2+-induced activation of the protein. Defects in these
domains lead to impair its autolytic activity. Therefore,
designing drugs to target this part of the Calpain3 proteinmight help to improve the quality of life in patients.
M. Fadaee: None. Z. Fattahi: None. R. Vazehan: None.
F. Ahangari: None. A. Abolhassani: None. Z. Kalhor:
None. S. Dehdahsi: None. E. Parsimehr: None. M. Faraji1480Zonooz: None. M. Beheshtian: None. A. Kariminejad:
None. H. Najmabadi: None.
P10.19B
Multigenic involvement of the semaphorin-plexin
pathway in Moebius syndrome by a germlinechromothriptic rearrangement
L. Nazaryan-Petersen
1, I. Rodrigues de Oliveira1,2,
M. M. Mehrjouy1, J. M. Medina Mendez1, M. Bak1,3,
M. Bugge1, V. M. Kalscheuer4, I. Bache1,3, D. C. Hancks5,
N. Tommerup1
1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty
of Health Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,Denmark,
2Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon,
Lisbon, Portugal,3Department of Clinical Genetics,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,Copenhagen, Denmark,
4Group Development and Disease,
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,5Department of Immunology, The University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United
States
Moebius syndrome (MBS) is a congenital disorder
primarily caused by unilateral or bilateral paralysis of the
facial and abducens nerves. Both genetic defects andenvironmental toxic factors leading to abnormal brainstem
development are proposed to be involved in the aetiology of
MBS. Recently, mutations in PLXND1 and REV3L were
conﬁrmed to cause MBS. Here, we applied next generation
mate-pair sequencing to map the breakpoints of a complex
chromosomal rearrangement (CCR) 46,XY,t(7;8;11;13) in apreviously reported patient with MBS, and con ﬁrmed 39
out of 41 breakpoint-junctions by Sanger sequencing.
Molecular mapping revealed 41 clustered breakpoints,involving chromosomes 7, 8, 11 and 13, resulting in heavy
intra- and interchromosomal rearrangements with typical
hallmarks of chromothripsis. Among 12 truncated protein-coding genes, SEMA3A and SEMA3D are attractive
candidates for the MBS features, as they encode class
3 semaphorins, where SEMA3A is known to bind to theMBS-associated PLXND1. Intriguingly, the CCR also
truncated PIK3CG , which in silico interacts with a protein
encoded by the other known MBS-gene REV3L , and with
the SEMA3A/PLXND1 complex via the vascular endothe-
lial growth factor FLT1. In conclusion, the simultaneous
truncation of several interactors of the known MBS-genesby a single CCR suggests that the multiple breakpoints in
germline chromothripsis may predispose to complex multi-
genic disorders. Grants: Danish Council for Independent
Research [4183-00482B]; University of Copenhagen Excel-
lence Programme for Interdisciplinary Research; LundbeckFoundation [2013-14290]); NIH K99/R00 Pathway to
Independence Award; Cancer Prevention Research Institute
of Texas Recruitment Award.
L. Nazaryan-Petersen: None. I. Rodrigues de Oliveira:
None. M.M. Mehrjouy: None. J.M. Medina Mendez:
None. M. Bak: None. M. Bugge: None. V.M. Kalscheuer:
None. I. Bache: None. D.C. Hancks: None. N.
Tommerup: None.
P10.20C
Inactivation of KLHL24 results in myopathy and
cardiomyopathy
C. Hedberg-Oldfors
1, A. Abramsson1, D. Osborn2,
O. Danielsson3, A. Fazlinezhad4, Y. Nilipour5,
L. Hübbert6, I. Nennesmo7, K. Visuttijai1, J. Bharj2,
E. Petropoulou2, A. Shoreim2, B. Vona8, N. Ahangari9,
M. Dávila López1, M. Doosti10, R. Kumar Banote1,
R. Maroo ﬁan2, M. Edling1, M. Taherpour4,
H. Zetterberg1, E. Ghayoor Karimiani4, A. Oldfors1,
Y. Jamshidi2
1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,2St
George ’s University of London, London, United Kingdom,
3Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden,4Imam Reza
International University, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic
of,5Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,6Linkoping University,
Linköping, Sweden,7Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden,8Julius Maximilians University
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany,9Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
10Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran,
Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the
most common inherited cardiovascular disorder, yet the
genetic cause remains unknown in up to 50% of the
individuals who lack sarcomere gene mutations. We reporta novel genetic cause of a cardiomyopathy mimicking HCM
in two consanguineous families with a high incidence of
sudden cardiac arrest. The age at onset in the patients was inadolescence or in young adulthood.
Material and Methods: Investigations included clinical
examination, endomyocardial and skeletal muscle biopsyand genetic analyses by exome sequencing and homo-
zygosity mapping. Functional studies were performed in
zebra ﬁsh by expression analysis and genetic down-
regulation using antisense morpholino oligomers.
Results: Endomyocardial biopsy and skeletal muscle
biopsy of individuals from both families demonstratedcharacteristic alterations including muscle ﬁbers with a
“cogwheel ”appearance, and desmin accumulation.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1481Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing identi ﬁed a
homozygous missense mutation in KLHL24 , c.917G>A, p.
Arg306His in one family and a nonsense mutation,
c.1048G>T, p.Glu350* in the second family. KLHL24
encodes a conserved protein, which is highly expressed in
striated muscle. Studies in zebra ﬁsh revealed expression of
the homolog gene klhl24a in the heart and downregulation
by antisense morpholino oligomers resulted in cardiac
dysfunction.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed a novel form of cardi-
omyopathy that mimics HCM with recessive inheritance
and onset in adolescence or young adulthood. Genetic,morphological and functional studies demonstrated that
inactivation of KLHL24 is associated with the disease.
Several individuals had died of sudden cardiac arrest indi-cating that lethal arrhythmias may be a common
complication.
C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. A. Abramsson: None. D.
Osborn: None. O. Danielsson: None. A. Fazlinezhad:
None. Y. Nilipour: None. L. Hübbert: None. I. Nen-
nesmo: None. K. Visuttijai: None. J. Bharj: None. E.
Petropoulou: None. A. Shoreim: None. B. Vona: None.
N. Ahangari: None. M. Dávila López: None. M. Doosti:
None. R. Kumar Banote: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:None. M.
Edling: None. M. Taherpour: None. H. Zetterberg:
None. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. A. Oldfors: None.
Y. Jamshidi: None.
P10.21D
Interruptions in the CTG repeat sequence in the DMPKgene in a 40-year-old patient with myotonic dystrophy
type I
A. Bialek-Proscinska
1, J. Muszynski1, M. Jopek1,
M. Przyborska1, K. Lacna1, M. Piechota1,
M. Krawczynski1,2
1Centre for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland
Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is an autosomal
dominant neuromuscular disorder that is caused by the
expansion of a CTG triplets in the DMPK gene. We want to
present that using a standard TP-PCR method it is possibleto skip expansion of CTG triplets due to interruptions
present in the CTG repeat sequences.
Materials and Methods: Patient- female (40 years old)
symptoms of dystrophia appeared at the age of 30: problems
with walking, balance disorders and weakness in the limbs.
A test for dynamic mutation in the DMPK gene was per-formed. Standard TP-PCR method didn't show expansion of
CTG repeat sequence. We used a bidirectionally labeledTP-PCR method (Radvansky et al.) in which ampli ﬁcation
products are anchored at the 3 ’end of a CTG repeat
expansion rather than the 5 ’end. The effect of this redesign
is that it may prevent the failure in detecting expansion-
positive patients carrying repeat interruptions.
Results: TP-PCR reverse primer combinations showed
expansion above 50 repeats at the 3'end of the CTG repeat
sequence.
Conclusions: Thanks to the combination of both: forward
and reverse TP-PCR primers there is a simple and effective
method of identifying the presence or absence of expanded
CTG repeat alleles in the DMPK gene. It seems necessary touse forward and reverse TP-PCR primers, due to the pos-
sibility of occurrence of interruptions observed at both ends
of the CTG repeat sequence.
A. Bialek-Proscinska: None. J. Muszynski: None. M.
Jopek: None. M. Przyborska: None. K. Lacna: None. M.
Piechota: None. M. Krawczynski: None.
P10.22A
Validation of a fast, robust, inexpensive, two-tieredneonatal ncreening test algorithm on dried blood spots
for spinal muscular atrophy
A. Strunk
1, A. Abbes1, A. R. Stuitje2, C. Hettinga2,
E. Sepers2, R. Snetselaar2, J. Schouten2, F. Asselman3,
I. Cuppen3, H. Lemmink4, W. L. van der Pol3, H. Engel1
1Department of Clinical Chemistry and Neonatal
Screening, Isala Hospital, Zwolle, Netherlands,2MRC-
Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Department of
Neurology, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
4Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is one of the leading
genetic causes of infant mortality with an incidence of
1:10,000. Recently introduced antisense oligonucleotidetreatment improves outcome, in particular when applied
presymptomatically. The genetic cause of SMA is in >95%
of cases a homozygous deletion of the survival motorneuron (SMN1) 1 gene, which makes low cost detection of
SMA cases as part of newborn screening programs feasible.
We developed and validated a new SALSA MC002 meltingcurve assay that meets Dutch legal requirements of not
detecting asymptomatic carriers and that detects the absence
of the SMN1 exon 7 DNA sequence using crude extractsfrom dried blood spot (DBS) newborn screening cards.
Melting curve analysis shows speci ﬁc peaks of both the
SMN1 and the disease modifying SMN2 homolog, and incase of insuf ﬁcient amounts of sample DNA, a warning
peak. We retrieved 47 DBS samples from children with1482genetically con ﬁrmed SMA (identi ﬁed by using the Dutch
SMA database) after consent from parents and 375 controls
from the national archive of the Dutch National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). The assay
correctly identi ﬁed all anonymized SMA and control
samples (i.e. sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of 100%), without
the detection of carriers, on 3 most commonly used PCR
platforms with melting curve analysis. Concordance with
the second-tier ‘golden standard ’P021 SMA MLPA test
was 100%. Using the new P021-B1 version, crude extracts
from DBS cards could also be used to determine the SMN2
copy number of SMA patients with high accuracy.
A. Strunk: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equip-
ment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest;
MRC-Holland. A. Abbes: C. Other Research Support
(supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind
support); Modest; MRC-Holland. A.R. Stuitje: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland.
C. Hettinga: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. E. Sepers: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Snetselaar: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland.
J. Schouten: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-
Holland. F. Asselman: None. I. Cuppen: None. H. Lem-
mink: None. W.L. van der Pol: None. H. Engel: C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs orother in-kind support); Modest; MRC-Holland.
P10.23B
Improving molecular diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease by targeted next-generation sequencing in a
cohort of Lithuanian patients
B. Burnyte, K. Grigalioniene, A. Morkuniene,
L. Ambrozaityte, A. Utkus
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common
hereditary neuropathy with over 100 causative genesidenti ﬁed to date. Next generation sequencing (NGS)
approaches represent a powerful tool to identify genetic
variants in CMT in contrast to classic time consuming geneby gene approach. However, approximately 50% of patients
remain undiagnosed after use of NGS tools. The aim of this
study was to identify the molecular diagnosis in a group ofpatients with CMT using targeted NGS. 38 patients
presenting with hereditary neuropathies were tested by
targeted NGS for 150 nuclear genes associated with CMTand related neuropathies. In 15 of the 38 patients, we
identi ﬁed the de ﬁnite molecular diagnosis (39.47%). Intotal, 6 novel and 8 known pathogenic variants in 12 genes
were identi ﬁed. Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy
with neuromyotonia was the most prevalent type in our
cohort (4 patients). Additionally, autosomal recessive
inheritance was con ﬁ
rmed in patients harbouring GDAP1
andFIG4 variants. Our targeted gene panel allowed us to
perform a very rapid and cost-effective screening of genes
associated with CMT. We expanded a spectrum of
genotypes of CMT and clinical phenotypes of knownCMT related genes. This diagnostic rate was achieved by
performing accurate neurologic examination prior to
enrolment patients in the study and interpreting theNGS data.
B. Burnyte: None. K. Grigalioniene: None. A. Mor-
kuniene: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None. A. Utkus: None.
P10.25D
Identi ﬁcation and characterization of disease-causing
genes in non-5q-SMA by next-generation sequencing
technology: Lessons learned from NeurOmics study
M. Karakaya
1, M. Storbeck1, E. Strathmann1, A. Delle
Vedove1, I. Hoelker1, J. Altmueller2, S. Motameny2,
S. Alawbathani2, H. Thiele2, I. Polat3, G. Wunderlich4,
D. Ardicli5, H. Topaloglu5, J. Kirschner6, B. Schrank7,
R. Maroo ﬁan8, O. Magnusson9, U. Yis3, P. Nuernberg2,
R. Heller1,10, B. Wirth1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular
Medicine Cologne, Institute of Genetics, and Center forRare Diseases Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
2Cologne
Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany,3Dokuz Eylul
University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir,Turkey,
4University Hospital Cologne, Department of
Neurology, Cologne, Germany,5Hacettepe University,
Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, Turkey,
6Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders,
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany,7DKD Helios Kliniken,
Department of Neurology, Wiesbaden, Germany,8Genetics
and Molecular Cell Sciences Research Centre, St. George's
University of London, London, United Kingdom,9deCODE
Genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland,10GHSNZ
Northern Hub, ADHB, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland,
New Zealand
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) without
deletions/mutations in SMN1 (non-5q-SMA) is genetically
very heterogeneous. Due to strongly overlapping pheno-
types of neuromuscular disorders, the differential diagnosis
of non-5q-SMAs is challenging.
Materials and Methods: For the last 23 years, we have
performed SMN1 deletion analysis to 3,535 individuals withAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1483suspected SMA. In 1,715 (48.5%) of these individuals, no
SMN1 deletion/mutation was detected. Review of the clin-
ical data with respect to a possible motor neuron disorder
led to 114 patients who were available and consented to
participate. These 114 patients were analysed by two dif-
ferent gene panels. Of these, 24 unresolved patients and 49new patients were analysed by WES or/and WGS.
Results: Gene panel provided a diagnosis in 39% (44/
114) of the probands. The neuromuscular disease panel with479 genes outperformed the lower motor neuron disease
panel with 62 genes with a 44% to 13% diagnostic yield,
respectively. WES/WGS revealed the disease-causingmutation in 38% (28/73) of these patients. Within the
NeurOmics project, we published ﬁve novel disease-
causing genes ( BICD2, CHP1, PIEZO2, VAMP1,
ADPRHL2) and introduced three novel genes ( PRUNE1,
MCM3AP, AGTPBP1) with recently published overlapping
phenotypes.
Discussion: NGS is a powerful method for diagnostic and
gene identi ﬁcation purposes in non-5q-SMA, and illustrate
the wide spectrum of neuromuscular disorders that initiallypresent as motor neuron disease. Gene panels with larger
gene representation perform best in clinical conditions with
heterogenic genetic background. For phenotypes that arenot ful ﬁlling the core clinical criteria for motor neuron
disorders, a more comprehensive WES or WGS methods
should be used.
M. Karakaya: None. M. Storbeck: None. E. Strath-
mann: None. A. Delle Vedove: None. I. Hoelker: None. J.
Altmueller: None. S. Motameny: None. S. Alawbathani:
None. H. Thiele: None. I. Polat: None. G. Wunderlich:
None. D. Ardicli: None. H. Topaloglu: None. J. Kirsch-
ner: None. B. Schrank: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:None. O.
Magnusson: None. U. Yis: None. P. Nuernberg: None. R.
Heller: None. B. Wirth: None.
P10.26A
Genotype-driven WES analysis identi ﬁes novel
compound heterozygous splice-site mutationsinPIEZO2 causing a unique variant of distal
arthrogryposis with impaired proprioception & touch
E. Darmani
1, K. Kydonopoulou1, E. Papadopoulou1,
S. Gerou1, M. Kambouris2
1Analysi Iatriki S.A, Thessaloniki, Greece,2Division of
Genetics, Department of Pathology & Laboratory
Medicine, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar
A family with two siblings (20-year old male & 18-year old
female) affected by an undiagnosed Neuromuscular diseasewas analyzed by WES of a single affected individual to
identify the offending gene defect. The clinical presentationincludes agenesis of corpus callosum, severe congenital
truncal hypotonia, severe scoliosis, short stature, delay in
bone age, ataxic gait / jerky walking, triangular face with
narrow maxilla affecting speech, congenital clasped thumb
and congenital clubfoot (female patient), lateral deviation
deformity of foot bilaterally and upper and lower extremityspasticity. Phenotype-driven WES analysis did not identify
any known pathogenic or novel predicted damaging
variants in known genes. Genotype-driven WES analysisfor known pathogenic mutations and novel variants
predicted as damaging in MIM genes, identi ﬁed two novel
PIEZO2 exon 27 splice site mutations (c.4093-1G>C and
c.4189+1G>A, both predicted damaging). Recessive
PIEZO2 pathogenic mutations cause Distal Arthrogryposis
with Impaired Proprioception & Touch (DAIPT) withclinical presentation that overlaps that of the patients under
investigation. Mutation-to-disease co-segregation in the
nuclear family by Sanger sequencing, showed the variantsin“trans ”conﬁguration as both parents were carriers of a
different mutation and the affected siblings compound
heterozygotes. Phenotype-driven WES analysis failed toidentify the offending gene most likely due to clinical
heterogeneity. Agenesis of corpus callosum has not been
associated with DAIPT. Impaired proprioception was notproperly diagnosed, and arthrogryposis was erroneously
referred as “spasticity ”. Genotype-driven WES analysis is
an invaluable tool that should be utilized rather thanphenotype-driving analysis to accommodate for clinical
heterogeneity and variability in clinical presentation.
E. Darmani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; ANALYSI IATRIKI SA. K. Kydonopoulou: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; ANALYSI
IATRIKI SA. E. Papadopoulou: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; ANALYSI IATRIKI SA. S. Gerou:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; ANALYSI
IATRIKI SA. M. Kambouris: None.
P10.27B
Distinguishing Highly Similar SMN1/2 Genes and
Identifying Novel SMN Transcripts by Targeted
Capture of PacBio Single-molecule Long-read
Sequencing
M. Dai, Y. Xu, X. Ji
Department of Genetic Counseling, Xinhua Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
shanghai, China
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is autosomal
recessively inherited disease with a high carrier frequencycaused by biallelic mutations in SMN1 gene. As high
homology between SMN1 andSMN2 , it would be dif ﬁcult1484to distinguish the mutations in SMN1 from SMN2 . PacBio
single molecule real time (SMRT) sequencing techniques
can aids the identi ﬁcation of transcript variants due to the
longer read lengths
Materials and Methods: Twenty-one study subjects
were selected from the diagnostic laboratory. MultiplexPCR with four pairs of speci ﬁc-primers to enrich SMN
transcripts. Enriched products sequenced by long-read
sequencing approach using SMRT. An 20bp anchorsequences were used to distinguish SMN1 and SMN2 .
Marked with SMN1/SMN2 reads utilized GATK for varia-
tion calling.
Results: For the majority of subjects in this study, SMN1
transcripts full-length SMN mRNA (FL-SMN) and SMN2
transcripts lacking exon 7 mRNA (SMN Δ7) as reported.
Nine in ten subjects with subtle mutation are detected by
long-read sequencing. Detected mutation of M0 are existing
in SMN Δ7, all the other detected mutation are existing in
FL-SMN. There are ten novel transcripts detected. Six of
ten are successfully ampli ﬁed by PCR.
Conclusions: We have developed a novel method to
distinguish highly similar SMN1 and SMN2 genes and
identify affected mutations in SMN1 orSMN2 by long-read
SMRT sequencing. Meanwhile, the method can compre-hensively illustrate SMN transcripts existed.
M. Dai: None. Y. Xu: None. X. Ji: None.
P10.28C
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy (FSHD):
insights into the genetic characterization of SMCHD1
V. Caputo
1, R. Galota2, G. Campoli2, S. Chimienti2,
S. Zampatti2, L. Colantoni2, C. Strafella1, G. Minozzi3,
R. Cascella2,4, E. Ricci5, L. Politano6, E. Giardina1,2
1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, “Tor
Vergata ”University, Rome, Italy,2Molecular Genetics
Laboratory UILDM, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy,
3Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy,4Department of Biomedical Sciences, Catholic
University Our Lady of Good Counsel, Tirana, Albania,
5Institute of Neurology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy,6Department of Experimental Medicine,
Cardiomyology and Medical Genetics, University of
Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy
Introduction: SMCHD1 (18p11.32) is a gene coding for a
chromatin remodeller involved in the epigenetic silencing ofdifferent targets, including genes located in D4Z4 locus
(4q35). SMCHD1 loss of function mutations can hamper its
function, leading to the aberrant expression of D4Z4 genes
associated with FSHD. This study aimed to characterize agroup of patients with a clinical suspect of FSHD, by
molecular analysis of SMCHD1 sequence.
Materials and Methods: 58 patients with a clinical
suspect of FSHD were enrolled and were analyzed by NGS
methodology and direct sequencing. The detected variants
were investigated by bioinformatics tools in order to predicttheir impact on the protein and evaluate the potential
pathogenic effect on FSHD.
Results: Molecular analysis of SMCHD1 sequence
revealed the presence of exonic, intronic and 3 ’UTR var-
iants. Among them, ﬁve novel variants (c.183_184insGT;
c.1131+2delTAAG; c.2130insC; c.3469G>T;
c.5150_5151delAA) were predicted to be pathogenic for
FSHD, causing a substantial alteration of protein structure
and function. In addition, four variants (c.7394A>C;c.7597G>A; c.*1397A>G; c.*1889G>C) in 3 ’UTR were
predicted to affect the binding of different miRNAs.
Conclusions: Molecular analysis of SMCHD1 allowed to
detect novel potential pathogenic variants in patients with a
clinical suspect of FSHD. In particular, those variants may
modify the structure and function of SMCHD1 protein,leading thereby to the disruption of its physiological activity
and, ultimately, contributing to FSHD etiopathogenesis.
Moreover, the 3 ’UTR variants unveiled a possible impact of
miRNA-dependent regulation on FSHD-related pathways.
V. Caputo: None. R. Galota: None. G. Campoli: None.
S. Chimienti: None. S. Zampatti: None. L. Colantoni:
None. C. Strafella: None. G. Minozzi: None. R. Cascella:
None. E. Ricci: None. L. Politano: None. E.
Giardina: None.
P10.29D
Screening multiple populations reveals large differencesin the prevalence of a truncated SMN gene lacking exon
7 and 8
R. Vijzelaar, R. Snetselaar, M. Clausen, A. Mason,
M. Rinsma, M. Zegers, N. Molleman, R. Boschloo,
R. Yilmaz, R. Kuilboer, S. Sulchan, J. Schouten
MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the
most frequent genetic disorders in Caucasians, with an
incidence of approximately 1:10.000 in newborns. SMA isan autosomal recessive disorder with a population depen-
dent carrier frequency ranging from 1:35 in Caucasians to
1:91 in African Americans. In the majority of populations,most individuals have two copies of both SMN1 and the
almost identical SMN2 gene. Previous studies have
identi
ﬁed the presence of SMN1 orSMN2 gene copies
lacking the last two exons, exons 7 and 8, in 8% and 23% of
healthy Swedish and Spanish individuals respectively. NoAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1485information on the presence of these truncated gene copies
in other populations has been reported.
Methods: A new version of the SALSA MLPA P021
SMA probemix was tested on 1255 samples from the 1000
genomes / HapMap projects from 15 different populations.
The probemix covers all SMN1 andSMN2 exons by at least
one probe and contains four SMN1 orSMN2 speciﬁc
probes.
Results: Large differences in the frequency of a truncated
SMN gene were observed between all the different popu-
lations tested, ranging from 0 to 20%. Frequencies in the
different populations were as follows: 8-20% in Europeanpopulations, 7-11% in American populations, and 0-1% in
both the Asian and African populations.
Conclusion: The improved P021 MLPA Probemix makes
the identi ﬁcation of truncated SMN genes straightforward.
These truncated SMN genes are found frequently in several
populations while they are relatively non-existent in otherpopulations with their clinical signi ﬁcance still unknown.
R. Vijzelaar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Snetselaar: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Clausen:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-
Holland. A. Mason: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Rinsma: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Zegers:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-
Holland. N. Molleman: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Boschloo: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Yilmaz:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-
Holland. R. Kuilboer: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. S. Sulchan: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland. J. Schouten:
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; MRC-Holland.
P10.30A
SARS2 modi ﬁes spastic paraplegia type 4 age at onset
L. Parodi
1, F. Lejeune1, M. Barbier1, A. Brice1,
G. Stevanin1,2, A. Durr1
1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM),
INSERM, CNRS, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris(AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Pitié-Salpêtrère University
Hospital, Paris, France,
2Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes
(EPHE), Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL) ResearchUniversity, Neurogenetics Group, Paris, France
Introduction: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) are
rare neurological disorders caused by the progressive distal
degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. Mutations inSPAST , encoding Spastin, are the most frequent cause of
HSP. Recently, through the analysis of 842 SPAST mutated
patients, we showed that mutation nature accounts for some
of the age at onset variability and that sex in ﬂuences the
disorder penetrance. To identify additional age at onset
modiﬁers, a GWAS analysis was performed on 134 SPAST
truncating mutations carriers.
Materials and Methods: Patients were genotyped using
Illumina In ﬁniumOmni2.5Exome-8 kit. Single variant test
was performed using a logistic mixed model for binary traits
available with GMMAT R package, adjusted for sex and
patients ’relatedness. Patients with very discordant age at
onset were compared ( ≤15 years versus ≥45 years).
Results: A group of SNPs in linkage disequilibrium
(r
2>0.8) reached a p-value suggestive for association (top p-
value=10e-6). The 7 suggestive SNPs are located on
chromosome 19, in the 3 ’UTR region of SARS2 gene and
are described as eQTLs of this gene in the GTEx database.Among the genotyped patients, a signi ﬁcantly lower age at
onset (p<0.0001, Mann-Whitney test) was associated with
the minor allele at all SNPs, as well as a tendency to adecreased disorder severity.
Conclusions: Pathogenic mutations affecting SARS2 ,
encoding a mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase, havealready been linked to progressive spastic paraparesis onset,
suggesting it as a good candidate. iPSCs-derived neurons
andDrosophila model are being used to further con ﬁrm its
role as SPAST -HSP age of onset modi ﬁer.
L. Parodi: None. F. Lejeune: None. M. Barbier: None.
A. Brice: None. G. Stevanin: None. A. Durr: None.
P10.31B
Development of motor function in late vs earlytreatment with nusinersen for SMA type 1 and 2
patients
I. Henriksson
1, L. Alberg2, A. Kroksmark2, L. Wahlgren2,
M. Tulinius2
1Department of Clinical Pathology and Genetics,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden,
2Department of Pediatrics, Gothenburg University, Queen
Silvia Children ’s Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an
autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder caused by
mutations in the SMN1-gene (5q 12.2-13.3) generating
atrophy of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord andbrainstem leading to muscle weakness. The antisense
oligonucleotide nusinersen was recently approved in
Sweden for treatment of SMA in the public health caresystem. In this study we compare the development in motor
function in patients who received treatment within three1486months of symptom onset for SMA type 1, and within
twelve months for SMA type 2, to the patients receiving
treatment later in the course of disease.
Materials and Methods: All patients diagnosed with
SMA type 1 or 2 treated with nusinersen for at least twelve
months at the Department of Pediatrics, Queen SilviaChildren's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden are included in
the study. The motor function is assessed by standardized
motor function scales; CHOP-INTEND/HFMSE, developedand validated for SMA patients.
Results: Data regarding age of onset, age at start of
treatment, genetic constitution and development of motorfunction will be presented.
Conclusion: Previous studies have indicated that treat-
ment ef ﬁcacy for motor function is greater in patients
receiving treatment close to onset of symptoms or even in
presymptomatic patients compared to patients receiving the
treatment later in the course of disease. This highlights theimportance of early diagnosis and raises the question of
inclusion of SMA in newborn screening programmes.
I. Henriksson: None. L. Alberg: None. A. Kroksmark:
None. L. Wahlgren: None. M. Tulinius: None.
P10.32C
Methylation level of genes on various stages of
differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells,
generated from patients with spinal muscular atrophy,into motoneurons
M. A. Maretina
1, N. A. Tsyganova2, S. V. Shtykalova2,
A. A. Egorova1, K. R. Valetdinova3,4,5,6, S. M. Zakian3,4,5,6,
V. S. Baranov1,2, A. V. Kiselev1
1The Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductology named after D.O. Ott, Saint-Petersburg,
Russian Federation,2Saint-Petersburg State University,
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,3Federal Research
Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, the Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk,Russian Federation,
4Institute of Chemical Biology and
Fundamental Medicine, the Siberian Branch of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,
5State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology, Ministry
of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Novosibirsk,
Russian Federation,6National Research University
Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe neuromuscular
disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. SMA is
subdivided into four clinical groups based on age of onsetand achieved motor milestones. SMN2 gene copy number is
a key modi ﬁer of the disease, though involvement ofadditional factors such as DNA methylation is also
examined. Previous studies have demonstrated correlation
between methylation pro ﬁles of several genes and SMA
severity. Current study is devoted to investigation of
methylation level of genes in SMA patients ’derived cells
on sequential stages of differentiation of induced pluripotentstem cells (iPS) into motor neurons. The level of
methylation of SMN2 gene as well as genes playing role
in neural cells ( OLIG2 ,ISL1,SLC23A2 ,DYNC1H1 ) and
pluripotency-regulating genes ( Oct4 ,SALL4 ) has been
determined by means of methylation-sensitive high-resolu-
tion melting. Signi ﬁcant differences have been found in the
methylation level of the regulatory regions of OCT4 ,SALL4
andSMN genes between patients with SMA type I, type II
and a healthy individual. A decrease in methylation level ofthe promoter region of OLIG2 gene in SMA type I
compared to SMA type II, as well as of 41 exons of the
DYNC1H1 gene in SMA type I compared to a healthy
individual was also found. The results observed in this
study may elucidate new pathways involved in SMA
progression and may contribute to better understanding ofthe particularities of disease pathogenesis. This work is
supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research grant
18-315-00258 mol_a.
M.A. Maretina: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Modest; Russian Foundation forBasic Research. N.A. Tsyganova: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;Russian Foundation for Basic Research. S.V. Shtykalova:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Modest; Russian Foundation for Basic Research.
A.A. Egorova: None. K.R. Valetdinova: None. S.M.
Zakian: None. V.S. Baranov: None. A.V. Kiselev: None.
P10.33D
Mutation Spectrum of the Survival of Motor Neuron 1in Iranian Population
M. Taheri, A. SayadShahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a lethal disorder
characterized by loss of motor neurons, muscle weakness,hypotonia and muscle atrophy. SMA is highly heteroge-
neous with various genes with different heritable patterns
causing the disease. In the typical form, patients havedefective SMN1 genes. To date, tens of genes have been
identi ﬁed for Atypical SMA. In this study, 144 familiesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1487suspected for SMA were included. Patients were ﬁrst
examined for typical SMA by MLPA and assessment of
STR markers for SMN1 . Next, patients who did not have
mutations in the SMN1 gene were examined using STR
markers for the DNAJB2 ,IGHMBP2 ,SIGMAR1 and
PLEKHG5 genes. Subsequently, autozygosity mapping
followed by sequencing were performed for cases with
homozygous haplotypes. Finally, Whole Exome sequencing
(WES) was done for the remaining cases who did not showassociation with any of the studied genes. The pathogenicity
of the newly identi ﬁed mutations was examined using
various softwares and ACMG guideline. SMN1 deletions/
mutations were identi ﬁed in 134 families. Of the remaining
10 families, three families showed mutations in DNAJB2 ,
SIGMAR1 andPLEKHG5 genes. In six families tested by
WES, four families had pathogenic variants in TNNT1 ,
TPM3 andTTN genes respectively. MLPA and assessment
of STR markers can be helpful in both typical and atypicalSMA cases. Moreover, linkage analysis and WES are
suggested as effective strategies for identi ﬁcation of
mutations in patients with atypical SMA.
M. Taheri: None. A. Sayad: None.
P10.34A
Accurately resolving copy number variation in highly
homologous SMN1 and SMN2 genes using next-
generation sequencing and rhPCR
H. Junnila, M. Valori, A. Korppoo, L. Koskinen,
E. Salminen, K. Gall, T. Alastalo, S. Myllykangas,J. Koskenvuo, P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen
Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, FinlandIntroduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a
neuromuscular disorder characterized by progressive degen-eration of spinal cord motor neurons. In most cases, the
disease is caused by the homozygous absence of the SMN1
gene. Copy number of the highly homologous SMN2 gene
can also modify the disease severity. To address the clinical
importance of accurate SMN1 and SMN2 copy number
analysis, we developed a custom bioinformatic analysisbased on next-generation sequencing (NGS) data combined
with a novel RNase H2-dependent PCR (rhPCR) for
conﬁrmation analysis.
Materials and Methods: The bioinformatic method uti-
lizes sequence reads at four loci differing between the
genes. The rhPCR assays target two of the loci with RNA-modiﬁed primers that require activation by RNase H2
enzyme improving assay speci ﬁcity and sensitivity com-
pared to standard methods. We validated the methods using27 reference samples with known SMN1 /SMN2 copynumbers and evaluated the clinical performance by ana-
lyzing 89 patient samples.
Results: Both methods showed 100% sensitivity and
speciﬁcity to detect SMN1
copy numbers 0-2 or higher and
SMN2 copy numbers 0-3 or higher. In clinical samples, the
obtained SMN1 and SMN2 copy numbers showed 100%
concordance between the methods. Additionally, we
applied the bioinformatic analysis to 2196 de-identi ﬁed
patient samples not referred for the indication of SMA.Heterozygous SMN1 deletions were observed in 2.6% of the
samples, which agrees with previously reported frequencies.
Conclusions: We established an accurate and high-
throughput approach to test for SMN1 and SMN2 copy
numbers enabling diagnostics of SMA and application of
novel therapeutic strategies.
H. Junnila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Valori: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. A.
Korppoo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Salminen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S.
Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P.
Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P10.35B
Accurate single-tube quanti ﬁ
cation of SMN1 andSMN2
copy numbers using a rapid and streamlined PCR/CE
assay evaluated at two different laboratories
M. E. Oliveira1, S. Filipovic-Sadic2, S. Gokul2,
J. Janovsky2, J. Milligan2, G. J. Latham2, R. Santos1
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Centro Genética Médica Dr.
Jacinto Magalh ães, Centro Hospitalar Porto, Porto,
Portugal,2Asuragen, Inc., Austin, TX, United States1488Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an
autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease and a leading
genetic cause of infant mortality. SMA is commonly caused
by homozygous exon 7 deletions in the survival motor
neuron 1 gene ( SMN1 ). The severity of SMA is modulated
by the copy number of the paralogous SMN2 gene. Here, we
report the two-site evaluation of a single-tube assay that
quanti ﬁesSMN1 andSMN2 copy number.
Materials and Methods: A prototype SMN1/2 single-
tube PCR was developed from AmplideX ®PCR/CE SMN1
reagents (Asuragen). Amplicons generated from whole
blood genomic DNA were resolved by capillary electro-phoresis (CE) on a 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher
Scienti ﬁc). Gene copy numbers were calculated from peak
area ratios that were normalized to a plate calibrator andbinned as 0, 1, 2, 3, or ≥4 copies. Two laboratories (one in
Portugal and one in the US) evaluated 60 residual clinical
samples with reference genotypes.
Results: Normalized SMN1 and SMN2 copy numbers
demonstrated operator-to-operator and site-to-site agree-
ment (R
2>0.98). Binned copy-number calls for SMN1
spanned 0 to ≥4 copies and were concordant with reference
results for both laboratories. SMN2 copy numbers ranged
from 0 to ≥4 copies and were concordant for 59/60 (98.3%)
samples.
Conclusions: A simple, high-throughput SMN1/2 PCR/
CE assay was successfully evaluated using 60 samples,including 15 SMA and 13 carrier samples. This method
offers a simple work ﬂow and fast turnaround time (< 4hrs
from sample-to-answer) with potential as an accurate andreliable alternative to existing methods.
M.E. Oliveira: None. S. Filipovic-Sadic: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. S.
Gokul: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Asuragen, Inc. J. Janovsky: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. J. Milligan: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc.
G.J. Latham: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc.. R. Santos: None.
P10.36C
Analysis of DNA tandem repeats in ALS from WholeGenome Sequencing: Role of FRA10Ac1 gene repeat
expansion in ALS
L. Corrado
1, L. Genovese2, E. Mangano3, R. Croce1,A .D i
Pierro1, F. Geraci2, R. Bordoni4, R. D'Aurizio2,
N. Barizzone1, F. De Marchi5, L. Mazzini5, G. De Bellis3,
G. Manzini2,6, M. Severgnini3, M. Pellegrini2,
S. D'Alfonso1
1University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, NOvara, Italy,
2Institute of Informatics and Telematics of CNR, Pisa, Italy,3Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research
Council (CNR-ITB), Segrate (MI), Italy,4Institute for
Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council
(CNR-ITB),, Segrate (MI), Italy,5ALS Center AOU
Maggiore della Carità, NOvara, Italy,6UPO, Vercelli, Italy
The C9ORF72 gene repeat expansion is the most frequent
cause of ALS. Long repeats alleles in ATXN-1, ATXN-2,
and NIPA1 genes are associated to ALS susceptibility.Tandem Repeat Polymorphisms (TRPs) are good candi-
dates for missing hereditability in ALS (40%), although
they were never systematically analyzed as they represent aremarkable challenge to NGS. The aim of this study is to
perform a systematic analysis of TRPs in ALS by
combining NGS and novel bioinformatics tools. Weperformed our analysis from whole genome sequencing
data (WGS) of 70 ALS cases. TRPs were evaluated by
means of a software developed within our consortium todetect tandem repeat expansion. Validation of expanded
loci was conducted by Repeat primer PCR We identi ﬁed an
ALS patient with a CGG expansion in 5 ’UTR of
FRA10AC1 gene. To explore the possible role of this
CGG expansion in ALS we screened a cohort of 337 ALS
and 285 controls and we found 3 expanded patients (0.9%)and no control. We failed to replicated this result in a
second cohort of 426 ALS patients and 733 controls (1 ALS
(0.2%) and 5 controls (0.7%)) Overall, we observed theCGG expansion in 4/763 (0.5%) ALS patients and 5/1018
controls (0.5%). FRA10AC1 gene expression was not
silenced by the expansion. The software we developed candetect repeat expansions from WGS data, although
FRA10AC1 CGG expansion seems not to be involved in
ALS pathogenesis. Conversely to what previously reported,large CGG expansion at this locus do not decrease gene
expression
L. Corrado: None. L. Genovese: None. E. Mangano:
None. R. Croce: None. A. Di Pierro: None. F. Geraci:
None. R. Bordoni: None. R. D'Aurizio: None. N. Bar-
izzone: None. F. De Marchi: None. L. Mazzini: None. G.
De Bellis: None. G. Manzini: None. M. Severgnini: None.
M. Pellegrini: None. S. D'Alfonso: None.
P10.37D
Clinical diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and
hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSPs) in Portugal usingexome sequencing
S. Sousa
1,2, P. Silva1,2, A. Brandão1,2, A. Lopes1,2,
P. Arinto1,2, R. Bastos1,2, S. Morais1,2, S. Barbosa1,2,
J. Sequeiros1,2,3, I. Alonso1,2
1CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2i3S - Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1489Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3ICBAS - Instituto
de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal
SCAs and HSPs are rare genetic neurological diseases with
a prevalence of 12.9/100,000 in Portugal. Clinical symp-toms often distinguish SCAs from HSPs; however, complex
forms combine these and other neurological symptoms, in a
wide phenotypic diversity (age-at-onset, severity andprogression rate). In this study, we provide an estimate of
the diagnostic yield of SCAs and HSPs at our laboratory.
We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) and appliedvirtual gene panels on 333 patients with SCAs and HSPs,
and analysed SNVs, using an in house pipeline, and CNVs,
using Golden Helix ’s VarSeq software. We tested 161 SCA
patients using a WES-based virtual panel (145 genes),
where we achieved a molecular diagnosis for 17 patients
(18 previously described and 13 novel disease-causingvariants); in another 72 patients, we reported a VUS,
according to the ACMG classi ﬁcation. In 172 patients with
HSP (118 genes in the virtual panel), we established amolecular diagnosis in 27 cases (35 described and 8 novel
disease-causing variants), while in 50 probands we reported
a VUS. We obtained a diagnostic yield of 10.6% for SCAsand 15.7% for HSPs; VUS reported represented 44.7% of
SCA and 29.1% of HSP cases. In undiagnosed patients,
family studies, correlation with phenotype, CNV analysis inaddition to ﬂexible virtual gene panels (e.g., including
newly discovered genes or using a large neurological
disorder multigene panel) may increase the diagnostic yield,in order to provide a better disease management and
improve genetic counselling for affected patients and their
families.
S. Sousa: None. P. Silva: None. A. Brandão: None. A.
Lopes: None. P. Arinto: None. R. Bastos: None. S.
Morais: None. S. Barbosa: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I.
Alonso: None.
P11
Multiple malformation/anomalies syndromes
P11.01A
Sex-speci ﬁc transcriptome analysis highlights immune
and neuronal dysfunction in the developing brain cortexof 16p11.2 deletion mouse models
P. De Nittis
1, G. Giannuzzi1, E. Porcu1,2, L. Dib2,
J. Chrast1, Y. Herault3, F. Schütz2, C. Attanasio1,
A. Reymond1
1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland,
2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne,Switzerland,3Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France
Rearrangements of the proximal 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 region
are associated with mirroring anthropometric traits and
neurodevelopmental disorders. To assess the molecularimpact of 16p11.2 dosage and investigate possible sex
interaction(s), we pro ﬁled the transcriptomes of brain
cortices of wild-type, 16p11.2 deletion and 16p11.2duplication male and female mouse models across embryo-
nic (E11.5), newborn (P0) and adult (P77) stages. Whereas
we corroborate previous results by identifying expressionchanges of transcripts associated with primary cilium and
metabolism, we also uncovered signi ﬁcant perturbation of
immune-related genes that encode proteins in ﬂuencing
neuronal development and synaptic function (P =6.44E-
05) in 16p11.2
Del/+mice. This signal is already present in
embryos and newborns, and becomes especially exacer-bated in adult females with 6203 differentially expressed
genes compared to 146 in males, suggesting that hormonal
changes could be involved. This massive transcriptomemodiﬁcation could be a compensation mechanism of
16p11.2
Del/+females, consistent with the milder phenotypes
of human female deletion carriers. Unfortunately, the vastmajority of 16p11.2 animal models have not been studied in
a sex-speci ﬁc manner. We also assessed the transcriptome
of 16p11.2
Dup/+mice, and in agreement with the hypothesis
that aneuploidy of the genes of the rearranged interval is
more detrimental than their overexpression, we found, at all
developmental stages, greater transcriptional alterations in16p11.2
Del/+rather than 16p11.2Dup/+mice. Our data reveal
time- and sex-speci ﬁc transcriptional changes in the brain
cortex of 16p11.2Del/+mice, and shed light on possible
intimate connections between the immune and nervous
systems and its in ﬂuence on neurologic manifestations in
carriers of 16p11.2 rearrangements.
P. De Nittis: None. G. Giannuzzi: None. E. Porcu:
None. L. Dib: None. J. Chrast: None. Y. Herault: None.
F. Schütz: None. C. Attanasio: None. A. Reymond: None.
P11.02B
Duplication 17q24.3q25.1, inserted on 17p13,encompassing SOX9: the impact on the phenotype
E. Matoso
1,2,3, P. Louro4,5,6, A. Estevinho1, S. I. Ferreira7,
P. Paiva7, J. B. Melo7,3,8, A. Mirante9, U. S. Melo10,11,
S. Mundlos10,11, S. B. Sousa2,4, L. Ramos4,6, J. Saraiva4,2,
I. M. Carreira7,8,3
1Laboratório de Citogenética, Serviço de Genética Médica,
Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário deCoimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
2Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,3CIMAGO –1490Centro de Investigaç ão em Meio Ambiente, Genética e
Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal,4Serviço de Genética
Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,5Clínica de
Risco Familiar, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa
Francisco Gentil, Lisboa, Portugal,6Faculty of Health
Sciences, Universidade da Beira Interior, Covilh ã,
Portugal,7Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra,Coimbra, Portugal,
8CNC.IBILI Consortium, Universidade
de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,9Unidade de
Endocrinologia, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar eUniversitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
10Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development
& Disease, Berlin, Germany,11Institute for Medical and
Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany
Intrachromosomal insertions are uncommon rearrange-
ments. The cytogenetic recognition of these structurally
rearranged chromosomes can be dif ﬁcult to ascertain. In last
years the application of array-CGH in the investigation of
patients with intellectual disability and congenital malfor-
mations increased substantially the detection of crypticchromosomal imbalances. However, the rearrangement
underlying the imbalance could be missed, when we only
perform molecular techniques.
We report a 10 year-old girl presenting intellectual dis-
ability, attention de ﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, short stature,
prenatal microcephaly, aplasia cutis congenita, bulbousbiﬁd nose, bilateral congenital trigger thumb, shortening of
the fourth metacarpal of the right hand, pectus excavatum,
long ﬁrst toe, and mild hypertrichosis.
High resolution cytogenetic analysis revealed a cryptic
alteration: 46,XX,add(17)(p13.1). To characterize the
imbalance 180K oligonucleotide array-CGH was per-formed, revealing a 2.4 Mb duplication: arr[hg19]
17q24.3q25.1(68,620,187-71,083,594)x3 encompassing 10
genes. Molecular cytogenetics showed an intrachromoso-mal insertion on 17p. Parents were not available to study.
The most relevant gene involved in the imbalance is SOX9
(MIM*608160) and encodes a transcription factor essentialfor both sex and skeletal development. Duplications of
noncoding elements 5-prime of SOX9 were associated with
abnormal digit and nail development. Investigations arebeing addressed, by chromosome conformation capture
(HiC) in patient cell lines in combination with whole-
genome sequencing, in order to do a better interpretation ofthe pathogenic mechanisms underlying the chromosomal
rearrangement.
This report emphasis the contribution of high resolution
cytogenetics, molecular cytogenetics and array-CGH to a
better understanding of the rearrangement involved in theimbalance, providing a better interpretation and correlation
to the phenotype.
E. Matoso: None. P. Louro: None. A. Estevinho: None.
S.I. Ferreira: None. P. Paiva: None. J.B. Melo: None. A.
Mirante: None. U.S. Melo: None. S. Mundlos: None. S.B.
Sousa: None. L. Ramos: None. J. Saraiva: None. I.M.
Carreira: None.
P11.03C
Understanding microcephaly/macrocephaly
mechanisms in the new 19p13.3 microduplication/
microdeletion syndrome
G. Jouret
1, M. Egloff2, O. Tassy3, F. Giuliano4,
H. Karmous-Benailly4, C. Coutton5, V. Satre5,
F. Devillard5, K. Dieterich5, G. Vieville5, P. Kuentz6,C .L e
Caignec7, P. Callier8, V. Marquet9, C. Laroche-Raynaud9,
E. Bieth10, C. Rooryck-Thambo11, P. Pennamen11,
C. Angélini11, J. Lévy12, A. Philippe-Recasens2,
S. Lyonnet2, G. Baujat2, M. Rio2, F. Cartault13, S. Berg13,
S. Sophie14, A. Gouronc14, A. SCHALK1, C. Jacquin1,
E. Gouy1, E. Landais1, M. Spodenkiewicz1, C. Poirsier1,
M. Doco-Fenzy1
1Reims University Hospital, Reims, France,2Necker
University Hospital, Paris, France,3IGBMC, Strasbourg,
France,4Nice University Hospital, Nice, France,5Grenoble
University Hospital, Grenoble, France,6Besançon
University Hospital, Besançon, France,7Nantes University
Hospital, Nantes, France,8Dijon University Hospital,
Dijon, France,9Limoges University Hospital, Limoges,
France,10Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France,
11Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France,
12Robert-Debré University Hospital, Paris, France,13La
Réunion University Hospital, Saint Denis, France,
14Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France
Introduction: A small but growing body of scienti ﬁc
literature is emerging about clinical ﬁndings in patients with
19p13.3 rearrangements. Most reported individuals have
deletions, and only eleven patients with clinical ﬁndings
attributed to 19p13.3 duplications have been reported.Interestingly, 19p13.3 microdeletions are described in
patients with syndromic intellectual disability and macro-
cephaly, and 19p13.3 microduplications in patients withsyndromic intellectual disability and microcephaly. More-
over, patients with 19p13.3 microduplication share common
developmental features, suggesting the existence of a newmicroduplication syndrome.
Methods: To characterize these new syndromes, we
formed a French collaborative study, and included 37 newpatients with 19p13.3 rearrangements. We performed phe-
notype and genotype analysis, including genotype-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1491phenotype correlations by critical region delineation. We
screened this critical region with experimental ﬁndings in
murine model by using the data-mining software Manteia,
to purpose candidate genes never associated with human
phenotype before.
Results: We report the largest cohort of patients with
19p13.3 rearrangements, and describe a new 377 Kb critical
region associated with syndromic intellectual disability and
micro/macrocephaly. 19p13.3 rearrangements are asso-ciated with speci ﬁc recurrent clinical ﬁndings: mild to
moderate intellectual disability, pre and post-natal growth
delay, micro or macrocephaly, osteoarticular anomaliesincluding precocious osteoporosis in children, congenital
severe hip dysplasia and scoliosis, congenital heart defect,
genitourinary ﬁndings and immunode ﬁciency. Breakpoint
analysis and supporting murine model allowed us to pur-
pose candidate genes associated with micro/macrocephaly.
Conclusions: 19p13.3 rearrangements are associated with
speciﬁc clinical ﬁndings, including intellectual disability
and micro/macrocephaly. We delineate genotype-phenotype
correlations and purposed candidate genes never associatedwith human phenotype before.
G. Jouret: None. M. Egloff: None. O. Tassy: None. F.
Giuliano: None. H. Karmous-Benailly: None. C. Cout-
ton: None. V. Satre: None. F. Devillard: None. K. Diet-
erich: None. G. Vieville: None. P. Kuentz: None. C. Le
Caignec: None. P. Callier: None. V. Marquet: None. C.
Laroche-Raynaud: None. E. Bieth: None. C. Rooryck-
Thambo: None. P. Pennamen: None. C. Angélini: None.
J. Lévy: None. A. Philippe-Recasens: None. S. Lyonnet:
None. G. Baujat: None. M. Rio: None. F. Cartault: None.
S. Berg: None. S. Sophie: None. A. Gouronc: None. A.
Schalk: None. C. Jacquin:
None. E. Gouy: None. E.
Landais: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None. C. Poirsier:
None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None.
P11.04D
22q11.2 Deletion syndrome and coexisting conditions -
an important prognostic, management, and geneticcounseling consideration
D. M. McDonald-McGinn
1,2, M. Unolt3, T. B. Crowley1,
D. E. McGinn1, J. Cohen1, A. Bailey1, M. Lambert1,2,
B. Emanuel1,2, E. Zackai1,2, B. Nowakowska4,
J. Vermeesch5
1The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
United States,2Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United
States,3Ospedale Bambino Gesu and Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy,4Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw,
Poland,5KU Leuven, Philadelphia, BelgiumBackground: 22q11.2DS is the most frequent CNV,
affecting ~1/1000 fetuses and ~1/2000 –4000 children,
resulting in recognizable but variable ﬁndings across
multiple organ systems. Patients with atypical features
should prompt consideration of coexisting diagnoses due to
the possibility of additional genome ‐wide mutations/CNVs
which may be inherited, as well as, mutations/CNVs on the
other chromosome 22q11.2 allele resulting in an autosomal
recessive condition. Both occurrences compound symptomsimpacting management and genetic counseling.
Methods: Records on 1422 patients with laboratory
conﬁrmed 22q11.2DS followed at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia were reviewed to identify a dual diagnosis,
including a subset with atypical features, e.g. craniosynos-
tosis, whose samples underwent NGS of the intact 22q11.2allele in Leuven/Warsaw.
Results: 24 patients had a coexisting diagnosis (1.7% of
our cohort) including 8 patients with conditions unrelated to22q11.2DS (SCID, Trisomy 8 mosaic, CHD7 mutation,
cystic ﬁbrosis, maternally inherited 17q12 deletion, G6PD
deﬁciency, von Willebrand disease, 1q21.1 deletion) and 16
patients with 22q11.2DS and a CNV/mutation on the
remaining allele resulting in an autosomal recessive condi-
tion. The latter group included mutations/CNVs in GP1BB ,
CDC45 (4), LZTR1 (2), SNAP29 (4), and TANGO2 (5)
explaining their atypical features, unfortunately including
sudden death in a 5-year-old child with post mortem iden-tiﬁcation of TANGO2 Related Disease.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings support considering addi-
tional laboratory testing in this population to ensureappropriate personalized care, as formulating medical
management decisions hinges on establishing the correct
diagnoses in their entirety, especially given that theseﬁndings are medically actionable, potentially altering long ‐
term outcome and recurrence risk counseling.
D.M. McDonald-McGinn: None. M. Unolt: None. T.B.
Crowley: None. D.E. McGinn: None. J. Cohen: None. A.
Bailey: None. M. Lambert: None. B. Emanuel: None. E.
Zackai: None. B. Nowakowska: None. J. Vermeesch:
None.
P11.05A
SNVs and CNVs in ﬂuencing phenotype variability in the
patients with 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome detected from
whole exome sequencing data
K. Ziemkiewicz
1, M. Smyk1, T. Gambin1, M. Geremek1,
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak1, D. M. McDonald-McGinn2,
T. B. Crowley2, M. Piotrowicz3, D. Gieruszczak-Bia łek4,
B. A. Nowakowska1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,2Human
Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,1492Philadelphia, PA, United States,3Department of Genetics,
Polish Mother ’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute,
Łódź, Poland,4Department of Medical Genetics, Children ’s
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland
The 22q11.2DS has an estimated frequency of 1 in 3000
live births. There is still very poor understanding of how
heterozygous microdeletion of approximately 50 genes can
lead to such diverse expressivity of the clinical features inpatients carrying the same deletions. Two aspects seem to
have an impact on phenotype variability; coexistence of the
second condition and modi ﬁers of typical clinical features.
In this project we focused on three of the potential
mechanisms underlying the ﬁrst aspect: pathogenic variants
within the remaining 22q11.2 region, SNVs in genesoutside of the deletion and additional CNVs.
For 85 22q11DS carriers deep phenotype was performed
based on the form with over 230 clinical features. Subse-quently for all patients whole exome sequencing (WES)
was carried out. Data was analysed using standard protocol,
additionally two algorithms were implemented to identifyCNVs in genome (CoNIFER and HMZdel ﬁnder).
WES analysis revealed: 9 pathogenic SNVs and 54
potentially pathogenic variants in known disease relatedgenes correlating with patients ’phenotypes. Moreover we
found 149 rare variants of unknown signi ﬁcance, including
2 in 22q11.2 region. All variants were classi ﬁed as dele-
terious by at least 3 of 4 applied function prediction scores
and located in genes with increased expression in brain,
nervous system, immune system or heart. CoNIFER algo-rithm identi ﬁed 12 rare CNVs and HMZdel ﬁnder 14
deletions.
Conclusions: The, second hit ”–pathogenic/potentially
pathogenic SNV or CNV may act as a phenotype modi ﬁer,
changes patient ’s prognosis and should be considered in
genetic counselling.
Financed by NSC, OPUS NCN2015/17/B/NZ5/
01357 to BN.
K. Ziemkiewicz: None. M. Smyk: None. T. Gambin:
None. M. Geremek: None. A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak:
None. D.M. McDonald-McGinn: None. T.B. Crowley:
None. M. Piotrowicz: None. D. Gieruszczak-Bia łek:
None. B.A. Nowakowska: None.
P11.06B
Morbidity is increased in 47,XYY syndrome: a
nationwide registry study
A. Berglund, M. Viuff, K. Stochholm, C. Gravholt
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, DenmarkBackground: The 47,XYY syndrome is common as being
diagnosed among 18 per 100,000 newborn males. However,
knowledge of the long-term health outcomes of this
condition is sparse.
Aim: To describe morbidity in a national 47,XYY cohort
using complete registry data on hospital admissions andprescribed medication.
Setting: A uniform public health care system.
Participants: A total of 251 males with 47,XYY
(n=205), 46,XY/47,XYY (n =28) or compatible karyotypes
(n
=18) diagnosed during 1965-2014 and a randomly
selected age-matched control cohort of 25,100 males fromthe general population.
Results: Hospital admission owing to any diagnosis was
signiﬁcantly increased among 47,XYY compared to con-
trols (HR =1.8, CI: 1.6-2.4). Among a total of 18 diagnostic
groups the risk of admission was increased in all but three
groups. The highest HRs were observed for congenitalmalformations (HR =6.1, CI: 4.8-7.6); psychiatric diseases
(HR=5.7, CI: 4.5-7.1); endocrine and metabolic disorders
(HR=3.2, CI: 2.4-4.4); neurologic diseases (HR =3.0, CI:
2.2-4.0); and urogenital system disorders (HR =3.0, CI: 2.4-
3.7). Overall, 47,XYY had an increased risk of receiving
medicinal prescriptions compared to controls (HR =1.3,
CI:1.1-1.5), and it was signi ﬁcantly increased in 11 out of
14 medicinal groups. The highest HRs were observed for
medication related to the blood (HR =2.5, CI:1.8-3.5); the
nervous system (HR =2.2, CI:1.9-2.7); as well as for uro-
genital system disorders and sex hormones (HR =2.7, CI:
2.0-3.7).
Conclusions: The 47,XYY syndrome is associated with
an increased morbidity as interpreted from data of hospital
admissions and medicinal prescriptions. Whether these dataextend to the approximately 80% of 47,XYY suffering from
non-diagnosis remains unknown.
A. Berglund: None. M. Viuff: None. K. Stochholm:
None. C. Gravholt: None.
P11.08D
Characterization of a CRISPR-Cas9 cellular model to
Alström syndrome
B. Bea-Mascato, E. Neira-Goyanes, D. Valverde
University of Vigo, Vigo, SpainAlström syndrome is a rare disease with a prevalence of 1/
1,000,000 per inhabitant. ALMS1 gene has been implicatedin this disease, with more than 290 causal mutations, mostly
of them located in exons 8, 10 and 16. The majority of these
mutations leads to a change of the reading frame thatconcludes in a premature stop codon, resulting in a truncated
protein. The modelling of this disease through KO modelsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1493becomes in this context an interesting tool to understand the
cellular processes that take place in this disease. We have
generated a Knock-out (KO) model in HeLa cell line. We use
the CRISPR/Cas9 method with dual system with Homology
Direct Repair (HDR). After isolation of homozygous clones,
we validated ALMS1 expression by qPCR and Sangersequencing of the recombinant amplicon comprised between
Exon 1 and 3. Then we evaluate mitochondrial activity,
proliferation and apoptosis resistance. We obtained a totalinhibition in the expression of the ALMS1 gene. We are
performing the characterization but we expected apoptosis
resistance, cell cycle elongation and inhibition of mitochon-drial activity like other authors report in analysis of patient´s
ﬁbroblasts. The generation of cellular models using CRIPR/
Cas9 for the Alström syndrome is considered as a simple andeasy to implement tool that would broaden the knowledge of
the molecular basis of this disease.
B. Bea-Mascato: None. E. Neira-Goyanes: None. D.
Valverde: None.
P11.09A
Beyond the ﬁrst clinical diagnosis: a new interesting case
of KBG syndrome
R. Artuso
1, F. Peluso2, E. Bosi2, V. Palazzo1, S. Landini2,
D. Formicola3, D. Vergani2, L. Tiberi2, L. Giunti1,
C. Cosentino4, L. Pala4, C. Rotella4, S. Giglio1,5
1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer's Children University
Hospital, Firenze, Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit,
Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical
Sciences 'Mario Serio', University of Florence, Florence,
Italy., Firenze, Italy,3Department of Science ’s Health,
Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children ’s University
Hospital, Florence, Italy, Firenze, Italy,4Diabetology Unit,
Department of Clinical and Experimental BiomedicalSciences "Mario Serio", University of Florence, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy., Firenze, Italy,
5Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Biomedical Sciences 'Mario Serio', University
of Florence, Florence, Italy., Florence, Italy
A 48 years old man acceded in emergency unit for
addominal pain and vomit. He presented polyuria, poly-
dipsia for 2 months and important weight loss. Hematicexam showed high glycemia, high value of HB1Ac and
negative speci ﬁc insulin autoantibodies suspecting diabetic
ketoacidosis. The insulin treatment improved symptoms andglicemia. The genetic evaluation revealed a more complex
phenotype included hyposomia, growth delay, mild intel-
lectual disability, monosomy of left kidney, fusion ofcervical vertebrates, brachydactyly, Arnold-Chiari syn-
drome and chronic lymphocytic leucemia. The WESanalysis con ﬁrmed the multiple aetiopatology of the clinical
picture identifying mutations in different causative genes.
The likely pathogenetic missense mutations in CAPN10 ,
SLC2A2 andGCKR explained only diabetes mellitus non-
insulin dependent. The kidney anomaly correlated to
CHD1L mutation, candidate gene for congenital anomalies
of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). An essential in-
depth study of WES identi ﬁed a new ANKRD11 mutation,
responsible of KBG syndrome. This is a rare autosomaldominant condition characterized by short stature, neurolo-
gical involvement, skeletal anomalies and macrodontia.
ANKRD11 encodes for a member of family of Ankyrin
repeat domain-containing cofactors that are inhibitors of
ligand-dependent transcriptional activation. Moreover, it is
known as a tumor protein p53-interacting protein.ANKRD11 enhances TP53-dependent transcriptional acti-
vation promoting its tumor-suppressive effects. Retrospec-
tively analysis of literature (about hundred cases)highlighted the presence of only two cases with malignancy,
testicular rhabdoid tumor and acute myeloid leukemia.
Although we cannot exclude that tumor observed in KBGpatients developed coincidentally, the role of ANKRD11
and our new case suggest a general cancer surveillance.
R. Artuso: None. F. Peluso: None. E. Bosi: None. V.
Palazzo: None. S. Landini: None. D. Formicola: None. D.
Vergani: None. L. Tiberi: None. L. Giunti: None. C.
Cosentino: None. L. Pala: None. C. Rotella: None. S.
Giglio: None.
P11.10B
Fruits of Genomic Match-making: De Novo Variants in
PRR12 are Associated with a Spectrum of Eye and
Neurodevelopmental Anomalies
T. B. Balci
1, L. Wang2, S. Lalani3, S. Heide4, B. Keren4,
C. Mignot4, G. Morley5, J. Walia6, P. Wheeler7,
J. Lemons8, D. Rodriguez Buritica8, E. Riberi9,
E. Biamino9, K. Schatz10, M. Gunay-Aygun10,
A. Wiesener11, C. Zweier11, I. Wentzensen12, V. M. Siu1,
W. Bi3
1Western University, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, London, ON, Canada,2Baylor Genetics
Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States,3Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,4GH Pitie-
Salpetriere, Paris, France,5Mercyhealth Hospital,
Rockford, IL, United States,6Queen's University, Kingston,
ON, Canada,7Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children,
Orlando, FL, United States,8University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, Houston, TX, United States,9University of
Turin, Turin, Italy,10Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States,11Friedrich
Alexander Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg, Erlangen,1494Germany,12GeneDx Clinical Genetics Laboratories,
Gaithersburg, MD, United States
Rare disease research has made great strides in the last
decade; ﬁrst with unbiased genome-wide sequencing
methods, then with global data-sharing efforts. Genomicmatch-making has accelerated the path from candidate gene
identi ﬁcation to establishing causality. Using exome
sequencing, we identi ﬁed a de novo frameshift variant in
thePRR12 gene in a 2-year-old girl with anophthalmia and
developmental delay. PRR12 is highly expressed in the
brain and the visual system. It has a high missenseconstraint score (Z =3.37) and no loss of function variants
listed in Gnomad (pLI =1.00). De novo truncating variants
inPRR12 were recently reported in three individuals with
developmental delay and iris abnormalities. Through
GeneMatcher, we were connected to 11 additional patients
from around the globe, bringing the total number ofindividuals with de novo variants in PRR12 to 15. There
were no recurrent variants; all but one, were truncating; and
none were listed in Gnomad. A variety of eye abnormalitieswere observed in 10/15 individuals; including myopia,
stellate iris, coloboma, Rieger ’s anomaly, microphthalmia,
cryptophthalmos and anophthalmia. Developmental delaywas noted in 13/15 and microcephaly in 5/15. The
overlapping clinical ﬁndings, especially the ophthalmolo-
gical features, support an association between haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency of PRR12 and a distinct neurodevelopmental
disorder. Features are variable and functional data is needed
to con ﬁrm pathogenicity. We plan to use zebra ﬁsh and
mouse models to replicate the eye and growth phenotypes
and further investigate the pathogenicity of different PRR12
variants. This cohort once again demonstrates the utility ofglobal data sharing efforts in rare disease research.
T.B. Balci: None. L. Wang: None. S. Lalani: None. S.
Heide: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot: None. G.
Morley: None. J. Walia: None. P. Wheeler: None. J.
Lemons: None. D. Rodriguez Buritica: None. E. Riberi:
None. E. Biamino: None. K. Schatz: None. M. Gunay-
Aygun: None. A. Wiesener: None. C. Zweier: None. I.
Wentzensen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁ
cant; GeneDx. V.M. Siu: None. W. Bi: None.
P11.11C
Skeletal defects and defective osteoclast and osteoblastfunction in Aymé-Gripp syndrome
M. NICETA
1, A. Del Fattore2, D. Barbuti3, M. Rossi2,
E. Stellacci4, N. Gupta5, C. Ruggiero6, E. Tizzano7,
L. Graul-Neumann8, C. Leoni9, C. Zweier10, P. Fernandez
Alvarez7, A. Tzschach11, M. Valenzuela7, S. Barresi1,
B. Dallapiccola1, G. Zampino9, M. Tartaglia1,
G. Nishimura121Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
2Multifactorial Disease and Complex Phenotype Research
Area, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,, Rome, Italy,
3Radiologia e Bioimaging, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, Rome, Italy,4Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia
e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy, Rome, Italy,5Division of Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, All Institute of Medical Sciences,, New Delhi,India,
6Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Buenos Aires,
Argentina,7Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics
and Rare Disease Unit, University Hospital Vall d´Hebron,Barcelona, Spain,
8Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum
Humangenetik, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany,9Center for Rare Diseases, Department of
Pediatrics, Polo Salute Donna e Bambino, Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Catholic University,
Rome, Italy,10Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität (FAU) Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany,11Institut für Klinische Genetik,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany,
12Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical
University Hospital, Moroyama-cho, Irima-gun, Saitama,
Japan
Ayme-Gripp syndrome (AYGRPS) is the eponym of a
recognizable condition caused by a restricted spectrum ofdominantly acting missense mutations affecting the basic
leucine zipper (bZIP)-containing transcription factor, MAF .
Major clinical features include congenital cataracts, sensor-ineural hearing loss, intellectual disability, seizures, reduced
growth, and a distinctive ﬂat facial appearance. Skeletal
abnormalities have also been noted in affected individuals;even thought, these features have not been assessed
systematically due to the small number of subjects.
AYGRPS-causing MAF mutations cluster in the GSK3
phosphorylation motif within the N-terminal transactivation
domain of the protein, and impair proper phosphorylation of
MAF, perturbing its activation and stability. Here, wecharacterize clinically and molecularly four additional
patients. Expanding the series, we provide a more accurate
delineation of the clinical phenotype, particularly focusingon the skeletal features characterizing this disorder. Beside
midfacial hypoplasia and joints limitations, we report that
delayed bone age, radio-ulnar synostosis, carpal/tarsal andlong bone defects, and hip dysplasia variably occur in
affected subjects. Consistent with this ﬁndings, by func-
tional characterization of mutations using informative cellmodels, we provide ﬁrst data documenting defective
osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation and function.
M. Niceta: None. A. Del Fattore: None. D. Barbuti:
None. M. Rossi: None. E. Stellacci: None. N. Gupta:
None. C. Ruggiero: None. E. Tizzano: None. L. Graul-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1495Neumann: None. C. Leoni: None. C. Zweier: None. P.
Fernandez Alvarez: None. A. Tzschach: None. M.
Valenzuela: None. S. Barresi: None. B. Dallapiccola:
None. G. Zampino: None. M. Tartaglia: None. G.
Nishimura: None.
P11.12D
A not so rare insertion of a retrotransposon (SVA-F) in
one of the major Bardet-Biedl gene ( BBS1 )
C. Delvallée1, S. Nicaise1, C. Stoetzel1, V. Geoffroy1,
B. Keren2,3, C. Depienne2,3, J. Klar4, N. Dahl4,
J. Deleuze5, A. Piton6, J. Mandel6, J. Muller1,7,
H. Dollfus1,8
1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Institut de génétique
médicale d ’Alsace, INSERM U1112, Fédération de
Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS),Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
2AP-HP,
Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique,
F-75013, Paris, France,3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, UMR 7225,
ICM, F-75013, Paris, France,4Department of Immunology,
Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,
5Centre National de
Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de
biologie François Jacob, CEA, 91000, Evry, France,
6Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7104, INSERM U964, Université de
Strasbourg, Illkirch, France,7Laboratoires de Diagnostic
Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France,8Centre de référence pour les maladies
rares ophtalmologiques CARGO, Hôpitaux Universitairesde Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France
Bardet Biedl syndrome is a ciliopathy with typical features
including retinitis pigmentosa, polydactyly, cognitive
impairment and renal failure. Mutations in 22 genes account
for 80% of the cases. BBS1 represents the highest fraction of
patients with pathogenic variations including for 17% of all
BBS patients the c.1169T>G, p.M390R variant. Among the
unsolved cases in our cohort, several patients wereheterozygous carriers of this speci ﬁc recurrent mutation
suggesting a second allele in BBS1 . Targeted exome
sequencing and mobile element insertion (MEI) detection(Mobster) was applied to 200 BBS samples. Whole genome
sequencing, de novo assembly and SNP array analysis were
performed to characterize the genomic events identi ﬁed. We
identi ﬁed a few large exons deletions in BBS1 gene.
Interestingly, 4 families carried the c.1169T>G variation in
trans of a hominid-speci ﬁc retrotransposon insertion (SVA-
F) in exon 13 of BBS1 . We characterized this insertion in
the general population (>400 samples screened), determinedthat its sequence of 2435 bp contains hallmarks of LINE1
mediated retrotransposition with a 5 ’truncation compared
to the canonical SVA-F sequence. We con ﬁrmed our initial
ﬁnding (Redin et al, 2012) that MEI is occurring in BBS.
We describe 4 new families with the same SVA-F insertion
inBBS1 . Thus this insertion is now described in 5 families
since the initial case reported by Tavares et al (2018). Such
ﬁndings highlight the importance of using dedicated
bioinformatics pipelines to identify all types of variations.Our PhD student is supported by a FRM grant
(ECO20170637509).
C. Delvallée: None. S. Nicaise: None. C. Stoetzel: None.
V. Geoffroy: None. B. Keren: None. C. Depienne: None.
J. Klar: None. N. Dahl: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Piton:
None. J. Mandel: None. J. Muller: None. H.
Dollfus: None.
P11.14B
Adult phenotype of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
D. Carli
1, A. Gazzin1, C. Molinatto1, F. Sirchia2,
S. Cardaropoli1, A. Mussa1, G. B. Ferrero1
1Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of
Torino, Torino, Italy,2Institute for Maternal Child Health
IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo ”, Trieste, Italy
Background: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS)
phenotype usually mitigate with age and data on adulthood
are scanty. Our study aims at reporting phenotype evolutionand health issues in adulthood.
Methods: 31 patients (14 males), aged 18-58 years
(median 28.45) with BWS were enrolled.
Results: 14 patients had IC2-hypomethylation, 5 paternal
UPD11, two IC1-hypermethylation, one 11p15.5 micro-
duplication, 5 negative molecular tests and 4 were not tes-ted. Final tall stature was present in 38%. Three patients
developed nephroblastoma (2, 3 and 10 years, respectively);
one hepatoblastoma (22 years); one acute lymphoblasticleukemia (21 years); one adrenal adenoma and testicular
Sertoli cell tumour (22 and 24 years, respectively); and
three benign tumours (hepatic haemangioma, uterinemyoma and mammary ﬁbroepithelioma). Surgery for BWS-
related features was required in 84%. Despite surgical
correction several patients presented morbidity and sequelaeof BWS pediatric issues: pronunciation/swallow dif ﬁculties
(n=8) due to macroglossia, painful scoliosis (n =4) con-
sistent with lateralized overgrowth, recurrent urolithiasis(n=4), azoospermia (n =3) likely consequent to cryptorch-
idism, severe intellectual disability (n =2) likely related to
neonatal asphyxia and diabetes mellitus (n =1) due to sub-
total pancreatectomy for intractable hyperinsulinism. Three1496patients (2 males) had healthy children (two physiologically
conceived and one through ART).
Conclusions: adult health conditions in BWS are mostly
consequent to pediatric issues, underlying the preventive
role of follow-up strategies in childhood. Malignancy rate
observed in early adulthood in this small cohort matchesthat observed in the ﬁrst decade of life, cumulatively raising
tumor rate in BWS to 20% during the observation period.
Further studies are warranted in this direction.
D. Carli: None. A. Gazzin: None. C. Molinatto: None.
F. Sirchia: None. S. Cardaropoli: None. A. Mussa: None.
G.B. Ferrero: None.
P11.15C
Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome: a case report on anatypical case with broad intra-familial variability
V. Ivashchenko
1, S. Julia1, A. Lebre2, O. Patat1
1CHU Toulouse Purpan, TOULOUSE, France,2CHU
Reims, Reims, France
Introduction: Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is
an autosomal-dominant inherited disorder, related tomutations in TFAP2A . This gene encodes for the AP2- α
protein, which plays a major role in human craniofacial
development. While cardinal features of this syndromecommonly involve branchial skin defects, oculo-facial
abnormalities, and hearing loss, a broad phenotypic
variability can hamper the diagnosis in some atypical cases.
Case Presentation: We report two siblings and their
mother, with a familial history of Pierre Robin sequence
without cleft palate, coloboma, pseudo-cleft aspect of theupper lip, nasolacrimal duct stenosis and hearing loss, with
a broad intra-familial variability. Focusing on the severe
syndromic Pierre Robin sequence and ear dysplasia in oneaffected child, a gene panel of mandibulofacial dysostosis
(EFTUD2 ,POLR1A ,POLR1C ,POLR1D , and TCOF1) was
performed without identifying any mutation. A CGH arrayshowed a 22q11.21 microduplication in one of the affected
children, assessed as insuf ﬁcient to explain the poly-
malformative familial phenotype. After a second clinicalevaluation, a diagnosis of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome
was suggested based on the association of “pseudo-cleft ”
defects of the upper lip, coloboma, and nasolacrimal ductstenosis. Speci ﬁc Sanger sequencing of TFAP2A in the
index case revealed a predicted pathogenic c.532 +2T>C
variant (NM_003220.2) in a heterozygous state, supportingthe diagnosis of BOFS.
Conclusion: This case report highlights the broad varia-
bility of BOFS phenotypic spectrum. However, it empha-sizes some distinctive clinical features, which can beunrecognized by clinicians, though highly relevant to reach
the accurate diagnosis.
V. Ivashchenko: None. S. Julia: None. A. Lebre: None.
O. Patat: None.
P11.16D
Novel patient with Contiguous ABCD1 /DXS1375E
(BCAP31 ) Deletion Syndrome (CADDS) and review of
the literature
S. Whalen
1, A. Gomart2, C. Mignot3, T. Billette De
Villemeur4, A. Gerasimenko3, D. Heron5, J. Siffroi6,
P. Gobalakichenane2, M. Lachtar2, D. Mitanchez2,
S. Chantot-Bastaraud6
1APHP, UF de génétique clinique, Hôpital Armand
Trousseau, Centre de référence maladies rares « Anomalies
du développement et syndromes malformatifs », Paris,France,
2APHP, Service de néonatologie, Hôpital Armand
Trousseau, Paris, France,3APHP, UF de génétique
clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,4AP-
HP, Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau,
Sorbonne Université, Inserm U1141, Paris, France,
5APHP, Département de génétique, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié Salpêtrière, Centre de référence maladies rares «
Déﬁciences intellectuelles de causes rares », Paris, France,
6APHP, Département de Génétique, UF de Génétique
Chromosomique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris,
France
The contiguous ABCD1/DXS1375E (BCAP31 ) deletion
syndrome (CADDS) was ﬁrst reported in 2002. Up to date
there are only 6 reported patients. These patients presented asimilar phenotype with marked neonatal hypotonia, severe
growth failure, failure to thrive, profound developmental
delay and liver dysfunction leading to early death in the ﬁrst
year. We present a 7
thpatient with CADDS, a 2 months old
boy who presented severe antenatal and postnatal growth
retardation, failure to thrive, irritability, mild hypotonia,transient liver dysfunction with cholestasis and elevated
liver enzymes. He also had exocrine and possible endocrine
pancreatic de ﬁciency which has not yet been described.
Chromosomal microarray showed a 60kb Xq28 including
theﬁrst three exons of the BCAP31 gene, the entire ABCD1
gene and part of the PLXNB3 gene. ABCD1 loss-of-function
mutations lead to X linked-Adrenoleucodystrophy, a
neurodegenerative condition with broad clinical variability.
No cases have been described under the age of 2.7 years.And no liver involvement has been described. BCAP31
loss-of-function mutations have been identi ﬁed in 7 patients
from 3 families, all boys with severe developmental delay,dystonia, deafness, central hypomyelination, growth retar-
dation. No apparent chronic liver dysfunction wasAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1497described. Four of the patients died in the ﬁrst years of life,
either suddenly or during a febrile episode. The phenotype
of CADDS patients seems distinctive from those with
isolated ABCD1 orBCAP31 loss-of-function. Different
hypotheses have been made to explain the severe liver
phenotype of the deletion, however further studies areneeded to conclude.
S. Whalen: None. A. Gomart: None. C. Mignot: None.
T. Billette De Villemeur: None. A. Gerasimenko: None.
D. Heron: None. J. Siffroi: None. P. Gobalakichenane:
None. M. Lachtar: None. D. Mitanchez: None. S.
Chantot-Bastaraud: None.
P11.17A
A novel missense variant of MAP3K7 causescardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome by dominant
negative effect
T. Kaname
1, K. Saito2, K. Yanagi1, M. Takeshita1,
N. Kobayashi1, T. Tohma3, I. Inoue4, Y. Matsubara5
1Dept Genome Medicine, National Center for Child Health
and Development, Tokyo, Japan,2Invertebrate Genetics
Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan,
3Wanpaku Clinic, Okinawa, Japan,4Div Human Genetics,
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan,5National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan
Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome (CSCF) is character-
ized by growth retardation, dysmorphic facial features,brachydactyly, vertebral synostosis, cardiac septal defects,
and deafness.
Here we report a patient with growth retardation, dys-
morphic facial appearance, vertebral abnormalities and
congenital heart defect associated with a pathogenic variant
inMAP3K7 identi ﬁed by whole exome sequencing (WES)
and animals model analyses. The patient was a four-year-
old boy. The boy was born at 39 weeks of gestation with
apgar index of 3 (1 min) and 6 (5 min). After birth, the boywas soon administrated our hospital due to severe cyanosis.
At 4 year-of-age, the patient showed short stature (-5 S.D.),
developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features withmacrocephalus, long face, frontal bossing, epicanthal fold
and mid-face hypoplasia, coarctation of aorta and atrial
septal defect, scoliosis, vertebral synostosis, and joint laxity.Written informed consent was obtained from his parents.
WES analysis was performed and detected variants were
conﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing. A novel heterozygous
missense variant, c,574 A>G (p.S192G), in the MAP3K7
gene was found in the patient. The variant was de novo.
We con ﬁrmed the effect of the variant using transgenic
Drosophila. The MAP3K7 gene with the variant was
introduced into Drosophila overexpressed eiger(TNFalpha), which was reduced the eye-size. Then, the
eiger effect was suppressed by the mutant MAP3K7, sug-
gesting that the variant showed dominant negative effect.
We concluded that the patient was caused by the missense
de novo variant of MAP3K7 and CSCF was caused by loss-
of-function of MAP3K7.
T. Kaname: None. K. Saito: None. K. Yanagi: None.
M. Takeshita: None. N. Kobayashi: None. T. Tohma:
None. I. Inoue: None. Y. Matsubara: None.
P11.20D
Deleterious mutations in one third of non-syndromicdiscontinuous cleft lip and palate patients
B. Demeer
1,2,3, N. Revencu2,4, R. Helaers2, C. Gbaguidi5,
S. Dakpe5,3, G. François6, B. Devauchelle5,3, B. Bayet7,
M. Vikkula2
1Center for Human Genetics, CLAD nord de France, CHU
Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France,2Human Molecular
Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique deLouvain, Brussels, Belgium,
3EA CHIMERE, Université
Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France,4Center for Human
Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, University ofLouvain, Brussels, Belgium,
5Department of Maxillofacial
Surgery and Stomatology, centre de compétence fentes et
malformations faciales (MAFACE), CHU Amiens-Picardie,amiens, France,
6Department of Pediatrics, Cliniques
universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium,7Centre Labiopalatin, Division of Plastic Surgery,
Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium
Cleft of the lip and/or palate (CLP) are among the most
common birth defects, with an approximate incidence of 1/
700 live births and with a wide variability of expression
depending on ethnicity, gender and cleft type. When cleft ofthe palate is associated with a cleft of the lip with
preservation of the primary palate, it de ﬁnes an atypical
phenotype called discontinuous cleft . Although this pheno-
type may represent 5% of clefts of the lip and/or palate
(CLP), it is rarely speci ﬁcally referred to and its
pathophysiology is unknown. To date only few WESstudies, mostly applied to familial cases, have been
performed to search for rare coding variants in non-
syndromic CLP individuals. One study identi ﬁed mutations
in genes mutated in syndromic forms of CLP in 10%. We
conducted Whole Exome sequencing (WES) on 8 non-
syndromic discontinuous CLP individuals whether familialor not in order to identify genes and mutations that could
underlie this phenotype. We discovered loss-of-function
mutations in 3 out of the 8 individuals in 3 genes previouslyimplicated in CLP, representing almost 40% of this cohort.
Whole exome sequencing of clinically well-de ﬁned1498subgroups of CLP, such as discontinuous cleft, is a relevant
approach to study CLP etiopathogenesis. Non-syndromic
discontinuous cleft lip and palate seems to have a strong
genetic basis.
B. Demeer: None. N. Revencu: None. R. Helaers:
None. C. Gbaguidi: None. S. Dakpe: None. G. François:
None. B. Devauchelle: None. B. Bayet: None. M.
Vikkula: None.
P11.21A
A new cloverleaf skull syndrome in a pair of twins
O. Caluseriu, D. Wang, A. E. Reichert, R. Bhargava,
F. D. Jacob, T. Laut, C. Young, V. Jain, T. Stryker,
S. Chandra
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Cloverleaf skull (Kleeblattschaedel, OMIM 148800) is a
rare congenital anomaly resulting from complex craniosy-
nostosis. The condition shows clinical and etiologicheterogeneity. The cause of isolated cloverleafskull is
unknown, and this feature is a component of at least 15
monogenic disorders which account for majority of allcloverleaf skull syndromes (JM Graham & PA Sanchez-
Lara, 2016). A diamniotic, dichorionic pregnancy was
assessed starting at 20 weeks gestation for skull andpossible brain anomalies by ultrasound and MRI. An initial
suspicion of encephaloceles in both fetuses was raised
followed by that of craniosynostosis. Genetic testing waspostponed for the postnatal time. The 24-year-old G2P1A1
mother experienced PPROM at 28 weeks gestation and
delivery took place by C/S at 32w2d gestation. Bothnewborns, a boy and a girl shared the same phenotype
including typical craniofacial dysostosis associated with
cloverleaf skull, and bilateral parietal encephaloceles,micromelia, no skeletal anomalies, and unilateral kidney
dysplasia in one fetus. Extensive genetic testing including
targeted sequencing (FGFR1, 2, and 3, TWIST1), cranio-synostosis panel, exome sequencing (WES) and chromoso-
mal microarray (CMA) did not reveal a clear etiology. WES
and CMA showed a 2.4 Mb VUS deletion at chromosome18p11.32, seen in gnomAD, shared between the two
affected newborns and the father who has a history of an
unclear seizure disorder, mild developmental delay and nocraniosynostosis. We are raising the possibility of a new
genetic syndrome with cloverleaf skull of unknown etiology
that requires further investigations to inform appropriatecounseling for this young family.
O. Caluseriu: None. D. Wang: None. A.E. Reichert:
None. R. Bhargava: None. F.D. Jacob: None. T. Laut:
None. C. Young: None. V. Jain: None. T. Stryker: None.
S. Chandra: None.P11.22B
Adding evidence to the role of NEUROG1 in congenital
cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs): a case report
J. Dupont
1, J. Alves1, A. Taylor Tavares2, P. Janeiro3,
A. Sousa1
1Serviço de Genética, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital
de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário LisboaNorte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal,
2East Anglian Medical Genetics Service,
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Centro de Referência de
Doenças Hereditárias do Metabolismo, Unidade de
Doenças Metabólicas, Serviço de Pediatria, CentroHospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico
de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
Introduction: CCDDs are a heterogeneous group of
neurodevelopmental phenotypes caused by a primary
disturbance of innervation due to de ﬁcient, absent, or
misguided cranial nerves. Several phenotypes still await
etiological elucidation.
NEUROG1 encodes Ngn1 which is a basic helix-loop-
helix transcription factor essential for the formation of the
trigeminal, vestibule-cochlear and accessory nerves. So far
it hasn ’t been associated with a phenotype in OMIM.
Nonetheless, in 2013 Schroder et al (PMID: 23419067)
reported a patient with mild developmental delay (DD),
bilateral profound sensorineural deafness due to absentbilateral VIII nerves, and severe oromotor dysfunction, who
had a homozygous deletion including NEUROG1 .
Case description: We describe a 10 year- old boy with
hypotonia, mild DD, bilateral profound sensorineural
hearing loss, and keratoconjunctivitis due to lack of corneal
reﬂex and incomplete eye closure. On physical examination
he had a long expressionless face, right eye leucocoria, and
severe oromotor dysfunction. EMG showed axonal sensory
polyneuropathy of the lower limbs. Brain-MRI revealedbilateral agenesis/severe hypoplasia of the VIII nerve with
marked atresia of the internal auditory canals and cochlear
labyrinth malformation. Trio-exome identi ﬁed a homo-
zygous variant in NEUROG1 (NM_006161.2: c.202G>T, p.
Glu68*). This variant is classi ﬁed as uncertain according to
ACMG guidelines, but is considered pathogenic applyingthe ClinGen SVI Bayesian classi ﬁcation framework (pos-
terior probability 0.997).
Conclusions: The resemblance between our case and
Schroder ’s is remarkable. This case adds support to estab-
lishing NEUROG1 as a new gene for CCDDs associated
with a very distinctive phenotype, and contributes to a betterunderstanding and classi ﬁcation of these disorders.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1499J. Dupont: None. J. Alves: None. A. Taylor Tavares:
None. P. Janeiro: None. A. Sousa: None.
P11.23C
Genomic overlap between neurodevelopmental
disorders and congenital heart defects
S. Sa ﬁzadeh Shabestari1, S. Sopariwala2, A. Ali1,N .K .A l
Jezawi1, G. Begum1, B. Berdiev1, S. W. Scherer3,4,5,
A. Alsheikh-Ali1, A. AlBanna6, A. Tayoun6, M. Speevak7,
D. J. Stavropoulos3,8,7, M. Uddin1,3
1Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Dubai, United Arab Emirates,2University of
Guelph, Toronto, ON, Canada,3The Centre for Applied
Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada,4Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,5McLaughlin Centre,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,6Al Jalila
Specialty Children ’s Hospital, Dubai, United Arab
Emirates,7Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada,8Genome Diagnostics, Paediatric Laboratory
Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,Canada
Introduction: The phenotypic overlap between neurode-
velopmental disorders (NDD) and congenital heart disease
(CHD) is well documented and in this study, we
investigated the genomic overlaps in large clinical cohorts.
Materials and Methods: We analyzed whole genome
clinical microarray data from 10,797 NDD and 3,174 CHD
cases from Ontario to analyze large copy number variations(CNVs). Clinical cytogeneticists identi ﬁed a consensus set
of variants(pathogenic, variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS)) based on established guidelines. We have con-ducted pathway enrichment and brain single cell tran-
criptome analysis to identify cell types for pleiotropic genes
that are impacted in both NDD and CHD cases.
Results: We have identi ﬁed 186 de novo CNVs from
NDD and CHD cases. Our analysis on clinically relevant
CNV revealed 573 and 181 pathogenic variants in NDD andCHD, respectively. Similarly, we have identi ﬁed 4753 and
1361 variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in NDD and CHD,
respectively. Genes with at least one exon impacted bypathogenic(OR =6.41) and VUS(OR =6.68) deletions
shows signi ﬁcant (P<0.001) overlaps between the NDD and
CHD cases. Similar signi ﬁcant overlap was also observed
for duplications. “activation of gtpase activity ”pathway
showed signi ﬁcance (P<0.001) for the overlapping genes.
For example, CLSTN1 gene was found to be impacted by
pathogenic variants for both NDD and CHD. Single cellanalysis shows overlapping genes are highly expressed in
neurons and astrocytes.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant overlap of
pathogenic and VUS CNVs between NDD and CHD sam-
ples. This study also shows evidence of speci ﬁc cell types
that might contribute to the etiology of NDD and CHD.
S. Sa ﬁzadeh Shabestari: None. S. Sopariwala: None.
A. Ali: None. N.K. Al Jezawi: None. G. Begum: None. B.
Berdiev: None. S.W. Scherer: None. A. Alsheikh-Ali:
None. A. AlBanna: None. A. Tayoun: None. M. Speevak:
None. D.J. Stavropoulos: None. M. Uddin: None.
P11.24D
49 novel recessive candidate genes for intellectual
disability and visual impairment in 350 consanguineousfamilies
S. E. Antonarakis
1,2,3, S. A. Paracha4, S. Imtiaz5,
A. Nazir4, Y. M. Waryah6, P. Makrythanasis1,7,
S. Qureshi4, J. Khan4, E. Falconnet1, M. Guipponi2,
C. Borel1, M. A. Ansari5, E. Frengen8, E. Ranza1,2,9,
F. A. Santoni1,10, I. Shah4, K. Gul5,11, J. Ahmed4,
M. T. Sarwar4, A. M. Waryah6, M. Ansar1
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,2Service of
Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva,Switzerland,
3iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,4Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan,
5Department of Genetics, University of Karachi, Karachi,
Pakistan,6Molecular Biology and Genetics Department,
Medical Research Center, Liaquat University of Medicaland Health Sciences, Jamshoro, Pakistan,
7Biomedical
Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens,
Greece,8Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University
Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,9current
address, Medigenome, The Swiss Institute of Genomic
Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland,10Department of
Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University
Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
11Department of Bio Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences,
Muhammad Ali Jinnah University, Karachi, Pakistan
Consanguinity, practiced in a substantial fraction of human
populations, reveals numerous rare recessive phenotypes
because of the extensive regions of homozygosity by
decent. In Pakistan, the frequency of consanguineousmarriages approaches 70%. To bridge the gap between
the 1800 known and the estimated >9000 recessive gene-
phenotypes, we have initiated a Swiss-Pakistani project toidentify novel recessive candidate genes for two pheno-
types: Intellectual Disability (ID) and Visual Impairment1500(VI). We have collected samples from 1265 individuals of
197 ID, and 1809 individual of 236 VI families of ﬁrst
cousin marriages with at least two affecteds. Exome
sequence of one affected and genotyping of the whole
family (parents, all affected and unaffected siblings) has
been completed in 166 ID and 184 VI families to date. Thelikely causative gene/variant in known genes was found in
64% of the VI and 32% in the ID families. Thus, there are
more unknown “recessive genes ”for ID. In 18% of the VI
families we have identi ﬁed 25 novel candidate genes, and in
27% of the ID families 24 such candidates (to be presented
in the conference). International genematching identi ﬁed
additional families in 20% of the candidate genes. Careful
evaluation of the phenotypes is mandatory to assess the
possibility of two or more causative genes in certainfamilies, and to minimize false negative results. Interna-
tional databases from consanguineous individuals are
needed to facilitate the assignment of pathogenicity tohomozygous variants.
S.E. Antonarakis: None. S.A. Paracha: None. S.
Imtiaz: None. A. Nazir: None. Y.M. Waryah: None. P.
Makrythanasis: None. S. Qureshi: None. J. Khan: None.
E. Falconnet: None. M. Guipponi: None. C. Borel: None.
M.A. Ansari: None. E. Frengen: None. E. Ranza: None.
F.A. Santoni: None. I. Shah: None. K. Gul: None. J.
Ahmed: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. A.M. Waryah: None.
M. Ansar: None.
P11.25A
A CNV positional effect analysis implicates enhancer-mediated SHH dysregulation in a patient with multiple
congenital anomalies and malformations
M. Pinelli
1,2, P. Pignataro3, S. Bianco4, R. Genesio3,
G. Cappuccio1,2, A. Chiariello4, M. Nicodemi4, L. Nitsch3,
N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2
1TIGEM, Pozzuoli, Italy,2Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche
Traslazionali, Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico
II”, Naples, Italy,3Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Biotecnologie mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli
“Federico II ”, Naples, Italy,4Dipartimento di Fisica,
Università di Napoli Federico II, and INFN Napoli
Complesso Universitario di Monte Sant'Angelo, Naples,
Italy
Introduction: Despite application of genome-wide diag-
nostics, such as chromosomal microarrays and wholeexome sequencing, a signi ﬁcant proportion of patients with
suspected genetic disease continue to lack a de ﬁnitive
diagnosis. The underlying genetic defects in a subgroup ofthese cases may be altered expression of disease genes due
to copy-number variants (CNV) involving regulatory non-coding elements. Therefore, in a cohort of cases with
suspected genetic diseases who underwent chromosomal
microarray analysis, we searched for CNV interposed
between relevant disease genes and their corresponding
enhancers.
Methods: Out of a dataset of 1,176 CNV from 682
patients, we selected CNVs that were: (1) smaller than 1
Mb, (2) devoid of disease genes, and (3) mapped between
disease genes and their enhancers. Then, we manuallyanalyzed these gene-CNV-enhancers groups for con-
cordance between involved genes and corresponding phe-
notypes. Finally, we predicted effect of CNV on chromatinfolding by the strings-and-binders method.
Results: 235 CNV (34%) mapped between a disease gene
and one of its enhancers and 26 gene-phenotype relation-ships were consistent after manual evaluation. Among these
cases, the best CNV candidate was a 50 kb de novo deletion
encompassing a region between sonic hedgehog gene(SHH ) and two of its enhancers, in a patient with limb
abnormalities, aortic malformation, cardiac arrythmia, and
facial dysmorphisms.
Conclusion: Systematic analysis of potential positional
effect of CNV has potential for identifying the genetic
defects in undiagnosed cases and in our analysis it detecteda CNV affecting contacts of SHH , an important transcrip-
tion factor involved in development, with its enhancers.
M. Pinelli: None. P. Pignataro: None. S. Bianco: None.
R. Genesio: None. G. Cappuccio: None. A. Chiariello:
None. M. Nicodemi: None. L. Nitsch: None. N. Brunetti-
Pierri: None.
P11.28D
Down syndrome-iPSC neurogenesis connects differentialmethylation to dysregulated gene expression
L. Laan
1, J. Klar1, M. Sobol1, J. Hoeber1, M. Zakaria1,
G. Annerén1, A. Falk2, J. Schuster1, N. Dahl1
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden,2Department of Neurosceince, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: Down syndrome is caused by trisomy 21
(T21) in humans and affects approximately one in 700 livebirths. Despite major efforts the molecular mechanisms
leading to the morphological and functional brain abnorm-
alities associated with T21 remain largely unknown.
Material and Methods: To clarify the role of differential
methylation on transcriptional dysregulation and neurode-
velopment in T21, we established an induced pluripotentstem cell (iPSC) derived neural cell model showing a
transctiptional pro ﬁle comparable to early-mid gestationalAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1501period. The DNA methylation pattern was analysed using
Illumina HumanMethylation 450k BeadChip and paralleled
by RNA sequencing.
Results: We assessed the genome wide methylation pat-
tern in T21 and euploid iPSC neural derivatives and iden-
tiﬁed 500 differentially methylated positions (DMPs).
Approximately half of DMPs (281 of 500) could be anno-
tated to a total of 202 genes. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
of these 202 genes revealed enrichment of neurotransmittertransporters (GO:0006836). Integrated analysis of methy-
lation and transcriptome data sets revealed altered expres-
sion in 77 out of the 202 genes in T21 lines. Furthermore,the most profound methylation changes (>9DMPs/gene)
associated with differential expression was observed for a
cluster of genes ( ZNF69 andZNF700 ) on chromosome 19
encoding zink ﬁnger transcription factors. These ZNF genes
have yet unknown functions and are highly expressed
during normal embryonic brain development.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that differential methy-
lation contributes to transcriptional dysregulation in T21
neural cells derived from iPSCs. Our study further high-lights a set of ZNF transcription factor genes showing
profound differential methylation in T21 neurogenesis.
L. Laan: None. J. Klar: None. M. Sobol: None. J.
Hoeber: None. M. Zakaria: None. G. Annerén: None. A.
Falk: None. J. Schuster: None. N. Dahl: None.
P11.29A
DPH1 syndrome. Clinical review and structural and
functional analyses of seven disease-causing variantsidenti ﬁed so far
L. Castilla-Vallmanya
1, R. Urreizti1, K. Mayer2,
G. Evrony3, E. Said4, N. Cody5, G. Plasencia6, B. Gelb7,
D. Grinberg1, U. Brinkmann2, B. Webb8, S. Balcells1
1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics,
Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD,
CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain,2Roche Pharma Research and
Early Develpoment. Large Molecule Research, Roche
Innovation Center, Munich, Penzberg, Germany,
3Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States,4Section of
Medical Genetics, Mater dei Hospital. Department of
anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Malta, Msida,Malta,
5Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai., New York, NY,
United States,6Lead Molecular Design, S.L, Sant Cugat del
Vallès, Spain,7Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai. Department of Genetics and
Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, UnitedStates,
8Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai. Department of Genetics and
Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, United States
Introduction: DPH1 variants have been associated with an
ultra-rare and severe neurodevelopmental disorder mainly
characterized by variable developmental delay, short
stature, dysmorphic features, and sparse hair.
Material and methods: WES was applied to two trios
with undiagnosed patients. A survey of all the clinical
features of 17 DPH1 syndrome patients from 7 families wasperformed. The DPH1 enzyme activity of wild-type and of
7 disease-causing mutants was assessed through the diph-
theria toxin ADP-ribosylation assay. A homology model ofthe human DPH1-DPH2 heterodimer was built, and mole-
cular dynamics simulations were performed to study the
effect of these variants on the catalytic sites, as well as onthe interactions between subunits of the heterodimer.
Results: Two DPH1 novel variants were identi ﬁed in 2
independent families, enriching the clinical delineation ofDPH1 syndrome. The enzyme assay demonstrated com-
promised functionality for 5 mutations (p.Leu234Pro; p.
Ala411Argfs*91; p.Leu164Pro; p.Leu125Pro; p.Tyr112-Cys). According to the structural model, p.Leu125Pro may
affect dimerization while p.Tyr112Cys, p.Leu164Pro, p.
Leu234Pro and p.Pro382Ser may interfere the binding ofthe iron-sulphur cluster necessary for catalysis.
Conclusions: The overall good correlation observed
between DPH1 protein activity, structural prediction andclinical features indicate that these biochemical and struc-
tural tests may be useful tools for assessing the pathogeni-
city of DPH1 variants and for helping to predict the clinicalseverity of future DPH1 cases.
Funding: Associació Síndrome Opitz C, Spain; Spanish
MINECO (SAF2016-75948-R, FECYT-PRECIPITA); Cata-lan Government (2014SGR932); CIBERER (U720); the
Mindich Institute (MCHDI) at the Icahn School of Medicine-
Mount Sinai, NY; Genetic Disease Foundation, NY.
L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. R. Urreizti: None. K.
Mayer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Roche.
G. Evrony: None. E. Said: None. N. Cody: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Sema4, a Mount Sinai
venture. G. Plasencia: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Lead Molecular Desgin, S.L. B. Gelb: None. D.
Grinberg: None. U. Brinkmann: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Roche. B. Webb: None. S.
Balcells: None.
P11.30B
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia withrhombencephalosynapsis and microlissencephaly
expands the spectrum of PCH type 1B1502M. Vezain1, F. Marguet2, M. Bucourt3, P. Letard3,
A. Delahaye4, T. Frébourg5, A. Laquerrière2, P. Saugier-
Veber5
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, F 76000,
Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,Rouen, France,
2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM
U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department of
Pathology, F76000, Normandy Center for Genomic andPersonalized Medicine, Rouen, France,
3Paris University
Hospital, Jean Verdier Hospital, Department of Pathology,
F93141, Bondy, France,4Paris University Hospital, Jean
Verdier Hospital, Department of Genetics, F93141, Bondy,
France,5Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and
Rouen University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized
Medicine, Rouen, France
Rhombencephalosynapsis (RES) is a rare cerebellar mal-
formation, developing during embryogenesis, de ﬁned by
complete or partial vermis agenesis with fusion of thecerebellar hemispheres. It occurs either alone or in
association with other cerebral and/or extracerebral anoma-
lies. Its association with microlissencephaly is exceedinglyrare and to date, only a heterozygous de novo missense
variant in ADGRL2 , a gene encoding Adhesion G-Protein-
Coupled Receptor L2, has been identi ﬁed. Here, we report
two siblings of Roma origin presenting with severe growth
retardation, fetal akinesia, microlissencephaly and small
cerebellum with vermian agenesis. Neuropathology showedextreme paucity in pontine transverse ﬁbres, rudimentary
olivary nuclei, RES and vanishing motoneurons in both
foetuses. Comparative foetus-parent exome sequencingrevealed in both foetuses a homozygous variant in exon 1
of the EXOSC3 gene encoding a core component of the
RNA exosome, c.92G>C;p.(Gly31Ala). EXOSC3 variants
account for 40% to 75% of patients affected by ponto-
cerebellar hypoplasia with spinal muscular atrophy
(PCH1B). The c.92G>C variant is a founder mutation inthe Roma population and has been reported in severe
PCH1B. PCH1B is characterized by a broad phenotypic
spectrum, ranging from mild phenotypes with spasticity,mild to moderate intellectual disability, distally pronounced
muscular atrophy, and cerebellar atrophy, to severe
phenotypes with profound global developmental delay,progressive microcephaly, and atrophy of the cerebellar
hemispheres. The typical dragon ﬂy pattern of the cerebel-
lum observed in PCH1B patients with ﬂattened hemispheres
and relative prominence of vermis differs markedly from
RES. This novel foetal presentation expands the spectrum
of PCH1B and highlights the diversity of RES aetiologies.M. Vezain: None. F. Marguet: None. M. Bucourt:
None. P. Letard: None. A. Delahaye: None. T. Frébourg:
None. A. Laquerrière: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None.
P11.31C
MR neuroimaging and EEG ﬁndings in 62 patients with
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders
S. Boronat
1, E. Vázquez2, Á. Sánchez-Montañez2,
M. Vicente2, M. del Campo3
1Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,
2Hospital de la Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,3Rady
Children´s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States
Introduction: The fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD)
span a group of neurodevelopmental disorders related to
maternal alcohol intake during pregnancy. Studies correlat-ing EEG and neuroimaging with speci ﬁc FASD categories
are lacking.
Material and methods: Classi ﬁcation of 62 patients into
3 FASD categories, including fetal alcohol syndrome
(FAS), partial FAS (pFAS) and alcohol related neurodeve-
lopmental disorders (ARND). Prospective studies of MRimaging and EEG.
Results: Neuroimaging: The most frequent ﬁndings were
corpus callosum abnormalities (42%) and cerebellar vermishypoplasia (24%). Additional ﬁndings were vascular
anomalies, gliosis, prominent perivascular spaces, occipito-
cervical junction and cervical vertebral anomalies, pituitaryhypoplasia, arachnoid cysts, and cavum septum pellucidum.
Only 16% had normal neuroimaging. EEG (including sleep
recording in 43%) showed anomalies in 23%, includingslowing of background activity and interictal epileptiform
discharges, focal and/or generalized, and 3 of them had
epilepsy. In one patient, seizures were ﬁrst detected during
the EEG recording and one case had an encephalopathy
with electrical status epilepticus during slow sleep (ESES).
Focal interictal discharges in our patients did not imply thepresence of underlying visible focal brain lesions in the
neuroimaging studies, such as cortical dysplasia or poly-
microgyria. However, they had nonspeci ﬁc brain MR
abnormalities, including corpus callosum hypoplasia, ver-
mis hypoplasia or cavum septum pellucidum. The latter was
signiﬁcantly more frequent in the group with EEG abnormal
ﬁndings (p < 0.01).
Conclusion: Patients with FASD exhibit frequent and
diverse neuroimaging and EEG ﬁndings.
S. Boronat: None. E. Vázquez: None. Á. Sánchez-
Montañez: None. M. Vicente: None. M. del
Campo: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1503P11.32D
Gating-affecting mutations in KCNK4 cause a
recognizable neurodevelopmental syndrome
F. C. Radio1, P. Calligari2, V. Caputo3, M. L. Dentici1,
N. Falah4, F. High5, F. Pantaleoni1, S. Barresi1,
A. Ciol ﬁ1, S. Pizzi1, A. Bruselles6, R. Person7,
S. Richards7, M. T. Cho8, D. J. Claps Sepulveda1,S .P r o1,
R. Battini9, G. Zampino10, M. C. Digilio1,
G. Bocchinfuso2, B. Dallapiccola1, L. Stella2,
C. K. Bauer11, M. Tartaglia1
1Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
2University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy,3Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy,4Nemours Children ’s
Hospital, Orlando, FL, United States,5Mass General
Hospital for Children, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, United States,6Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome, Italy,7GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
8GeneDX, Gaithersburg, Italy,9Stella Maris, IRCCS,
Calambrone, Italy,10Fondazione Policlinico Universitario
A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore,
Rome, Italy,11University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Introduction: Aberrant activation or inhibition of potas-
sium (K +) currents across the plasma membrane of cells
has been causally linked to altered various functions in both
excitable and non-excitable cells. KCNK4 belongs to the
mechano-gated ion channels of the TRAAK/TREK sub-family of two pore-domain (K2P) K +channels. While K2P
channels are well-known to contribute to the resting
membrane potential/cellular excitability, their involvementin pathophysiological processes remains largely
uncharacterized.
Materials and Methods: In the frame of the Undiag-
nosed Patients Program at the Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, Rome, the exomes of two unrelated subjects with a
molecularly unexplained, clinically superimposable pheno-type were scanned to identify the underlying molecular
cause. Patch-clamp analyses, co-expression experiments
and molecular dynamics simulations were used to func-tionally characterized the genomic ﬁndings.
Results: Two variants in KCNK4 were identi ﬁed as the
only shared events in these two patients and a third wasfound by using GeneMatcher. Patch-clamp analyses docu-
mented an impressive gain-of-function of the identi ﬁed
KCNK4 channel mutants. Co-expression experiments pro-vided evidence of the dominant behavior of the disease-
causing mutations. Remarkably, molecular dynamics
simulations consistently indicated that mutations seal thelateral intramembrane fenestration proposed to negatively
control K +ﬂow.Conclusions: We report that de novo missense mutations
inKCNK4 cause a recognizable syndrome for which we
propose the acronym FHEIG (facial dysmorphism, hyper-
trichosis, epilepsy, intellectual disability/developmental
delay, and gingival overgrowth). Overall, our ﬁndings
illustrate the pleiotropic effect of dysregulated KCNK4function and provide support to the hypothesis of a gating
mechanism based on the lateral fenestrations of K2P
channels.
F.C. Radio: None. P. Calligari: None. V. Caputo:
None. M.L. Dentici: None. N. Falah: None. F. High:
None. F. Pantaleoni: None. S. Barresi: None. A. Ciol ﬁ:
None. S. Pizzi: None. A. Bruselles: None. R. Person:
None. S. Richards: None. M.T. Cho: None. D.J. Claps
Sepulveda: None. S. Pro: None. R. Battini: None. G.
Zampino: None. M.C. Digilio: None. G. Bocchinfuso:
None. B. Dallapiccola:
None. L. Stella: None. C.K.
Bauer: None. M. Tartaglia: None.
P11.33A
De novo mutation of CSNK2B encoding beta subunit of
casein kinase 2 causes Filippi syndrome
M. Asif1,2,3, E. Kaygusuz1,2,3,4, F. Brancati5,6,
C. Nienberg7, A. Nickelsen8, J. Jose7, J. Hochscherf9,
K. Nie ﬁnd9, A. A. Noegel2, P. Nürnberg1,10,
M. S. Hussain1,2,3
1Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,2Institute of Biochemistry I,
Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
4Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany,5Medical Genetics,
Department of Life, Health and Environmental Science,University of L ’Aquila, L ’Aquila, Italy,
6Istituto
Dermopatico dell ’Immacolata (IDI) IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
7Institute of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry,
Westphalian Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany,
87Institute of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry,
Westphalian Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany,
9Department of Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,103Center for
Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University ofCologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Filippi syndrome (FS) is a rare genetic
condition characterized by short stature, microcephaly,
intellectual disability, syndactyly and distinctive facial
features. A total of 33 patients from 25 families aredocumented worldwide. Previously, we reported the ﬁrst
gene ( CKAP2L ) involved in FS. Here, we ascertain a1504mutation in CSNK2B as a likely cause of FS. CSNK2B
encodes CK2 β–the beta subunit of casein kinase 2, which
plays pivotal role in diverse cellular processes.
Material and Methods: To identify the causal variant,
trio whole-exome sequencing was performed. To further
explore the consequences of the mutation, pulldown assays,microscale thermophoresis (MST), immuno ﬂuorescence
and RNA-seq transcriptome pro ﬁling of lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCLs) were conducted.
Results: A pathogenic de novo mutation ( CSNK2B:
c.94G>C; p.Asp32His) was identi ﬁed in an Italian patient
diagnosed with FS. The mutation caused an up-regulation ofCSNK2B expression at transcript and protein level, which
resulted in impaired cross talk between αandβsubunits of
CK2. The effects of mutation were also observed in twocrucial pathways; canonical Wnt signaling (CWS) and DNA
damage response (DDR). In CWS, an impaired interaction of
DVL3 with mutant CK2 βand up-regulation as well as mis-
localization of β-catenin in mutant LCLs was found. In DDR,
γH2AX was substantially increased in mutant LCLs. Finally,
RNA-seq data con ﬁrmed differential expression of proteins
involved in the aforementioned pathways.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that CSNK2B is a
novel candidate gene for Fillippi syndrome and the muta-tion found in our patient causes the disorder by dysregu-
lating CWS and DDR.
M. Asif: None. E. Kaygusuz: None. F. Brancati: None.
C. Nienberg: None. A. Nickelsen: None. J. Jose: None. J.
Hochscherf: None. K. Nie ﬁnd:None. A.A. Noegel: None.
P. Nürnberg: None. M.S. Hussain: None.
P11.34B
Intestinal elongation and motility require the longisoform of FLNA
M. M. Alves, D. Halim, Y. Zhao, S. Overkleeft, H. van der
Linde, A. S. Brooks, A. J. Burns, R. M. W. Hofstra
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands
Introduction: Filamin A (FLNA ) encodes a cytoskeletal
protein that regulates cell shape by cross-linking actin
ﬁlaments. Mutations in FLNA have been associated with a
wide spectrum of disorders, and more recently with anX–linked form of Congenital Short Bowel Syndrome
(CSBS). These mutations are located between two methio-
nines present at the N-terminal of the protein, and seem to
only block expression of the long isoform of FLNA.
Material and Methods: To understand the role of FLNA
in intestinal development, expression studies at differenthuman embryonic stages, and several in vitro studies were
performed. A transgenic zebra ﬁsh line was also generatedusing TALENs, where expression of the long isoform of
FLNA was speci ﬁcally blocked.
Results: FLNA expression was detected in the muscular
layer of the small intestine from early embryonic stages.
Moreover, FLNA mutations associated with CSBS, blocked
expression of the long isoform of FLNA, but did not affectthe binding of FLNA to actin ﬁlaments. These mutations
also impaired contractility of human intestinal smooth
muscle cells in vitro . Finally, FLNA mutant ﬁsh were phe-
notypically indistinguishable from wild-type ﬁsh, except for
a signi ﬁcant reduction in gut length (10%), and diminished
intestinal motility.
Conclusion: Our results bring new insights into CSBS
pathogenesis, by showing that the intestinal defects asso-
ciated with this disease, are likely caused by impairedsmooth muscle contraction, as a consequence of the loss of
expression of the long isoform of FLNA.
M.M. Alves: None. D. Halim: None. Y. Zhao: None. S.
Overkleeft: None. H. van der Linde: None. A.S. Brooks:
None. A.J. Burns: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Takeda Pharmaceuticals. R.M.W. Hofstra: None.
P11.35C
Intragenic de novo frame shift deletion of two exon
conﬁrms a role for FNDC3B in human craniofacial
development and possibly neuro-psychiatric
development
I. K. Ystrøm
1, R. Chistensen1, E. M. Vestergaard1,
M. Sommerlund1, L. Graversen1, M. F. Boxill2,
U. B. Jensen1
1Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark,
2Regional Hospital Midt, Viborg, Denmark
Background: De novo 3q26.31 microdeletions has been
reported in four cases with dysmorphic facial features. The
overlapping deleted region was shown to only contain the
FNDC3B gene. The product of this gene, the ﬁbronectin
domain III-containing protein 3B (also known as factor for
adipocyte differentiation-104 (FAD104)) has been identi-
ﬁed in mouse models as a positive regulator of adipocytes
differentiation but also as a negative regulator of osteoblast
differentiation. Cranial changes have also been described
forFNDC3B knock-out mice.
Methods: Agilent 180K oligo array CGH analysis and
clinical evaluation including a neurodevelopmental
evaluation.
Results: We report the ﬁrst case of a de novo intragenic
microdeletion involving two exons of the FNDC3B gene
resulting in an frameshift deletion. The patient is a boy withsubtle dysmorphic facial features and behavioral problemsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1505within the autism spectrum. The boy is 9 years old and we
present the developmental evaluation at different ages.
Conclusion: CNVs have contributed much to our
understanding of disease development and the underlying
mechanism. However, the role of individual genes in dis-
ease development can be dif ﬁcult to interpret in cases where
the deletion includes more genes or expands beyond the
boundaries of a single gene. Such deletions may include
crucial elements that affects the 3 dimensional structure ofthe genome and therefore affects the function of several
genes in the region. This is the ﬁrst case with an intragenic
exon deletion in FNDC3B supporting a role for this gene in
both craniofacial development and neuro-psychiatric
development.
I.K. Ystrøm: None. R. Chistensen: None. E.M. Ves-
tergaard: None. M. Sommerlund: None. L. Graversen:
None. M.F. Boxill: None. U.B. Jensen: None.
P11.36D
Genetic screening of Noonan syndrome in central north
of Morocco: achievements, challenges & perspectives
I. El Bouchikhi
1, I. Samri1, F. Mou ﬁd1, L. Bouguenouch1,
K. Belhassan1, M. Iraqui Houssaini2, S. Atmani3,
K. Ouldim1
1Medical Genetics and Oncogenetics Laboratory, Hassan II
University Hospital, Fez, Morocco,2Faculty of Sciences &
techniques, Sidi Mohamed ben Abdellah University, Fez,
Morocco,3Medico-Surgical Unit of Cardio-Pediatrics
Department, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco
Introduction: Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant
disorder with an incidence of 1/1000 - 2500 live births.
While the very ﬁrst genetic test in Morocco was carried out
in the nineties, the ﬁrst genetic diagnosis of Noonan
syndrome (NS) was performed seven years ago. Thus, the
aim of this presentation is to expose results of molecular
screening of Noonan syndrome in the central north ofMorocco, and discuss its challenges and perspectives.
Material and methods: Thirty-one patients were
recruited in the medical genetics laboratory from differentregions of central North of Morocco. After obtaining
informed consents, genomic DNAs were extracted from
leucocytes. Then, all samples were screened for PTPN11mutations using PCR and direct sequencing. The obtained
sequences were analyzed using NCBI bioinformatics tools.
Results: We have detected ﬁve pathogenic missense
mutations, one synonymous mutation and three novel
intronic duplications. All variants were heterozygous. The
pathogenic mutations were clustered on exons three andeight, while most of the non-coding variants were localisedin the intron four. Considering only the pathogenic muta-
tions, PTPN11 mutation rate in our cohort was around 16%.
Conclusions: Since the ﬁrst diagnosis of PTPN11
mutations in a Moroccan Noonan family, considerable
efforts have been made to improve the genetic services
offered to patients. Although several challenges are stillretarding the progress of NS genetic diagnosis in Morocco,
the NGS technologies that have recently been installed
seems to provide a promising future.
I. El Bouchikhi: None. I. Samri: None. F. Mou ﬁd:
None. L. Bouguenouch: None. K. Belhassan: None. M.
Iraqui Houssaini: None. S. Atmani: None. K.
Ouldim: None.
P11.37A
Does my expertise still make a difference? A single-
clinician ’s experience of genomic sequencing in 120
pediatric patients
F. B. Bengur
1, E. Kar1, K. Yararbas2, Y. Alanay3
1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey,2Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Department ofMedical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,
3Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Genomic sequencing (WES/WGS) provides
diagnosis in 40% of unsolved cases in the pediatricpopulation. Current clinical approach mandates integration
of phenotypic data with variant analysis. This study aims to
assess the diagnostic yield of NGS ordered by a singleclinician to a single laboratory.
Materials and Methods: Data from 120 patients were
retrospectively analyzed. Time interval was September2015-January 2019. Tests were performed at Centogene,
Germany. All patients were re-evaluated after test results.
Variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) were speci ﬁcally
re-analyzed with evolving clinical story, current literature
and results of other investigations. Diagnoses con ﬁrmed by
NGS (ACMG Class 1 or 2 variants) were coined as “sug-
gested molecular diagnosis ”. Those established after clinical
re-analysis were considered “robust clinical diagnosis ”.
Results: Median age was 4.7 (0.1-15.1) years. M/F ratio
was 1.14. Time passed since ﬁrst symptom until a robust
diagnosis was 2.8 (0.1-14.3) years. Blended phenotype was
present in 8%. Table 1 summarizes the data. Diagnostic rateof trio-based WES was signi ﬁcantly higher than proband-
only WGS, where both increased after clinical re-
evaluation. Suggested molecular diagnosis was sig-niﬁcantly higher in trio-based testing. Consanguinity,1506affected siblings and dysmorphic features did not have an
effect on diagnostic rate.
Conclusions: Our results emphasize the additional impact
of clinical expertise. An experienced clinician familiar withrare disease diagnoses is essential to determine whether a
variant is causative, contributory or unrelated.
F.B. Bengur: None. E. Kar: None. K. Yararbas: None.
Y. Alanay: None.
P11.38B
Flow-cytometric analysis con ﬁrms the GPI biosynthesis
deﬁcit in a family with an atypical phenotype associated
with a PIGA variant
N. Maia
1,2, P. Jorge1,2, M. L. Queirós3,4,2, M. Martins5,
I. Marques1,2, R. Santos1,2, A. de Brouwer6, M. Lima3,4,2
1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética
Médica Jacinto de Magalh ães (CGMJM), Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto,
Portugal,2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigaç ão
Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas AbelSalazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
3Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Hospital de Santo
António (HSA), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto(CHUP), Porto, Portugal,
4Laboratório de Citometria,
Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Hospital de Santo António(HSA), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP),
Porto, Portugal,5Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar
Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (CHTMAD, EPE), Vila Real,
Portugal,6Department of Human Genetics, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
This study aimed to identify the underling molecular defect
in a family with two male adults showing a similar
phenotype consisting of distinct facial features, intellectualdisability with a complete lack of speech, hypotonia, in
combination with abnormal muscle, skin, urinary, and
dental ﬁndings. Exome sequencing (ES) was carried out on
one of the patients. Functional validation was performed by
ﬂow cytometry determining surface expression of GPI
(identi ﬁed by FLAER) and GPI anchored proteins (GPI-AP)
in white and red blood cells. ES identi ﬁed a hemizygous
variant in PIGA gene: NM_002641.3: c.232A>G; p.
(Lys78Glu). Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed the presence of
the variant in both brothers and established that the mother
is a carrier. Flow cytometry results showed that, despite
normal peripheral blood counts, patient granulocytes/neutrophils and monocytes were partially de ﬁcient in cell
surface GPI and at least some GPI-AP ( e.g. CD16 in
neutrophils and CD14 in monocytes), supporting thepathogenicity of the PIGA variant. In contrast, red blood
cells had normal levels of GPI-AP (CD55 and CD59). TheNumber of index patients Suggested molecular
diagnosisRobust genetic
diagnosisDifference
between molecular
and robust
diagnosisNo diagnosis (%)
Positive (%) p value Positive (%) p value Percentage p value
Test type 0.008 0.779 0.054
Proband-only WES 13 7 (54%) 10 (77%) 23% 3 (23%)
Trio-based WES 59 27 (46%) 42 (71%) 25% 17 (29%)
Proband-only WGS 41 10 (24%) 28 (68%) 44% 13 (32%)
Trio-based WGS 7 6 (86%) 6 (86%) 0% 1 (14%)
Test type (proband-only vs trio-
based)0.041 0.776 0.055
Proband-only 54 17 (32%) 38 (70%) 39% 16 (30%)
Trio-based 66 33 (50%) 48 (73%) 23% 18 (27%)
Consanguinity 0.647 0.717 0.891
No 89 36 (40%) 63 (71%) 30% 26 (29%)
Yes 31 14 (45%) 23 (74%) 29% 8 (26%)
Affected siblings 0.508 0.856 0.593No 100 43 (43%) 72 (72%) 29% 28 (28%)
Yes 20 7 (35%) 14 (70%) 35% 6 (30%)
Dysmorphic features 0.666 0.861 0.524
No 58 23 (40%) 42 (72%) 33% 16 (28%)
Yes 62 27 (44%) 86 (72%) 27% 18 (28%)Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1507p.(Lys78Glu) missense mutation results in a partial
deﬁciency of GPI and GPI-AP affecting the myeloid, but
not the erythroid cells. Notably, the amino acid substitution
described herein leads to diminished expression of CD14 on
monocytes as well, representing the ﬁrst monocyte defect
described in a germline PIGA case. Funding: UMIB is
supported by National Funds through the FCT - Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia in the frameworks of the UID/
Multi/0215/2016 project. Grants: NM, DEFI-CHUP, EPEPhD 2015 and PJ, research grant 145/2015.
N. Maia: None. P. Jorge: None. M.L. Queirós: None.
M. Martins: None. I. Marques: None. R. Santos: None.
A. de Brouwer: None. M. Lima: None.
P11.39C
Severe haemophilia A caused by an unbalanced
chromosomal rearrangement identi ﬁed using nanopore
sequencing
N. Chatron
1,2, C. Schluth-Bolard1,2, M. Frétigny3,
A. Labalme1, G. Vilchez4, S. Castet5, C. Négrier3,6,
D. Sanlaville1,2, C. Vinciguerra3,6, Y. Jourdy3,6
1Service de génétique, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,2Equipe GENDEV,
CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5282, UCBL1, Lyon,
France,3Service d ’hématologie Biologique, Centre de
Biologie et Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France,4Cellule bioinformatique de la plateforme de
séquençage NGS du CHU de Lyon, GroupementHospitalier Est, Lyon, France,
5Service de traitement des
hémophiles, Hôpital Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux,
France,6EA 4609 Hémostase et cancer, Université Claude
Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France
Background: NoF8genetic abnormality was detected in
about 2% of severe haemophilia A patients using conven-
tional genetic approaches. In these patients, deep intronic
variation or F8disrupting genomic rearrangement could be
causal.
Objective: to characterize a Xq28 rearrangement dis-
rupting F8in a genetically unresolved severe haemophilia
A patient.
Materials and Methods :a large panel of comprehensive
molecular techniques including long-range PCR, RNAanalysis, nanopore sequencing and cytogenetic analysis
were used.
Results: Long-range PCR performed throughout F8
identi ﬁed a non-ampli ﬁable region in intron 25 indicating
the presence of a chromosomal rearrangement. F8mRNA
analysis including 3 ’Rapid Ampli ﬁcation of cDNA Ends
and nanopore sequencing showed the presence of a F8
fusion transcript in which F8exon 26 was replaced by a 742bp pseudo-exon corresponding to a non-coding region
located at the beginning of the long arm of chromosome X
(Xq11.1). The pseudo-exon was ﬂanked by a canonical AG
on its 5 ’side and contained two putative polyadenylation
signals on its 3 ’side. Cytogenetic Microarray Analysis
showed the presence of a 3.8 Mb gain of the Xq11.1q12chromosomal region. PCR ampli ﬁcation of junction frag-
ments and FISH analysis con ﬁrmed that the Xq11.1q12
duplicated region was inserted in F8intron 25.
Conclusion: Exceptionally, this structural variant char-
acterization was conducted from cDNA analysis. To our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case of chromosomal rearran-
gement revealed through nanopore sequencing without
previous cytogenetic study. This study highlights the use-
fulness of single molecule long-read sequencing technolo-gies for molecular diagnosis of genetic disorders especially
when structural variants are suspected.
N. Chatron: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. M. Fré-
tigny: None. A. Labalme: None. G. Vilchez: None. S.
Castet: None. C. Négrier: None. D. Sanlaville: None. C.
Vinciguerra: None. Y. Jourdy: None.
P11.40D
Modelling Hirschsprung disease with human inducedpluripotent stem cells: a preliminary study
A. Zada
1, K. C. MacKenzie1, E. Brosens1, B. M. de Graaf1,
T. van Gestel1, T. Wai1, P. Sloots2, R. M. H. Wijnen2,
M. M. Alves1, R. M. W. Hofstra1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a congenital
neuropathy characterized by the lack of the enteric nervoussystem in the distal part of the colon. Mutations in more
than 20 genes have been identi ﬁed. One single good in vitro
model to determine the functional consequences of thedifferent mutated genes is lacking. In this study we tested
whether induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) could serve
as such a model.
Material and Methods: Functional assays of the EDN3 ,
EDNRB , and ZEB2 variants identi ﬁed, were performed by
overexpressing the corresponding variant in HEK293 cells.qRT-PCR and Western Blot were performed to investigate
the effect of these mutations on protein expression. In
parallel, ﬁve iPSC lines obtained from ﬁbroblasts derived
from four HSCR patients carrying the mutations tested, and
one individual control were differentiated into Enteric
Neural Crest Cells (ENCCs) according a previous describedprotocol. ENCCs differentiation was evaluated using FACS
and immunostaining.1508Results: The EDN3 mutant showed lower expression in
comparison to the wild type, while the variants in EDNRB
and ZEB2 had the opposite effect. iPSC-derived ENCCs
were positive for the neuronal marker HNK1. However,
patient derived iPSCs yield lower percentage of ENCCs
than controls.
Conclusions: The mutations identi ﬁed in RET,GFRA1 ,
EDN3 ,EDNRB andZEB2 showed signi ﬁcant differences on
protein expression, and seem to impair iPSCs differentiationinto ENCCs. However, further studies are needed to fully
characterize the effect of these mutations on the iPSC-
derived ENCCs to show whether indeed iPSCs are theperfect model system for HSCR.
A. Zada: None. K.C. MacKenzie: None. E. Brosens:
None. B.M. de Graaf: None. T. van Gestel: None. T.
Wai: None. P. Sloots: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. M.
M. Alves: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None.
P11.41A
Screening for PALM2 and AKAP2 mutations in a set of
congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism patients: acase with a chromosomal deletion at 9q31, PALM2 and
AKAP2 chromosomal region
A. Iivonen
1, K. Vaaralahti1, V. Sidoroff2, T. Raivio1,3
1Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, Stem Cells and
Metabolism Research Program, Helsinki, Finland,2North
Karelia Central Hospital, Joensuu, Finland,3New
Children ’s Hospital, Pediatric Research Center, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: The genetic cause of congenital hypogona-
dotropic hypogonadism (cHH) remains unidenti ﬁed in half
of the patients. PALM2 encodes paralemmin-2, a para-
lemmin family plasma membrane protein, and AKAP2encodes an A-kinase anchor protein. PALM2 and AKAP2
are adjacent on chromosome 9 and can form fusion
transcripts. PALM2 has been implicated in cHH, since adeleterious PALM2 mutation has been found in one cHH
patient. A chromosomal translocation causing monoallelic
expression of AKAP2 has been found in another patientwith Kallmann syndrome (cHH and anosmia/hyposmia) and
bone anomalies.
Materials and Methods: Targeted sequencing of
ANOS1, CHD7, FGF8, FGFR1, GNRHR, KISS1R,
PROK2, PROKR2 and TACR3 and subsequent whole-
genome linked-read sequencing was performed on a patientwith cHH, anosmia, learning dif ﬁculties and motoric pro-
blems. We Sanger-sequenced the coding regions and exon-
intron boundaries of PALM2 and AKAP2 in 22 FinnishcHH patients who have no mutations in currently known
cHH genes.Results: The patient carried a 2.3 Mb chromosomal
deletion at 9q31.2 that excludes PALM2/AKAP2. Targeted
sequencing revealed no other causative mutations or novel
rare variants in this proband. In our patient set, no likely
causative mutations were found.
Conclusions: We report a patient with a deletion at
9q31.2 yet intact PALM2 and AKAP2 genes. The roles of
PALM2 and AKAP2 in Kallmann syndrome require further
investigations.
Grants: by the Academy of Finland, Foundation for
Pediatric Research, Sigrid-Juselius Foundation, Novo Nor-
disk Foundation, Emil Aaltonen Foundation, University ofHelsinki, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Päivikki and
Sakari Sohlberg foundation
A. Iivonen: None. K. Vaaralahti: None. V. Sidoroff:
None. T. Raivio: None.
P11.42B
Overgrowth disorders with intellectual disability due to
mutations in chromatin regulatory genes
P. Lapunzina
1, J. A. Tenorio1, P. Arias1, I. Dapía1,
G. Gordo1, P. Alarcón2, S. García-Miñaur1, F. Santos-
Simarro1, V. Martínez-Glez1, M. Palomares1, M. Solís1,
S. Ramos1, The SOGRI consortium, V. L. Ruíz-Pérez3,
J. Nevado1
1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM),
Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile,34- Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Overgrowth disorders (OGS) encompass an
heterogeneous group on conditions in which the main
features is an increase of weight, height and head
circumference or a combination of all, above +2SD for
age, sex and ethnicity. Most OGS has additional features
associated such as intellectual disability. Thus, the aim of
this project was to perform a molecular screening of OGSwith ID and to understand the underlying physio pathogenic
associated mechanisms.
Material and Methods: Patients were selected retro-
spectively from the Spanish Overgrowth registry database
(SOGRI). Molecular analysis included Sanger sequencing,
MLPA and a custom NGS panel of 211 genes (Overgrowthv2.3). Variants annotation and prioritization was performed
with a custom in-house bioinformatic script.
Results: A subgroup of patients with OGS +ID caused by
mutations in chromatin regulation genes was observed: (5)
BRWD3 (X-linked mental retardation), (6) DNMT3A (Tat-
ton-Brown-Rahman syndrome), (2) SETD2 (Luscan-Lumish
syndrome), (3) EZH2 (Weaver syndrome), (99) NSD1 (Sotos
syndrome).Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1509Conclusions: There is a high relationship between
patients who present some overgrowth disorders with
intellectual disability, with alterations in chromatin reg-
ulatory genes. These genes encode enzymes that possess
histone methyltransferase activity, and therefore, are critical
during the processes of human development. A correctmolecular and clinical characterization is essential to carry
out an adequate advice in patients with overgrowth that
associate other clinical characteristics that overlap withseveral entities.
Grants: FEDER-ISCIII Grant FIS PI15/01481 Unrest-
ricted Sotos syndrome spanish association funds
P. Lapunzina: None. J.A. Tenorio: None. P. Arias:
None. I. Dapía: None. G. Gordo: None. P. Alarcón:
None. S. García-Miñaur: None. F. Santos-Simarro:
None. V. Martínez-Glez: None. M. Palomares: None. M.
Solís: None. S. Ramos: None. V.L. Ruíz-Pérez: None. J.
Nevado: None.
P11.43C
MRX93 syndrome (BRWD3 gene): ﬁve new patients
with novel mutations
P. Arias
1, J. A. Tenorio1, P. Alarcón2, F. Ramos3,
J. Campistol4, S. Climent5, S. García-Miñaur1, I. Dapía1,
A. Hernández1, J. Nevado1, M. Solís1, V. L. Ruíz-Pérez6,
The SOGRI consortium, P. Lapunzina1
1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM),
Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile,3University Hospital “Lozano Blesa ”,
University of Zaragoza School of Medicine, Zaragoza,
Spain,4Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain,
5Hospital General de Ontinyent, Valencia, Spain,6Instituto
de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid (CSIC-UAM),
Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) comprise a
heterogeneous group of disorders whose main characteristicis that either the weight, height, or head circumference are
above the 97th centile or 2-3 standard deviations (SD)
above the mean for age and sex. Additional features areusually associated with OGS. Genetic analysis in patients
with overlapping clinical features is essential, in order to
distinguish between two or more similar conditions, and toprovide appropriate genetic counseling.
Material and Methods: Patients were selected from the
“Spanish Overgrowth Registry ”(SOGRI). All patients or
tutors gave informed consent. Two targeted custom gene
panels were designed (183genes, OGLYVAS V1.0) and
(212genes, Overgrowth v2.3) respectively. After the ﬁlter-
ing of the relevant variants and validation, classi ﬁcation andinterpretation of the variants were made according to
ACMG guidelines.
Results: Four different pathogenic variants have been
found in ﬁve patients. Three of the four variants were
classi ﬁed as pathogenic and the missense variant as likely
pathogenic. All variants were located within the WD40 andBromodomain of the protein, and all was not previously
reported in the 14 patients with MRX93 already published.
Conclusions: MRX93 syndrome (XLID due to BRWD3
mutations) is a relatively new and uncommon condition
mainly characterized by ID, overgrowth and facial dys-
morphism. We report ﬁve patients with novel variants in
BRWD3 and review all the published cases so far. MRX93
diagnosis should be suspected in male patients with these
features and genetic testing is highly recommended in orderto con ﬁrm the diagnosis.
Grants: FEDER-ISCIII Grant FIS PI15/01481
P. Arias: None. J.A. Tenorio: None. P. Alarcón: None.
F. Ramos: None. J. Campistol: None. S. Climent: None.
S. García-Miñaur: None. I. Dapía: None. A. Hernández:
None. J. Nevado: None. M. Solís: None. V.L. Ruíz-Pérez:
None. P. Lapunzina: None.
P11.44D
Interstitial 2q24.2q24.3 microdeletion: description of
two new cases and delineation of the critical minimal
region. A new emerging syndrome?
E. Tassano, L. Pisciotta, S. Uccella, T. Giacomini,
M. Mancardi, M. Divizia, M. Lerone, A. Puliti, G. Gimelli,D. Coviello, P. Ronchetto
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, ItalyInterstitial deletions in 2q24.2q24.3 are rare events reported
in literature and in publicly available databases associatedmainly with developmental delay and intellectual disability.
The breakpoint of these deletions varies, extending from 7.5
Mb to 2.3 Mb. Although some clinical features seem to berecurrent, these deletions are associated with a clinically
heterogeneous phenotype. This is probably due to the
different deletion size and gene content, to genetic variationin the remaining allele and to the in ﬂuence of the genetic
background of the rest of the genoma. Here we report on
two patients with similar clinical phenotype and interstitial2q24.2q24.3 deletions of different size overlapping a 1.7
Mb region. In particular, patient 1 was characterized by
hypotonia, growth retardation, and psychomotor develop-mental and language delay, dysmorphisms and hearing loss
with a de novo 3,7 Mb 2q24.2q24.3 deletion. Patient 2
presented with hypotonia, psychomotor and language delay,stereotypes movements and epilepsy with a de novo 2,9 Mb
2q24.2q24.3 deletion. We identi ﬁed the smallest region of1510overlap encompassing eight genes and our attention was
particularly drawn to SLC4A10, DPP4, KCNH7 . All these
three genes are associated to neurological features.
SLC4A10 is highly expressed in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus, where it regulates the neuronal intracellular
pH. Abnormal levels of DPP4 were seen in patients with
neuropsychiatric disorders. KCNH7 encodes a voltage gated
potassium channels and is widely expressed in human
central nervous system. In conclusion, haploinsuf ﬁciency of
these genes may be a good candidate for the main clinical
features of this emerging syndrome.
E. Tassano: None. L. Pisciotta: None. S. Uccella: None.
T. Giacomini: None. M. Mancardi: None. M. Divizia:
None. M. Lerone: None. A. Puliti: None. G. Gimelli:
None. D. Coviello: None. P. Ronchetto: None.
P11.45A
Inversion-duplication-deletion of chromosome 8p:genotype-phenotype correlation and determination of a
new minimal duplicated region involved in ACC in 29
patients
R. Vibert
1, B. Keren2,3, S. Chantot-Bastaraud4,
C. Mignot1,3, N. Chatron5, M. Portnoï4, M. Nouguès6,
M. Moutard6, A. Faudet1,3, S. Whalen1, D. Haye1,
C. Pebrel-Richard7, C. Missirian8, C. Vincent-Delorme9,
O. Boute9, J. Andrieux10, F. Devillard11, C. Coutton11,
S. Taviaux12, M. Perez13, C. Colson14, D. Sanlaville5,
J. Siffroi4, D. Héron1,3, S. Heide1,3
1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and
Pitié Salpêtrière Hospitals, Paris, France,2APHP, Service
of Developmental Genetics, Department of Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France,
3Reference Center for
Intellectual disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France,
4APHP, Department of Cytogenetics, Armand Trousseau
Hospital, Paris, France,5Service of Genetic, Hospices
Civils of Lyon, Bron, France,6APHP, Service of pediatric
neurology, Armand Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France,
7Service of Cytogenetic, Clermont-Ferrand ’s University
Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France,8APHM, Laboratory
of Genetic, Timone enfants ’Hospital, Marseille, France,
9Service of Clinical Genetic, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital,
Lille, France,10Institute of Medical Genetics, Jeanne de
Flandre Hospital, Lille, France,11Service of Genetic,
Grenoble ’s University Hospital, Grenoble, France,
12Laboratory of Genetic, Department of medical genetics,
Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France,
13Department of Medical Genetics, Arnaud de Villeneuve
Hospital, Montpellier, France,14Service of Clinical
Genetic, Caen ’s University Hospital, Caen, FranceIntroduction: Interstitial inverted duplication 8p associated
with a distal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 8
(invdupdel[8p]) is a complex and rare chromosomal
rearrangement. Intellectual disability (ID) is constant, and
anomalies of the corpus callosum (ACC) are present in 80%
of (invdupdel[8p]) patients. Almost all reported patientscarry the same 8pter deletion, but the size and proximal
breakpoint of the duplication are variable. Previous studies
suggested a correlation between the size of the duplicationand the severity of ID. Moreover, Sajan et al. (2013) de ﬁned
a minimal duplicated critical region of 10.7 Mb associated
with ACC. However, no gene of ACC has yet been clearlyidenti ﬁed in this region. In order to re ﬁne genotype-
phenotype correlation in this complex rearrangement, we
report clinical and chromosomal data from 29 new patientswith invdupdel[8p].
Patients and Method: 3 fetus and 26 patients (mean age:
9.7 years) were included. CGH/SNP array were performedfor all of them.
Results: All living patients (n =26/26) had developmental
delay and ID (n =5/22 mild and n =17/22 moderate to
severe). 16/22 patients had ACC (4 complete agenesis, 7
partial agenesis, and 5 dysplasia), associated with other
cerebral abnormalities in 11 patients. Mean size of thedeletion was 6.9 Mb and duplication was 19.2 Mb. Dis-
cussion - Conclusion: As expected, the severity of ID is
correlated with the size of the duplication. Our study re ﬁnes
the minimal duplicated critical region for ACC to a 1.7 Mb-
long region spanning one gene only, which is a new can-
didate gene for ACC.
R. Vibert: None. B. Keren: None. S. Chantot-Bastar-
aud: None. C. Mignot: None. N. Chatron: None. M.
Portnoï: None. M. Nouguès: None. M. Moutard: None.
A. Faudet: None. S. Whalen: None. D. Haye: None. C.
Pebrel-Richard: None. C. Missirian: None. C. Vincent-
Delorme: None. O. Boute: None. J. Andrieux: None. F.
Devillard: None. C. Coutton: None. S. Taviaux: None.
M. Perez: None. C. Colson: None. D. Sanlaville: None. J.
Siffroi: None. D. Héron: None. S. Heide: None.
P11.46B
KMT2A mutations (Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome): a
new phenotype of corpus callosum agenesis without
intellectual disability
E. Marchionni1, S. Heide1, C. Depienne2, A. Rastetter2,
C. Nava2, J. Buratti1, M. Spentchian1, M. L. Moutard3,
C. Mignot1, B. Keren1, S. Valence3, D. Héron1
1APHP, Département de Génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière,
CRMR Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris,
France,2ICM, UPMC Inserm UMR S975/CNRS UMRAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15117225, Paris, France,3APHP, Hôpital Trousseau, Service de
Neurologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France
Introduction: KMT2A mutations are responsible for
Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WDSTS), a rare autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by dysmorphic features,hypertrichosis, short stature, and intellectual disability (ID).
Corpus callosum anomalies have been described in 16% of
patients. We report here 2 unrelated patients with a de novoKMT2A heterozygous variant presenting with isolated
prenatal agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), and a
normal psychomotor development. Patients: Patient 1:partial ACC was diagnosed prenatally. At 4 years and
6 months of age, he had normal psychomotor development,
whereas attention and praxic disorders were observed,especially in ﬁne motor skills. The WPPSI-III at 4 years ½
showed a heterogenous pro ﬁle. In addition, he had postnatal
weight growth retardation (-2SD) and dysmorphic features.Patient 2: ACC was diagnosed prenatally. At the age of 8
years, he had normal neurodevelopment. WPPSI-IV
performed at 5 years was in a normal range, with aheterogenous pro ﬁle. Mild dysmorphic features were
observed.
Methods: Trio-based Whole Exome Sequencing (WES)
was performed in the 2 male patients and their non-
consanguineous and unaffected parents.
Results: Patient 1: WES analysis detected a novel de
novo heterozygous missense variant in KMT2A
(c.4256G>A; p.Gly1419Asp), predicted as probably
damaging by all prediction tools. Patient 2: WES analysisdetected a de novo heterozygous truncating variant in
KMT2A (c.1539del; p.Ile515Phefs*52).
Conclusions: These two observations expand the
WDSTS phenotypic spectrum, since ID may be absent.
Thus, this syndrome might be considered in cases of iso-
lated corpus callosum anomalies, associated with normaldevelopment.
E. Marchionni: None. S. Heide: None. C. Depienne:
None. A. Rastetter: None. C. Nava: None. J. Buratti:
None. M. Spentchian: None. M.L. Moutard: None. C.
Mignot: None. B. Keren: None. S. Valence: None. D.
Héron: None.
P11.47C
Expansion of the phenotype of Kosaki overgrowthsyndrome, and description of the long-term outcome in
the oldest case
B. Chalot
1,2,3, A. Foster4,5, E. Schaeffer6, C. Rustad7,
K. Tveten8, T. Cole5, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3, J. Woodley9,
A. Bruel10,11, R. Keelagher9, C. Philippe10,11,
T. Antoniadi9, P. Vabres12, D. Lim5, L. Faivre1,2,31Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence « Anomalies
du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs », Hôpital
d’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon,
Dijon, France,2Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique
et moléculaire, UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des
maladies rares, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon,Dijon, France,
3UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD team, Génétique
des Anomalies du développement, Université de Bourgogne
Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,4Institute of Cancer and
Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
United Kingdom,5West Midlands Regional Genetics
Service and Birmingham Health Partners, BirminghamWomen ’s and Children ’s Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom,
6Service de génétique
médicale - Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg - Institutde Génétique Médicale d'Alsace, Strasbourg, France,
7Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway,8Department of Medical Genetics,
Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway,9West Midlands
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women ’s and
Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United
Kingdom,10Inserm –UB UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des
Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon,
France,11Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique
des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France,12Service de Dermatologie,
CHU de Dijon, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France
Introduction: Kosaki overgrowth syndrome (KOGS), ﬁrst
described in 2015, is a rare overgrowth disorder caused byde novo pathogenic variants in the PDGFRB gene. Only 5
paediatric cases have been reported in the literature.
Material and Methods: We present 3 cases of KOGS
living in Europe including the ﬁrst adult patient, gathered
through a collaboration within the ERN ITHACA network.
Results: The French patient, aged 55, has in the past been
reported as a typical case of Sphritzen-Goldberg syndrome
(Stoll, Clin Dysmorphol 2012). Analysis of SKI was
negative, and WES identi ﬁed the recurrent PDGFRB
c.1751C>G variant. The English patient, aged 6, diagnosed
by NGS panel for syndromic overgrowth (de novo
PDGFRB c.1751C>G variant), had tall stature, craniosy-
nostosis, facial features, progressive contractures and
developmental delay. The Norwegian patient, aged 9,
diagnosed by WES (de novo PDGFRB c.1696T>C variant)
had tall stature, severe scoliosis, facial features and devel-
opmental delay. Long-term outcome in the oldest patient
revealed an evolving phenotype with persistent tall staturedespite severe scoliosis not accessible to surgery (188 cm),
extremely fragile skin with diffuse erythrosis, dystrophic
scars due to multiple injuries, nail dystrophy, progressivecamptodactyly, early osteoporosis, basilar artery aneurysm
complicated by a stroke, and severe ocular impairment due1512to complicated surgeries for pterygions. The patient had
normal intelligence, with no cognitive decline nor cerebral
calciﬁcations.
Conclusion: Genotype- ﬁrst approach is a powerful
approach to reach the diagnosis of ultra-rare syndromes.
Indeed, the clinical diagnosis was not raised before NGS,due to the lack of knowledge of this entity.
B. Chalot: None. A. Foster: None. E. Schaeffer: None.
C. Rustad: None. K. Tveten: None. T. Cole: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None. J. Woodley: None. A. Bruel:
None. R. Keelagher: None. C. Philippe: None. T. Anto-
niadi: None. P. Vabres: None. D. Lim: None. L.
Faivre: None.
P11.49A
Further delineation of the phenotypic spectrum of
MCAP in a French cohort of 31 patients
A. Garde
1,2, L. Guibaud3, A. Goldenberg4, F. Petit5,
R. Dard6, J. Mazereeuw-Hautier7, D. Lacombe8,
F. Morice-Picard8, A. Toutain9, S. Arpin9, O. Boccara10,
R. Touraine11, P. Blanchet12, C. Coubes12, M. Willems12,
L. Pinson12, P. Khau Van Kien13, C. Chiaverini14,
F. Giuliano15, J. Alessandri16, M. Mathieu-Dramart17,
A. Bursztejn18, E. Gautier1, M. Yous ﬁ1, M. Luu19,
M. Bardou19, A. Sorlin1,2, C. Philippe2, P. Edery20,
M. Rossi20, V. Carmignac2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,
P. Vabres21,2, L. Faivre1,2
1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et
Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD - CHU de
Dijon, Dijon, France,2Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique
des Anomalies du Développement, Université deBourgogne, Dijon, France,
3Service d'Imagerie Pédiatrique
et Foetale, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Lyon and Claude
Bernard University, Lyon, France,4Service de Génétique,
CHU de Rouen et Inserm U1079, Université de Rouen,
Centre Normand de Génomique Médicale et Médecine
Personnalisée, Rouen, France,5Service de Génétique
Clinique, CHU Lille, Lille, France,6Département de
Génétique, Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction,
CHI Poissy St Germain-en-Laye, St Germain-en-Laye,France,
7Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares de la
Peau, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,8INSERM
U1211, Université de Bordeaux, Service de GénétiqueMédicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,
9Service
de Génétique Clinique, CHRU de Tours, Tours, France,
10Department of Dermatology and Reference Center for
Genodermatoses and Rare Skin Diseases (MAGEC),
Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut
Imagine, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades,Paris, France,
11Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de
Saint-Etienne, Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France,12Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies rares et
Médecine Personnalisée, CHRU de Montpellier,
Montpellier, France,13Unité de Génétique Médicale et
Cytogénétique, CHU de Nîmes, Nîmes, France,14Service de
Dermatologie, CHU de Nice, Nice, France,15Département
de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nice - Hôpital de l'ArchetII, Nice, France,
16Pôle Enfants, CHU de la Réunion -
Hôpital Félix Guyon, Saint Denis, France,17Centre
d'Activité Génétique Clinique et Oncogénétique, CentreHospitalier Universitaire d'Amiens, Amiens, France,
18Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France,
19Centre d'Investigation Clinique INSERM 1432, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France,
20Genetics Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon and
GENDEV team, Lyon Neuroscience Research Centre,INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, Claude Bernard Lyon
1 University, Lyon, France,
21Service de Dermatologie,
CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France
Introduction: MCAP syndrome (megalencephaly-capillary
malformation syndrome) is a genetic disorder that resultsfrom somatic, mosaic, gain of function mutations of the
PI3KCA gene, and belongs to the spectrum of PIK3CA-
related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
Material and Methods: Based on a national collabora-
tion, we described the clinical features of 31 patients with
MCAP syndrome carrying mosaic PIK3CA pathogenic
variants. The objective of this study was to better de ﬁne the
clinical features of patients with MCAP syndrome in con-
nection with imaging features, to improve diagnosis andmanagement.
Results: The mosaic rate was between 0% and 20% in the
blood, between 1% and 47% in the skin, and between 4%and 34% in the saliva. Macrocephaly had been observed in
21/28 patients (75%) at birth, and in 26/28 patients (93%) at
time of the diagnosis. Hemihypertrophy was noticed in 22patients (71%). Intellectual disability was present in 15
patients (50%), ranging from mild to severe, 4 patients had
learning disabilities (12%). Six patients suffered from sei-zures (20%). Cerebral malformations were reported in 23/26
patients: ventriculomegaly (65%), megalencephaly (53%),
cerebellar tonsilla ectopia (35%), polymicrogyria (15%).Correlations between neurogognitive development and
cerebral malformations were made. All patients had cuta-
neous vascular malformation: angioma (53%), cutis mar-morata (29%), capillary malformations (26%). Internal
vascular anomalies are reported on 5 patients (16%). Limb
and distal anomalies were also observed.
Conclusion: This study con ﬁrms the large clinical het-
erogeneity in MCAP, in particular in the neurocognitive
development. This point is of importance for determiningthe outcome measures for future therapeutic trials.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1513A. Garde: None. L. Guibaud: None. A. Goldenberg:
None. F. Petit: None. R. Dard: None. J. Mazereeuw-
Hautier: None. D. Lacombe: None. F. Morice-Picard:
None. A. Toutain: None. S. Arpin: None. O. Boccara:
None. R. Touraine: None. P. Blanchet: None. C. Coubes:
None. M. Willems: None. L. Pinson: None. P. Khau Van
Kien: None. C. Chiaverini: None. F. Giuliano: None. J.
Alessandri: None. M. Mathieu-Dramart: None. A.
Bursztejn: None. E. Gautier: None. M. Yous ﬁ:None. M.
Luu: None. M. Bardou: None. A. Sorlin: None. C. Phi-
lippe: None. P. Edery: None. M. Rossi: None. V. Car-
mignac: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. P. Vabres:
None. L. Faivre: None.
P11.50B
Investigating the Clinical Features Leading to Morbidity
and Mortality in Microcephaly-Capillary Malformation
Syndrome
J. L. Zambonin1, G. Mirzaa2, M. Carter1
1Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontrio, Ottawa, ON,
Canada,2Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA,
United States
Microcephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MIC-
CAP) is a rare neurocutaneous disorder characterized bycongenital microcephaly, multiple capillary malformations,
hypoplastic distal phalanges, infantile-onset intractable
seizures, profound neurologic impairment and abnormalneuroimaging ﬁndings including a diffusely simpli ﬁed
cortical gyral pattern with increased extra-axial space. It is
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the STAMBP gene
and has been reported in only 14 individuals worldwide, to
date. Given the rarity, the full phenotypic spectrum remains
poorly understood with limited natural history and prog-nosis information, as well as guidelines on optimal medical
management. Additionally, there is one reported individual
with a mild phenotype suggesting variable severity, withinsufﬁcient data to de ﬁne genotype-phenotype correlations.
Here we present a case series of patients with MIC-CAP
obtained through a prospective well-designed online surveyof their primary caregivers and physicians. In this study, we
describe the most frequently reported features, management
and impact on disease course. We speci ﬁcally focused on
hallmark features leading to morbidity and decreased life-
span including seizures, neurologic impairment and
respiratory insuf ﬁciency. We report the various therapies
used by affected individuals and perceived bene ﬁts of these
therapies including anti-epileptics medications. Addition-
ally, we describe the spectrum of severity of other majorfeatures in previously reported individuals, including anadditional seven who have not been reported in the litera-
ture to identify genotype-phenotype correlations.
Improved understanding of the hallmark features,
including those leading to morbidity and mortality, in MIC-
CAP syndrome will facilitate early diagnosis, inform man-
agement strategies and provide prognostic information.
J.L. Zambonin: None. G. Mirzaa: None. M.
Carter: None.
P11.51C
Dominant negative effect of ACTG2 mutations in ﬂuence
TGF-beta signaling in MMIHS
Y. Zhao
1,2, J. Burger1,3, Y. Gao2, R. M. W. Hofstra1,4,
M. M. Alves1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department of
Pediatric Surgery, The Second Af ﬁliated Hospital of Xi ׳an
Jiaotong University, Xi ׳an, Shaanxi, China,3Department of
Molecular Genetics, Oncode Institute, Erasmus UniversityMedical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
4Birth Defects
Research Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoper-
istalsis syndrome (MMIHS) is a rare inherited disordercharacterized by bladder hypocontractility, and intestinal
obstruction. Mutations in ﬁve genes have been identi ﬁed as
its cause, but the majority of cases are caused by de novo
heterozygous mutations in the γ-smooth muscle actin gene
(ACTG2 ).ACTG2 encodes for an actin isoform speci ﬁcally
expressed in the intestinal and urogenital tracts. Previousstudies by us and others, have shown that mutated ACTG2
disrupt actin polymerization and result in reduced cellular
contractility. However, the mechanisms underlying theseeffects are still unknown.
Materials and Methods: Wild-type and mutant ACTG2
proteins fused to a GFP and mCherry tag respectively, werestably expressed in U2OS cells and human intestinal
smooth muscle cells. Transfected cells were analyzed by
immuno ﬂuorescence, actin polymerization and cellular
contractility assays. In Parallel, ﬁbroblasts derived from two
MMIHS patients carrying ACTG2 mutations, and three
controls have been used for trans-differentiation assays.Immuno ﬂuorescence, qRT-PCR, and a TGF-beta reporter
assay were performed, to investigate the effect of ACTG2
mutations on cellular differentiation.
Results: Actin polymerization, and cellular contractility
were signi ﬁcantly impaired when the mutant ACTG2 pro-
tein is expressed, alone or in combination with the wild-type. Furthermore, TGF-beta is up-regulated in ﬁbroblasts
derived from MMIHS patients when compared to controls.1514Conclusion: ACTG2 mutations lead to a dysregulation of
the TGF-beta pathway, and reduce cellular contractility by
exerting a dominant negative effect in MMIHS.
Y. Zhao: None. J. Burger: None. Y. Gao: None. R.M.
W. Hofstra: None. M.M. Alves: None.
P11.52D
22q11.2 deletion as a genetic model for multimorbidity
in young adults
A. S. Bassett, S. L. Malecki
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Background: Multimorbidity is increasing in younger
adults but is understudied in the general population.
22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) could act as a
genetic model of multimorbidity in young to middle-agedadults.
Methods: Using Anatomic Therapeutic Classi ﬁcation
(ATC) and setting 5 or more concurrent prescription med-ications as a proxy for multimorbidity, we compared data on
264 adults with 22q11.2DS (median age 27.8, range 17.3-
68.3 years) to that for a community-based general popula-tion sample in Canada (n =25,287). We used logistic
regression to examine possible predictors of multimorbidity
in 22q11.2DS.
Results: Multimorbidity in 22q11.2DS in the 25-44 year
age group (34.7%) was signi ﬁcantly more prevalent than in
the general population, both for the same age group (2.9%,prevalence ratio, PR =11.9) and compared to those aged 45-
64 years (16.4%, PR =2.1). Neuropsychiatric and endocri-
nological ATC medication classes predominated. Within22q11.2DS, older age and psychotic illness, but not sex,
major congenital heart disease or intellectual disability,
were signi ﬁcant predictors of multimorbidity.
Conclusion: The results indicate that adults with
22q11.2DS have a signi ﬁcant burden of illness with levels
of multimorbidity comparable to those of the generalpopulation several decades older. In younger adults with
multimorbidity, certain disease patterns may also help
identify genetic disorders in “big data ”.
A.S. Bassett: None. S.L. Malecki: None.
P11.53A
Transversal cohort analysis with data aggregation of
singleton exome sequencing signi ﬁcantly increases the
diagnostic yield for the diagnosis of fetuses with multiplecongenital abnormalities
A. Bruel
1,2, M. Lefebvre1, N. Bourgon1, Y. Duffourd1,
M. Assoum1, P. Kuentz1, E. Schaefer3, S. El Chehadeh3,
M. Antal4, V. Kremer5, F. Girard-Lemaire5, J. Mandel6,D. Lehalle7, S. Nambot7, N. Jean-Marçais7, N. Houcinat7,
S. Moutton1,7, N. Marle8, L. Lambert9, P. Jonveaux10,
B. Foliguet11, J. Mazutti11, D. Gaillard12, E. Alanio12,
C. Poirisier13, A. Lebre14, M. Aubert-Lenoir15, F. Arbez-
Gindre16, S. Odent17, C. Quelin17,18, P. Loget18,
M. Fradin17, M. Willems19,N .B i g i20, M. Perez20,
S. Blesson21, C. Francannet22, A. Beaufrere23,
S. Patrier24, A. Guerrot25, A. Goldenberg25, N. Laurent26,
C. Philippe1,2, F. Tran Mau-Them1,27, J. Thevenon1,7,
L. Faivre1,7, C. Thauvin1,7, A. Vitobello1,7
1Inserm –UB UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies
du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,
2Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique des
maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon,France,
3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de
Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France,
4Service de F œtopathologie, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital
de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France,5Laboratoire de
cytogénétique constitutionnelle et prénatale, CHU de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,6Département Médecine
translationnelle et neurogénétique, Institut de génétique et
de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire, Strasbourg, France,
7Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Développement et
syndromes malformatifs », Centre de Génétique, FHU-
TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,
8Laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire,
CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,9UF de génétique médicale,
Maternité régionale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France,
10Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy,
Nancy, France,11Laboratoire de Biologie de la
Reproduction et du Développement Maternité de Nancy,
Nancy, France,12Service de foetopathologie, CHU de
Reims, Reims, France,13Laboratoire de cytogénétique,
CHU de Reims, Reims, France,14Service de Génétique et
Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU de Reims, Reims,France,
15Service d ’imagerie médicale, CHU de Besançon,
Besançon, France,16Service de f œtopathologie, CHU de
Besançon, Besançon, France,17Service de génétique
clinique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France,18Service de
fœtopathologie, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France,19Equipe
Maladies Génétiques de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte, CHU deMontpellier, Montpellier, France,
20. Service de
fœtopathologie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
21Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire
Tours, Tour, France,22Service de génétique médicale,
CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France,
23Service de f œtopathologie, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand,
Clermont-Ferrand, France,24Service de f œtopathologie,
CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,25Service de génétique
clinique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,26Service de
fœtopathologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,27Unité
Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique des maladiesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1515rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon,
France
Exome sequencing (ES) harbors a diagnostic yield in
fetuses with multiple congenital abnormalities (MCA)
(25%) higher than any other diagnostic tool in fetalpathology but lower than in live birth individuals with
malformations (30-35%). Most fetuses remaining undiag-
nosed deprive couples of obtaining precise geneticcounseling and molecular diagnosis in future pregnancies.
This limited yield is explained by fetal wide phenotypic
variability and dif ﬁculties to de ﬁne precise phenotypes.
Here, we aimed to assess the contribution of ES to diagnose
MCA fetuses and also identify new genes. We performed
singleton ES in 95 MCA fetuses undiagnosed after currentinvestigations. Fetal DNA quantity/quality permitted ES in
only 95/151 fetuses. The strategy combined usual indivi-
dual ES analysis and an original cohort analysis based onbioinformatics scores and variant databases independently
of fetal phenotype. We selected variants on the following
criteria: truncating with a signi ﬁcant probability of loss-of-
function intolerance (pLI =0.9-1), reported in denovo-db
database, reported (likely) pathogenic in ClinVAR database,
or with probably recessive mode of inheritance. Usualindividual ES identi ﬁed pathogenic or likely pathogenic
variants in 21/95 fetuses (22%). The cohort analysis
identi ﬁed not only these 21 variants but also additional
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 3/95 fetuses
(4%), increasing the diagnostic yield from 22% to 25%. 9
candidate genes were suspected in 8/95 fetuses (8%)remaining to be replicated. In conclusion, this original
strategy increased the diagnostic yield in a fetal cohort with
atypical or non-described phenotype and could so beapplied to other heterogeneous cohorts with developmental
abnormalities.
A. Bruel: None. M. Lefebvre: None. N. Bourgon:
None. Y. Duffourd: None. M. Assoum: None. P. Kuentz:
None. E. Schaefer: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. M.
Antal: None. V. Kremer: None. F. Girard-Lemaire:
None. J. Mandel: None. D. Lehalle: None. S. Nambot:
None. N. Jean-Marçais: None. N. Houcinat: None. S.
Moutton: None. N. Marle: None. L. Lambert: None. P.
Jonveaux: None. B. Foliguet: None. J. Mazutti: None. D.
Gaillard: None. E. Alanio: None. C. Poirisier: None. A.
Lebre: None. M. Aubert-Lenoir: None. F. Arbez-
Gindre: None.
S. Odent: None. C. Quelin: None. P.
Loget: None. M. Fradin: None. M. Willems: None. N.
Bigi: None. M. Perez: None. S. Blesson: None. C. Fran-
cannet: None. A. Beaufrere: None. S. Patrier: None. A.
Guerrot: None. A. Goldenberg: None. N. Laurent: None.
C. Philippe: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. J. The-
venon: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin: None. A.
Vitobello: None.P11.54B
New recurrent 2q12.2q12.3 microdeletion involving
ST6GAL2 gene in a boy with neurological phenotype
E. Tassano, T. Giacomini, S. Uccella, M. Celle,
M. Malacarne, G. Gimelli, D. Coviello, P. Ronchetto
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy
Recurrent microdeletion and microduplication syndromes
are among the most common causes of human neurodeve-
lopmental and psychiatric disorders. These reciprocalgenomic disorders often result from non-allelic homologous
recombination (NAHR) between near-identical segmental
duplications. Copy number changes mediated by segmentalduplications may be either pathogenic or may exist as
benign variants in the human population.
However, almost all pathogenic CNVs are characterized
by a range of phenotypic outcomes (variable expressivity)
and by unaffected family members who carry the same
CNV (incomplete penetrance). Here we report a boy withmild intellectual disability, speech delay, and hypotonia
presenting a 1.56 Mb interstitial deletion at 2q12.2-12.3
inherited from his healthy father. The microdeletionincludes three OMIM genes, of which ST6GAL2 , in our
opinion, is the most interesting. This gene encodes a beta-
galactoside alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase expressed in brainand its transcription could be potentially activated for spe-
ciﬁc neuronal functions. In the literature four cases have
been reported with microdeletions/microduplications com-prising ST6GAL2 gene and associated with neurological
diseases. In DECIPHER database seventeen individuals
have been identi ﬁed with deletions similar to that of our
case and neurological disease as intellectual disability,
delayed speech, autism. Ten patients inherited the deletion
from an apparently unaffected parent. It is interesting tonote that all these microdeletions are very similar in
extension and are possibly mediated by NAHR.
In conclusion, we describe a new recurrent microdeletion
2q12.2-12.3 containing the ST6GAL2 gene, which may be a
signiﬁcant and independent risk factor for neurological
diseases acting in association with other factors to modifyneurological phenotypes.
E. Tassano: None. T. Giacomini: None. S. Uccella:
None. M. Celle: None. M. Malacarne: None.
G. Gimelli:
None. D. Coviello: None. P. Ronchetto: None.
P11.55C
Expanding the LZTR1-RASopathy association: Three
new cases of Noonan Syndrome with LZTR1 mutations
P. Fernández Alvarez1, I. Valenzuela Palafoll1, F. López
Grondona1, M. Masas Castro1, L. Iranzo Nuez1,1516I. Paramonov1, L. Blasco Perez1, E. García-Arumi1,2,
E. Tizzano1,2
1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics. Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,2Biomedical
Network Research Centre on RareDiseases (CIBERER),Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
Since the ﬁrst publication in 2014, LZTR1 missense gain of
function variants have been associated with Noonan
Syndrome (NS) in both dominant and recessive pattern,
with the dominant variants clustering on the different Kelchmotifs of the protein. Here we present 3 new index cases of
Noonan syndrome with variants in LZTR1. Two of them
have novel unreported variants. Case 1. A 12 year old boy,with prenatal polyhydramnios, unilateral ptosis, relative
macrocephaly, short stature (p10), cryptorchidism and
pulmonary valve stenosis. He also presented mild languagedelay. Genetic testing identi ﬁed a heterozygous missense
variant c.848G>A p.(Arg283Gln) located on the Kelch4
motif previously reported in another NS individual (Umekiet al. 2018). Case 2. A 42 year old man with dysmorphic
features of NS, short stature (p3), cryptorchidism, bicuspid
aortic valve and visual loss. Genetic testing identi ﬁed a
heterozygous missense new variant c.289C>T (.(Arg97Trp)
in the Kelch1 motif. The same variant was detected in his
69 year old mother who shared dysmorphic features andshort stature. Case 3. A 22 year old woman with neonatal
diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in context of
multiple angiomas. She also presented short stature (p3),pectus carinatum, scoliosis and dysmoprhic facial features
resembling Noonan syndrome. She is heterozygous for the
new variant c.905C>T p.(Ala302Glu) located on the Kelch5 motif. These 3 new cases in patients with clinical
diagnosis of NS and variants in LZTR1 further help to
delineate the phenotype of NS patients, expanding theLZTR1-RASopathy association
P. Fernández Alvarez: None. I. Valenzuela Palafoll:
None. F. López Grondona: None. M. Masas Castro:
None. L. Iranzo Nuez: None. I. Paramonov: None. L.
Blasco Perez: None. E. García-Arumi: None. E.
Tizzano: None.
P11.56D
Phenotypic spectrum associated with SPECC1Lpathogenic variants: new families and critical review of
the nosology of Teebi, Opitz GBBB, and Baraitser-
Winter syndromes
A. VERLOES
1, D. Haye2, A. Toutain3, D. Bonneau4,
I. Kibæk Nielsen5, I. Bay Lund6, P. Bogaard7,
S. Leenskjold7, K. Karaer8, K. T. Wild9, K. L. Grand9,
M. C. Astiazaran10, L. A. Gonzalez-Nieto11, A. Carvalho12,D. Lehalle13, S. M. Amudhavalli14, E. Repnikova15,
C. Saunders15, I. Thiffault15, I. Thiffault15, I. Saadi16,
D. Li17, H. Hakonarson17, Y. Vial1, E. Zackai9,
P. Callier13, S. Drunat1, E. E. Bhoj9
1Department of Genetics, APHP-Robert DEBRE University
Hospital, Sorbonne Paris-Cité University, and INSERM
UMR 1141, PARIS, France,2Department of Genetics,
PARIS, France,3Bretonneau University Hospital, Tours,
France,4Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, and
UMR CNRS 6015 INSERM 1083, University Hospital,
Angers, France,5Department of Genetics, Aalborg
University Hospital,, aalborg, Denmark,6Department of
Pathology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark,7Department of GynObs, Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,8Dr Ersin Arslan Research
and Training Hospital, Department Of Medical Genetics,
Gaziantep, Turkey,9Department of Genetics, Children´s
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
10Genetics Department, Research Unit-Genetics
Department, Institute of Ophthalmology, Conde deValenciana, Mexico City, Mexico,
11Genetics Department,
Research Unit-Genetics Department, Institute of
Ophthalmology, Conde de Valenciana, Mexico City,Mexico,
12Clinical Genetics Department, Coimbra
Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal,13Children
University Hospital, Dijon, France,14Division of Clinical
Genetics, Children ’s Mercy Hospital, University of
Missouri Kansas City, School of Medicine, Kansas City,
MO, United States,15Center for Pediatric Genomic
Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Children ’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO,
United States,16Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, MO,
United States,17Center for Applied Genomics, Children´s
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States
The SPECC1L protein plays a role in adherens junctions
involved in cell adhesion, actin cytoskeleton organization,microtubule stabilization, spindle organization and cytokin-
esis. It modulates PI3K-AKT signaling and controls cranial
neural crest cell delamination during facial morphogenesis.SPECC1L causative variants were ﬁrst identi ﬁed in
individuals with oblique facial clefts. Recently, causative
variants in SPECC1L were reported in a pedigree reported
in 1988 as atypical Opitz GBBB syndrome. Six families
with SPECC1L variants have been reported thus far. We
report here eight further pedigrees with SPECC1L variants,
including a three-generation family, and a further individual
of a previously published family. We discuss the nosology
of Teebi and GBBB, and the syndromes related toSPECC1L variants. Although the phenotype of individuals
with SPECC1L mutations shows overlap with OpitzAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1517syndrome in its craniofacial anomalies, the canonical
laryngeal malformations and male genital anomalies are
not observed. Instead, individuals with SPECCL1 variants
have branchial ﬁstulae, omphalocele, diaphragmatic her-
nias, and uterus didelphis. We also point to the clinical
overlap of SPECC1L syndrome with mild Baraitser-Winter
craniofrontofacial syndrome: they share similar dysmorphic
features (wide, short nose with a large tip, cleft lip and
palate, blepharoptosis, retrognathia, and craniosynostosis),although intellectual disability, neuronal migration defect,
and muscular problems remain largely speci ﬁc to Baraitser-
Winter syndrome. In conclusion, we suggest that patientswith pathogenic variants in SPECC1L should not be
described as “dominant (or type 2) Opitz GBBB syn-
drome ”, and instead should be referred to as “SPECC1L
syndrome ”as both disorders show distinctive, non over-
lapping developmental anomalies beyond facial
communalities.
A. Verloes: None. D. Haye: None. A. Toutain: None. D.
Bonneau: None. I. Kibæk Nielsen: None. I. Bay Lund:
None. P. Bogaard: None. S. Leenskjold: None. K. Kar-
aer: None. K.T. Wild: None. K.L. Grand: None. M.C.
Astiazaran: None. L.A. Gonzalez-Nieto: None. A. Car-
valho: None. D. Lehalle: None. S.M. Amudhavalli: None.
E. Repnikova: None. C. Saunders: None. I. Thiffault:
None. I. Thiffault: None. I. Saadi: None. D. Li: None. H.
Hakonarson: None. Y. Vial: None. E. Zackai: None. P.
Callier: None. S. Drunat: None. E.E. Bhoj: None.
P11.57A
Integrated clinical-molecular diagnostic criteria for
mosaic overgrowth syndromes
J. C. Sapp, A. Buser, J. Burton-Akright, L. G. Biesecker
NHGRI, Bethesda, MD, United States
Establishing robust clinical diagnostic criteria for mosaic
disorders is dif ﬁcult because of variation in the number of
mutant cells amongst patients. Using Proteus syndrome as
an example, a patient with a high level of mutant cells is
easy to diagnose, but one with few mutant cells may beimpossible to recognize. Also, some tumors have the AKT1
c.49G>A p.(E17K) variant, and this is not Proteus
syndrome. Also, some aspects of the phenotype are notunique to Proteus syndrome. We therefore recognize that
proper diagnosis must integrate both clinical and molecular
aspects. To address this, we have developed an integrated,clinical-molecular diagnostic system that de ﬁnes a robust
threshold for Proteus syndrome stricto sensu and a broader
category of what we term ‘AKT1 -related overgrowth
spectrum ’. Each Proteus syndrome manifestation is
assigned a weighted score with associated manifestationsreceiving a positive, weighted score (e.g., the cerebriform
connective tissue nevus) and each atypical manifestation
receiving a negative, weighted score (e.g., congenital, non-
CNS overgrowth). The presence of an AKT1 mosaic variant
was assigned a high positive score. We piloted these criteria
on the NIH mosaic overgrowth cohort and adjusted andadapted them to achieve agreement on appropriate thresh-
olds. We suggest that this semi-quantitative, integrated
clinical-molecular diagnostic approach is generalizable toother mosaic disorders, with its most important contribution
being the formal recognition that patients with lower variant
burdens have a related, but distinct and milder disorder thatmust be differentiated from the classic form of the disorder.
J.C. Sapp: None. A. Buser: None. J. Burton-Akright:
None. L.G. Biesecker: C. Other Research Support (sup-
plies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support);
Modest; ArQule, Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Illumina, Inc.. Other; Modest; Royalties:Genentech, Inc..
P11.58B
Multiple anomalies in an adult case with pentasomy X
D. L. Stoicanescu
1, M. L. Cevei2, C. R. Gug1, A. Simedrea1
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,
Romania,2University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine&
Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania
Pentasomy X is a very rare chromosomal disorder, the exact
prevalence is not known. Even rarer are descriptions of
adult cases. We present a 20 years old girl hospitalized for
functional rehabilitation. She was born from healthy, young,unrelated parents. Mother reported severe nausea and
vomiting during early pregnancy, birth at term, pelvic
presentation, Apgar 10. Medical history revealed multiplecorrective orthopedic surgeries such as osteotomies and
elongations/tendon transpositions for the skeletal abnorm-
alities, operated and recidivate varus equin, bilateral genuvalgum operated and relapsed, atrial septal defect without
indication for surgery, moderate mental retardation, primary
nocturnal enuresis, mixt astigmatism. She was diagnosedwith cerebral palsy, spastic diparesis, periventricular
leukomalacia. Clinical and functional evaluation revealed
normal height, 174 cm, overweight, microcephaly, hyperte-lorism, epicantus, bilateral corneal leukoma, divergent
strabismus, low-set ears and mandibular prognathism. She
had many bone and joint anomalies such as clinodactily,right varus equin, bilateral genu valgum with marked latero-
lateral and antero-posterior instability, congenital right hip
dislocation with femoral head necrosis, congenital left hipsubluxation, shortening of the right lower limb by 2 cm,
right radial head subluxation with functional impairment of1518the right elbow, hyperextension of the left elbow, moderate
motor de ﬁcit and muscular hypotonia in both lower limbs,
dorso-lumbar sinistro-convex scoliosis, dorsal kyphosis,
lumbar lordosis, generalized ligamentous laxity. She was
able to walk independently with right knee marked
deviation in valgus, typical cerebral palsy gait. Our patientwas a rare case, an adult with atypical height, multiple
musculoskeletal congenital defects associated with eye and
heart anomalies.
D.L. Stoicanescu: None. M.L. Cevei: None. C.R. Gug:
None. A. Simedrea: None.
P11.59C
First case of osteolysis in a patient with clinical and
molecular diagnosis of CLOVES syndrome
V. Martinez-Glez
1, G. Gordo1, L. Rodriguez-Laguna1,
J. Tenorio1, N. Agra1, P. Arias1, F. Santos1, S. Garcia-
Minaur1, E. Vallespín1, R. Martín-Arenas1, A. del Pozo1,
M. Feito2, J. C. Lopez-Gutierrez3, P. Lapunzina1
1INGEMM-CIBERER-IdiPaz-Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Department of Dermatology, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,3Vascular Anomalies
Center, Plastic Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain
The PIK3CA Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS)
includes a large number of pathologies showing clinical
overlap due to sharing the same causing gene ( PIK3CA ) and
genetic mechanism (somatic mosaicism). The clinical
manifestations in PROS depend on the time and place
during the embryonic development in which the mutationoccurred. One of the most recognizable syndromes within
the PROS spectrum is CLOVES (Congenital Lipomatous
Overgrowth, Vascular malformations, Epidermal nevi,Scoliosis/Skeletal/Spinal anomalies), which presents a
larger clinical severity associated with a wide distribution
of affected tissues due to the appearance of early mutations.Recently, we have described that Generalized Lymphatic
Anomaly (GLA) may also be caused by somatic, activating
mutations in PIK3CA . An intriguing clinical feature in GLA
is the presence of osteolysis associated with hyperplastic
lymphatics in bone. It is not known why bone loss occurs in
GLA but has not been described in isolated lymphaticmalformations or in the rest of the PROS syndromes with
more pleiotropic clinical features. We present a patient with
a clinical diagnosis of CLOVES, in whom there is also avertebral lytic lesion accompanied by a venous/lymphatic
component. The patient shows the variant PIK3CA:
c.241G>A;p.Glu81Lys, detected in a mosaic of 8.53% inthe affected tissue and absent in blood and saliva samples.
This is the ﬁrst description of phenotypic overlap betweenosteolysis and other PROS spectrum syndromes, supporting
the inclusion of GLA within this spectrum. This research
was supported by the project IP-17 from the call “Todos
Somos Raros ”, and Co- ﬁnanced by ISCIII, FEDER FUNDS
FIS PI17/00519.
V. Martinez-Glez: None. G. Gordo: None. L. Rodri-
guez-Laguna: None. J. Tenorio: None. N. Agra: None. P.
Arias: None. F. Santos: None. S. Garcia-Minaur: None.
E. Vallespín: None. R. Martín-Arenas: None. A. del
Pozo: None. M. Feito: None. J.C. Lopez-Gutierrez:
None. P. Lapunzina: None.
P11.60D
Mosaic activating PIK3CA mutations during early
embryonic development cause ectopic muscledevelopment and upper limb overgrowth
F. Taylan
1, S. Frisk1,2, I. Blaszczyk3, I. Nennesmo4,
G. Annerén5, E. Stattin5, V. Zachariadis1,6,
A. Lindstrand1,2, B. Tesi1,2, T. Laurell7, A. Nordgren1,2
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center
for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska
University Laboratory, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden,3Department of Surgical and
Perioperative Sciences, Hand and Plastic Surgery, UmeåUniversity Hospital, Umeå, Sweden,
4Department of
Pathology, Karolinska University Laboratory, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,5Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,6Present
address: Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden,
7Department of
Hand Surgery, Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden
Activating somatic mutations in the phosphatidylinositol-
4,5-bisphospate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha ( PIK3CA )
gene cause PIK3CA -Related Overgrowth Spectrum
(PROS). The timing and location of the PIK3CA mutations
can explain the phenotypic heterogeneity within PROS.
Here, we present a 4-year-old male individual (P1) and an18-year-old female individual (P2) with a PROS phenotype
with isolated muscle overgrowth of upper limbs and ectopic
muscles. P1 had four ectopic muscles and unilateral isolatedmuscle overgrowth and P2 had 13 ectopic muscles and
bilateral symmetric isolated muscle overgrowth of upper
limbs. Sequencing and digital PCR on DNA extracted frombiopsies from hypertrophic ectopic muscles identi ﬁed
mosaic PIK3CA mutations p.His1047Arg (VAF 18%) and
p.Glu542Lys (VAF 26%) in P1 and P2, respectively. SinceP2 has bilateral ﬁndings, the mutation might have occurred
before day 15 after fertilization in a cell of the primitiveAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1519streak in the middle of the embryo. The mutation in P1
might have occurred after day 21 post-fertilization since his
muscular overgrowth is unilateral. Observation of super-
numerary muscles in locations in the upper extremity where
there should not be muscles implies that the cells with
PIK3CA mutations might have differentiated into muscles
instead of tendons or fascia. Our ﬁndings highlight that the
timing of PIK3CA mutagenesis during embryonic develop-
ment has an impact on the phenotype and PI3K has a role inpluripotency and cell fate in early human development.
Grants: The Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation, the
Swedish Cancer Society, the Swedish Research Council,Karolinska Institutet, Berth von Kantzow ’s foundation, The
Hållsten Research Foundation
F. Taylan: None. S. Frisk: None. I. Blaszczyk: None. I.
Nennesmo: None. G. Annerén: None. E. Stattin: None.
V. Zachariadis: None. A. Lindstrand: None. B. Tesi:
None. T. Laurell: None. A. Nordgren: None.
P11.61A
Clinical and genetic features of prader-willi syndrome invietnam
L. T. An
1, N. T. H. Dinh1,L .T .L e1, M. T. P. Nguyen1,
T. M. Ngo1, N. D. Ngo1,A .N .D o1,D .C .V u1,H .T .L e1,
H. T. Phan2
1Vietnam National Children's Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam,
2Hanoi medical university, Hanoi, Viet Nam
Introduction: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex
genetic disorder that results from the lack of paternally
expressed in the chromosome 15q11-q13 region. This studywas performed to delineate the clinical and genetic features
of children with PWS.
Methods: The clinical signs were studied. Karyotype,
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization, methylation- speci ﬁc
polymerase chain reaction and subsequent methylation-
speciﬁc multiplex ligation- dependent probe ampli ﬁcation
were used to describe characteristics of genetic classes of
PWS. Data were collected on 101 patients with a molecular
diagnosis of PWS at Vietnam National Children ’s Hospital.
Results: The mean age at diagnosis was 30.2 months.
Most patients who showed the characteristics of facial
dysmorphism. 92.1% had neonatal hypotonia and feedingdifﬁculties, 61.4% of the neonates were hospitalized, 11.8%
had obesity, 79.6% showed developmental delays and
cryptorchidism was 84%. Among 101 patients, 51 patientshad been treated with growth hormon (GH) and GH treat-
ment resulted in an increase of insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1) and a decrease in obesity. Deletion subtype waspresent in 86 patients (85.1%), 4 patients had a transloca-
tion, one case is an unique PWS deletions. mUPD, ID wereobserved in 15 patients (14.9%). Signi ﬁcantly older mothers
(mean age =31.9 years vs 28.2 years) were found in the
mUPD, ID group compared with the deletion subtype.
Conclusions: The mean age at diagnosis was late.
Increase IGF-1 and decrease obesity rate after GH treat-
ment. The risk of mUPD may also increase with maternalage or this suggests that ethnic differences be relevant
for PWS.
L.T. An: None. N.T.H. Dinh: None. L.T. Le: None. M.
T.P. Nguyen: None. T.M. Ngo: None. N.D. Ngo: None. A.
N. Do: None. D.C. Vu: None. H.T. Le: None. H.T.
Phan: None.
P11.62B
A lower BMI and growth hormone use results indecreased mortality in Prader-Willi syndrome
J. N. Prof ﬁt
1,2, K. Osann1, B. MacManus3, M. G. Butler4,
V. E. Kimonis1, J. Heinemann3, D. Stevenson5,
J. A. Gold6,7,8
1University California Irvine, Orange, CA, United States,
2Perinatal Genetics Clinic, Stanford Medical Center,
Stanford, CA, United States,3Prader-Willi Syndrome
Association (USA), Sarasota, FL, United States,4University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, United States,
5Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,6Dept. of
Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomics University
California Irvine, Orange, CA, United States,7Dept. of
Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Addenbrookes CambridgeUniversity NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
8Loma
Linda University Childrens Hospital, Loma Linda, CA,
United States
Early mortality has been reported in PWS. Recent studies
have shown an increase in survival estimates in the last 20years. The hypothesis is that it is due to preventative
measures to avoid morbid obesity. The PWS Association
(PWSA) USA created a long standing bereavement andresearch program to investigate causes of death and collect
data in living individuals with PWS. A familial-response
questionnaires from the PWSA (USA), tested the hypoth-esis that body mass index (BMI), age of diagnosis, clinical
symptoms, and growth hormone treatment differ among
deceased and living individuals with PWS. Data wereavailable on a total of 2,029 individuals with PWS (114
deceased and 1,915 living) from the USA. Categorical and
continuous variables were compared using chi-square andtwo-group t-tests, respectively. For categorical variables,
the effect of age was limited by stratifying for age (<20y v.
≥20y) and birth year (<1994 v. ≥1994) and testing with a
Mantel-Haenszel test. For continuous variables, the effect of
age was limited by adjusting for age as a continuous1520variable in logistic regression. Average age at death was
31.6 years. Deceased individuals had lower rates of growth
hormone use (p<0.001) and higher rates of increased weight
compared to living individuals. BMI in living and deceased
individuals with PWS were 28.6 (SD =11.9) and 51.7
(SD=21.7), respectively (p<0.001). This study highlights
the bene ﬁts of growth hormone, external control of weight,
early diagnosis, and the need for a low threshold for
bringing affected individuals to medical attention.
J.N. Prof ﬁt:None. K. Osann: None. B. MacManus:
None. M.G. Butler: None. V.E. Kimonis: None. J. Hei-
nemann: None. D. Stevenson: None. J.A. Gold: None.
P11.63C
Neutralization of heat shock transcription factor 1 incells from segmental overgrowth syndrome patients
blocks abnormal proliferation
L. Duplomb
1, R. Da Costa1, M. Chevarin1, S. Hadj-
Rabia2, S. Lecler-Mercier3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,
C. Garrido1, L. Faivre1, P. Vabres1, G. Jego1
1INSERM 1231, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France,
2Department of Dermatology, Necker-Enfants Malades
Hospital, Paris, France,3Department of Pathology,
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France
PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Syndromes (PROS) are
caused by mosaicism mutations in the PIK3CA gene. The
use of speci ﬁc inhibitors to target PI3K or mTOR in PROS
was recently found to lead to disease regression. However,
the downstream effectors of the PI3K/mTOR pathways
speciﬁcally involved in the pathogenicity of PROS remain
unknown. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the
major stress-responsive transcription factor. Recent ﬁndings
indicate that AKT phosphorylates and activates HSF1independently of heat-shock in breast cancer cells. We
aimed to investigate the role of HSF1 in PROS.
We found elevated phosphorylation and activation of
HSF1 in cells from PROS patients, which are directly cor-
related to the presence of activated form of AKT. In line
with its function as a transcription factor, active HSF1localized in the nucleus of cells from PROS but not in
control donors. Inhibition of PI3K or mTOR activity
strongly reduced HSF1 activation in patient cells. Messen-ger RNA expression of 47 genes that are known to be
regulated by HSF1 were repeatedly down-expressed upon
PI3K inhibition. We also observed that targeting HSF1 withspeciﬁc inhibitors reduced the proliferation of mutant cells
as efﬁciently as PI3K or mTOR inhibitors. The increased
number of cells entering the S phase of the cell cycle, whichis characteristic of PROS, was completely blunted by HSF1inhibitors. Interestingly, CCND2, a major cell cycle reg-
ulatory protein was down-expressed upon functional inhi-
bition of HSF1.
Conclusion: Our results identify HSF1 as a new potential
therapeutic target in PROS.
L. Duplomb: None. R. Da Costa: None. M. Chevarin:
None. S. Hadj-Rabia: None. S. Lecler-Mercier: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. Garrido: None. L. Faivre:
None. P. Vabres: None. G. Jego: None.
P11.64D
PUF60 splicing variant in a boy with coloboma, short
stature and subtle facial features
S. MIZUNO
1, M. Izawa2, S. Miyatake3, M. Inaba1,
K. Kato1, Y. Muramatsu1, H. Taniai1, N. Matsumoto3
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aichi Developmental
Disability Center Hospital, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan,2Aichi
Children ’s Health and Medical Center, Obu, Aichi, Japan,
3Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan
Recent studies have clari ﬁed that microdeletion involving
PUF60 [Poly(U) Binding Splicing Factor 60] and de novo
variants in PUF60 cause multiple congenital anomalies and
intellectual disability. We report a boy with a PUF60
variant and coloboma, congenital heart disease, and short
stature. He was born uneventfully to healthy unrelated
parents, with around average birth weight and height. Heunderwent surgical ligation at 7 months for symptomatic
patent ductus arteriosus. He had recurrent febrile seizures in
infancy. He walked by 17 months and spoke his ﬁrst word
by 15 months. His facial features include a square face,
webbed neck, broad nasal bridge, long eyelashes, dark thick
eyebrows, ﬂat philtrum, thin upper vermilion and dental
crowding. His square face and large teeth were similar to
KBG syndrome. He had a right choroidal coloboma
(corrected visual acuity 0.06), short stature (Z-score -2.5)and borderline head circumference. He goes to junior high
school without special needs. Whole exome sequencing of
the boy and his parents identi ﬁed a de novo novel variant in
PUF60 [NM_078480, c.297 +1G>A]. RT-PCR analysis of
lymphoblastoid cells from the patient and a control
identi ﬁed an abnormal splicing event involving intron
4 sequences in the patient but not in the control. The
abnormal splicing product underwent nonsense mediated
mRNA decay.
Conclusion: This case of a PUF60 pathogenic variant in
a boy with coloboma, congenital heart disease, short stature,
subtle facial features, and normal intellectual developmentsuggests that PUF60 variants should be considered inAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1521syndromic phenotypes with coloboma with or without
intellectual disability.
S. Mizuno: None. M. Izawa: None. S. Miyatake: None.
M. Inaba: None. K. Kato: None. Y. Muramatsu: None.
H. Taniai: None. N. Matsumoto: None.
P11.65A
Novel homozygous nonsense PXDN mutation detected
by whole exome sequencing causing anterior segmentdysgenesis
E. Kritioti
1,2,3, N. Nicolaou2, A. Alexandrou1,
A. Syrimis2,3, I. Papaevripidou1, A. Theodosiou1,
V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou2,4, C. Sismani1,3,
G. A. Tanteles2
1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus
Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3The Cyprus
School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute ofNeurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
4Clinical
Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Anterior segment dysgeneses (ASMD - MIM #269400)
encompass a spectrum of anterior chamber ocular develop-mental defects affecting the cornea, iris, and lens and are
generally associated with a signi ﬁcant risk for glaucoma.
Clinical features include iris hypoplasia, corneal opacity,posterior embryotoxon, corectopia, polycoria, an abnormal
iridocorneal angle, ectopia lentis, and anterior synechiae
between the iris and posterior corneal surface.
We report on a Greek-Cypriot male born to parents who
were distantly related. He presented with bilateral iris
defects, extensive anterior synechiae, posterior embry-otoxon, nystagmus, glaucoma and cataracts. Other non-
ocular abnormalities included bilateral hydronephrosis,
vesicoureteric obstruction, bilateral megaureter and bipolardisorder.
Negative investigations included array-CGH, MLPA for
PAX6 deletions and Sanger sequencing of PAX6, FOXC1
andPITX2 . Trio-based WES was subsequently performed
on the Illumina NextSeq500 platform using the TruSeq
DNA exome library kit. Bioinformatics analysis was carriedout using an in-house pipeline according to the Genome
Analysis Toolkit Best Practices.
Homozygosity for a novel nonsense PXDN p.(Gly700*)
variant was identi ﬁed in the index case. The variant was
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing as was parental carrier
status.
In conclusion, a novel, homozygous PXDN variant was
identi ﬁed with a strong phenotypic correlation. Otherreports of PXDN mutations have been associated with
autosomal recessive ASMD in patients with similar phe-
notypes. It is currently unknown whether the proband ’s
non-ocular phenotypes are linked to PXDN ; therefore, more
similar cases are needed to reach a correlation. These results
highlight the strength of WES as a diagnostic tool and thediversity of phenotypes caused by PXDN mutations.
E. Kritioti: None. N. Nicolaou: None. A. Alexandrou:
None. A. Syrimis: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. A.
Theodosiou: None. V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou:
None. C. Sismani: None. G.A. Tanteles: None.
P11.66B
A clinical utility study of diagnosing genetic disorders in
newborns admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
A. C. Deden
1,2, L. E. L. M. Vissers3, R. A. C. M. Olde
Keizer4, G. W. J. Frederix4, RADICON-NL,
P. Andriessen5, K. A. Bergman6, R. A. van Lingen7,
L. S. de Vries8, K. D. Lichtenbelt9, W. S. Kerstjens-
Frederikse2, I. P. C. Krapels10, J. S. Klein Wassink-
Ruiter2, K. Neveling1, M. Nelen1, S. Castelein1, M. del
Rosario1, S. van den Heuvel1, C. Gilissen1, E. Kamsteeg1,
R. Pfundt1, T. Rinne1, H. G. Yntema1, R. J. Sinke2,
W. P. de Boode11, W. A. G. Zelst-Stams12
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of
Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University
of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,3Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition,
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Julius Center for Health Sciences
and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands,5Department of
Neonatology, Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven,Netherlands,
6Department of Neonatology, Beatrix
Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands,7Department of Neonatology,
Princess Amalia Department of Pediatrics, Isala, Zwolle,
Netherlands,8Department of Neonatology, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital, Utrecht University, Utrecht,Netherlands,
9Department of Medical Genetics, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
10Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,11Department of
Neonatology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Amalia Children ’s
Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands,12Department of Human
Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud
Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands1522Rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) is feasible, but
awaits embedding in routine clinical care in most hospitals.
We hypothesized that routine rWES will profoundly
increase genetic diagnoses for critically ill newborns,
leading to improved patient care. Therefore we performed
a clinical utility study assessing the value of genetic testingin routine neonatal clinical practice. In a multi-centre
prospective study set-up, 60 critically ill newborns with a
presumed genetic disorder received rWES, parallel toroutine genetic testing. To obtain insight into the prevalence
of genetic testing in the ﬁrst 30 days of life, historical data
from all 1423 patients admitted to the NICU in theRadboudumc (October 2013 to October 2015) served as a
control period.Prospectively, a conclusive molecular diag-
nosis was obtained in 19 of 60 patients (31.7%), with amedian time-to-diagnosis of 14 days (IQR 11-21). In
comparison, genetic testing was performed in 149 patients
(10.5%) in the control period, leading to a conclusivemolecular diagnosis within 30 days of life in 13 of them
(8.7%). The median time-to-diagnosis was 14 days (IQR
12-15). Importantly, from our control period, we noticedthat in a further 136 patients (9.6%) genetic test reports
outlasted the ﬁrst 30 days of life, but increased the
diagnostic yield to 32.2%. This suggests that more NICUpatients may bene ﬁt from rWES than currently tested. Our
data show that the introduction of rWES for all critically ill
newborns with a presumed genetic disorder increasesdiagnostic yield earlier in life than conventional
diagnostic tests.
A.C. Deden: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. R.A.C.M.
Olde Keizer: None. G.W.J. Frederix: None. P. Andries-
sen: None. K.A. Bergman: None. R.A. van Lingen: None.
L.S. de Vries: None. K.D. Lichtenbelt: None. W.S.
Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. J.S.
Klein Wassink-Ruiter: None. K. Neveling: None. M.
Nelen: None. S. Castelein: None. M. del Rosario: None.
S. van den Heuvel: None. C. Gilissen: None. E. Kam-
steeg: None. R. Pfundt: None. T. Rinne: None. H.G.
Yntema: None. R.J. Sinke: None. W.P. de Boode: None.
W.A.G. Zelst-Stams: None.
P11.67C
Is Schilbach-Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome
caused by a mutation in HNRNPH1? - a report on a 2
cases
J. Pilch
1, S. L. Reichert2, A. A. Koppolu3,4, A. Walczak3,
V. A. Murcia Pienkowski3,4, A. Biernacka3,4,R .L i2,
P. Skiba5, J. Machnik-Broncel6, R. L. Lewandowski2,
P. Gasperowicz3, J. Kosi ńska3, M. Rydzanicz3,
G. Vorona7, E. Emich-Widera1,R .P łoski31Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of
Silesia,, Katowice, Poland,2Clinical Genetics Services,
VCU Health, Richmond, VA, United States,3Department of
Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw,, Warsaw,
Poland,4Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine,
Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,
5Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University,
Wroclaw, Poland,6Department of Diagnostic Imaging,
Medical University of Silesia,, Katowice, Poland,7Pediatric
Department of Radiology, VCU Health, Richmond, VA,
United States
Schilbach-Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome (SR/
BRSS) (OMIM #164220) is an autosomal dominant
condition characterized by blepharophimosis, cleft palate,dysmorphic facies, and hypospadias in males. In many
patients hypotelorism and mild skeletal anomalies in the
hands or feet have been reported. No causative gene of SR/BRSS has been found to date. We present the clinical
characteristics of two boys with severe developmental delay
and dysmorphic features suggestive of SR/BRSS. In both,blepharophimosis, cleft or high-arched palate, hypospadias,
scoliosis, and arachnodactyly with clinodactyly were
observed. Additionally microcephaly, arched eyebrow, highnarrow nasal bridge, long hanging columella, micrognathia,
hypoplastic earlobes, hypermobile joints have been noted.
The same novel de novo mutation, HNRNPH1 c.616C>T
(p.Arg206Trp), was found in both patients using whole
exome sequencing. To date, mutations in the highly
conserved autosomal HNRNPH1 gene have not been
associated with human disease. HNRNPH1 belongs to the
group of nuclear ribonucleoproteins involved in regulation
of pre-mRNAs splicing. Interestingly, the identical recurrentmutation affecting the small domain encoding nuclear
localization signal in the highly paralogous HNRNPH2 gene
has been previously associated with X-linked, syndromic,Bain type mental retardation [MRXSB, OMIM #300986].
MRXSB has been identi ﬁed in females with developmental
delay, intellectual disability, autism, hypotonia, and sei-zures. Only in single cases hypotelorism, small palpebral
ﬁssures, or elongated ﬁngers were observed. Although
defective function of HNRNPH2 and HNRNPH1 proteinshave similar clinical consequences in regards to intellectual
disability, mutations in HNRNPH1 gene may represent a
distinct syndrome perhaps related or identical to Schilbach-Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome. Grant Numbers:
KNW-1-036/K/7/K; 2013/11/B/NZ7/04944;
J. Pilch: None. S.L. Reichert: None. A.A. Koppolu:
None. A. Walczak: None. V.A. Murcia Pienkowski:
None. A. Biernacka: None. R. Li: None. P. Skiba: None.
J. Machnik-Broncel: None. R.L. Lewandowski: None. P.
Gasperowicz: None. J. Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz:Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1523None. G. Vorona: None. E. Emich-Widera: None. R.
Płoski: None.
P11.68D
SEC31A mutation affects ER homeostasis, causing
neurological syndrome
D. Halperin1, R. Kadir1, Y. Perez1, M. Drabkin1,
Y. Yogev1, O. Wormser1, E. Berman1, E. Eremenko1,
B. Rotblat1, Z. Shorer2, L. Gradstein2, I. Shelef2, R. Birk3,
U. Abdu1, H. Flusser2, O. S. Birk1,2
1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel,
2Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel,
3Ariel University, Ariel, Israel
Introduction: Consanguineous kindred presented with an
autosomal recessive syndrome of intra-uterine growthretardation, marked developmental delay, spastic quadri-
plegia with profound contractures, pseudobulbar palsy,
epilepsy, dysmorphism, neurosensory deafness and opticnerve atrophy with no eye ﬁxation. Affected individuals
died by the age of four. Brain MRI demonstrated
microcephaly, semilobar holoprosencephally and agenesisof corpus callosum. We aimed at elucidating the molecular
basis of this disease.
Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis combined with
whole exome sequencing were performed to identify
disease-causing variants. Functional consequences were
investigated in fruit ﬂies null mutant for the Drosophila
SEC31A orthologue. SEC31A knockout SH-SY5Y and
HEK293T cell-lines were generated using CRISPR/Cas9
and studied through qRT-PCR, immunoblotting and viabi-lity assays.
Results: Through genetic studies, we identi ﬁed a disease-
associated homozygous nonsense mutation in SEC31A .W e
demonstrate that SEC31A is ubiquitously expressed, and
that the mutation triggers nonsense mediated decay of its
transcript, comprising a practical null mutation. Similar tothe human disease phenotype, knockdown SEC31A ﬂies
had defective brains and early lethality. Moreover, in line
with SEC31A encoding one of the two coating layers
comprising the COP-II complex, traf ﬁcking newly synthe-
sized proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi,
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated SEC31A null mutant cells demon-
strated reduced viability through upregulation of ER-stress
pathways.
Conclusions: We demonstrate that a severe neurological
syndrome is caused by a null mutation in SEC31A, redu-
cing cell viability through enhanced ER-stress response, in
line with SEC31A ’s role in the COP-II complex. Funding:
Legacy Heritage Bio-Medical Program of the Israel Science
Foundation (grants no. 1814/13 and 1798/16)D. Halperin: None. R. Kadir: None. Y. Perez: None.
M. Drabkin: None. Y. Yogev: None. O. Wormser: None.
E. Berman: None. E. Eremenko: None. B. Rotblat: None.
Z. Shorer: None. L. Gradstein: None. I. Shelef: None. R.
Birk: None. U. Abdu: None. H. Flusser: None. O.S.
Birk: None.
P11.70B
SMCHD1 mutation spectrum for facioscapulohumeralmuscular dystrophy type 2 (FSHD2) and Bosma arhinia
microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) reveals disease-
speci ﬁc localization of variants in the ATPase domain
R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, N. van der Stoep1, P. J. van der
Vliet1, S. A. Moore2, A. Topf3, K. Johnson3, D. San Leon
Granado1, T. Evangelista3, V. Straub3, C. Scotton4,
A. Ferlini4, N. Voermans5, B. van Engelen5, S. Sacconi6,
R. Tawil7, M. Lamers1, S. M. van der Maarel1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,
2University of Iowa, Iowa city, IA, United States,
3University of Newcastle, Newcastle, United Kingdom,
4University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,5Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,6Nice University
Hospital, Nice, France,7University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, United States
Introduction: Variants in the chromatin modi ﬁer Structural
Maintenance Of Chromosomes Flexible Hinge Domain-
Containing Protein 1 (SMCHD1) have been associated withthe myopathy FSHD2 and with the unrelated nasal
developmental syndrome BAMS. FSHD2 is a digenic
hereditary disease with heterozygous variants anywhere inSMCHD1 causing toxic derepression of DUX4 , a gene that
is embedded in the D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4 variant
4A. BAMS also requires missense variants in SMCHD1,but speci ﬁcally in the ATPase domain. Irrespective of the
phenotypic outcome, both FSHD2 and BAMS associated
SMCHD1 variants result in quanti ﬁable hypomethylation of
the D4Z4 locus. We identi ﬁed numerous new pathogenic
FSHD2 variants and non-pathogenic variants and compared
these to BAMS associated variants. M&M: Genetic andmethylation studies of D4Z4 and SMCHD1 in 91 new
FSHD2 families. Examination of the position and mutation
type for SMCHD1 variants in 180 (89 from previouspublications) FSHD2 families, 41 BAMS patients and 57
control individuals. Generation of a 3D model for the
SMCHD1 ATPase-domain in which we modeled allmissense variants in FSHD2 and BAMS.
Results: The FSHD2 mutation spectrum shows missense,
nonsense, indels and splice site variants covering the entireSMCHD1 locus, but missense variants are speci ﬁcally
enriched in the ATPase domain. Non-pathogenic missense1524variants were almost absent from the ATPase domain.
FSHD2 and BAMS variants occupy different sites in the 3D
model of the ATPase domain.
Conclusions: The localization within the ATPase-domain
might underlie the phenotypic outcome of missense variants
in the ATPase-domain of SMCHD1. Funded by NIH andPrinses Beatrix Spierfonds.
R.J.L.F. Lemmers: None. N. van der Stoep: None. P.J.
van der Vliet: None. S.A. Moore: None. A. Topf: None.
K. Johnson: None. D. San Leon Granado: None. T.
Evangelista: None. V. Straub: None. C. Scotton: None.
A. Ferlini: None. N. Voermans: None. B. van Engelen:
None. S. Sacconi: None. R. Tawil: None. M. Lamers:
None. S.M. van der Maarel: None.
P11.71C
SMG9 de ﬁciency syndrome: con ﬁrmation and further
phenotypic characterization
F. Lecoquierre
1, A. Bonnevalle1, A. Guerrot1, A. Chadie2,
C. Gayet3, C. Dumant Forest3, M. Renaux Petel4, J. Leca4,
T. Hazelzet3, M. Brasseur-Daudruy5, F. Louillet3,
M. Muraine6, S. Coutant1, O. Quenez1, A. Boland7,
J. Deleuze7, T. Frebourg1, A. Goldenberg1, P. Saugier-
Veber1, G. Nicolas1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics and Reference
Center for Developmental Disorders, F 76000, Normandy
Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen,France,
2Department of Neonatal Pediatrics and Intensive
Care -Neuropediatrics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen,
France,3Department of Pediatrics, Rouen University
Hospital, 76000, Rouen, France,4Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Rouen University Hospital, 76000, Rouen, France,
5Department of Radiology, Rouen University Hospital,
76000, Rouen, France,6Department of Ophthalmology,
Rouen University Hospital, 76000, Rouen, France,7Centre
National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH),Institut de Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-
Saclay, Evry, France
Introduction: SMG9 de ﬁciency syndrome is a rare
autosomal recessive condition originally described in three
patients from two families with homozygous truncatingSMG9 variants. Affected individuals presented with a
severe syndromic developmental disorder, and a mouse
model revealed the embryonic lethality of bi-allelic Smg9
deﬁciency, in a context of major brain, eye and cardiovas-
cular malformations. To our knowledge, no additional
patient has been described since this report.Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing in a
patient exhibiting a syndromic developmental delay and in
her unaffected parents and report the phenotypic features.
Results: Our patient was born to consanguineous parents
at 28 weeks of gestation. During pregnancy follow-up, left
cleft lip and alveolus, polyhydramnios and intrauterinegrowth restriction were noticed. Postnatal examination
revealed prominent forehead, hypertelorism, ears abnorm-
alities, cataracts, kyphosis, renal hypoplasia, as well ascomplex ventricular septal defects and aortic bicuspid valve
on cardiac ultrasound and thin corpus callosum and dilated
ventricles on brain MRI at the age of 12 months. She pre-sented early and severe feeding dif ﬁculties, severe growth
restriction, global developmental delay, and multiple severe
infections requiring hospitalizations. She carried a novelc.1177C>T, p.(Gln393*) (NM_019108) SMG9 homo-
zygous variant while her unaffected parents were both
heterozygous.
Conclusions: We con ﬁrm that bi-allelic truncating SMG9
variants cause a severe brain and heart malformation syn-
drome including ventricular septal defects, brain abnorm-alities, facial dysmorphic features, and severe growth and
developmental delay (4/4) with or without ophthalmological
abnormalities (3/4), severe feeding dif ﬁculties (2/3), and
life-threatening infections (2/4).
F. Lecoquierre: None. A. Bonnevalle: None. A. Guer-
rot:None. A. Chadie: None. C. Gayet: None. C. Dumant
Forest: None. M. Renaux Petel: None. J. Leca: None. T.
Hazelzet: None. M. Brasseur-Daudruy: None. F. Louil-
let:None. M. Muraine: None. S. Coutant: None. O.
Quenez: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. T.
Frebourg: None. A. Goldenberg: None. P. Saugier-
Veber: None. G. Nicolas: None.
P11.72D
The complete loss of function of the SMS gene is
responsible for an antenatal onset and a lethal form of
Snyder-Robinson Syndrome
L. Larcher1,2, J. Norris3, S. Whalen1,4, E. Lejeune1,2,
J. Buratti1,2, C. Mignot1,2,4, C. Garel1,4, C. Schwartz3,
B. Keren1,2
1Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France,
2Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France,3Greenwood
Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States,4Hôpital
Armand Trousseau, Paris, France
Introduction: Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS) is an X-
linked syndromic intellectual disability condition with post-
natal expression caused by variants in the Spermine
Synthase gene ( SMS). The syndrome is characterized by
facial dysmorphism, thin habitus, hypotonia and aAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1525nonspeci ﬁc movement disorder. Until now, only missense
variants with a functionally characterized partial loss of
function (LoF) have been described. Here we report the ﬁrst
complete LoF variant in a male patient with a congenital
form of SRS. Patient and Methods: The patient had multiple
malformations with antenatal onset and died at 4 months ofage after staying in the intensive care unit. His phenotype
included IUGR, cysts of the vermis, facial dysmorphism,
hypotonia with no eye contact, complex cardiac, gut andkidney malformations. His DNA and that of his parents
were sent to our genetics laboratory to perform whole-
exome-sequencing. Functional studies have been performedto validate a variant found by WES: western blot analysis to
quantitatively determine the protein level of SMS and
UPLC - MS/MS to qualitatively determine the enzymeactivity.
Results: Genomic analysis revealed a de novo hemi-
zygous frameshift in SMS, c.906_909delAATG; p.
M303Kfs3, classi ﬁed as pathogenic according to the
ACMG criteria. Functional in vitro assays showed a com-
plete absence of functional SMS protein.
Conclusion: Taken together, our ﬁndings con ﬁrm that the
mechanism of pathogenicity in SRS is a LoF in SMS and
that complete LoF leads to a far more severe phenotype thanpartial LoF due to missense variants.
L. Larcher: None. J. Norris: None. S. Whalen: None.
E. Lejeune: None. J. Buratti: None. C. Mignot: None. C.
Garel: None. C. Schwartz: None. B. Keren: None.
P11.73A
Rare case of a complex small supernumerary r(1;10)
chromosome mosaicism associated with a Kabuki-like
phenotype
R. Silveira-Santos, J. Dupont, J. R. Alves, A. Sousa,
A. B. Sousa
Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria,
Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, CAML, Lisboa,Portugal
Introduction: Complex small supernumerary marker
chromosomes (sSMC) originate from more than one
chromosome and can cause variable phenotypes. We report
theﬁrst case of mosaic ring-shaped sSMC derived from
chromosomes 1 and 10 in a child with dysmorphisms
reminiscent of Kabuki Syndrome (KS). KS is a genetically
heterogeneous autosomal dominant condition characterizedby intellectual disability (ID), multiple congenital anomalies
and a recognizable facial gestalt. Case presentation: The 3-
year-old girl showed moderate ID, aggressive behaviourand dysmorphisms, including hypertelorism, long palpebral
ﬁssures, eyebrows with sparse lateral third, and shortcolumella, resembling KS patients. ArrayCGH identi ﬁed a
40.76-Mb pathogenic duplication at 1p13.3q21.2 pericen-
tromeric region and a 4.69-Mb duplication of unclear
clinical signi ﬁcance at 10q22.2q22.3, both with pro ﬁles
suggesting mosaicism. Subsequent karyotype and FISH
analyses revealed a supernumerary ring chromosome in40% of the cells that co-hybridizes with probes for both
chromosome 1 and 10 duplicated regions.
Discussion: sSMC derived from chromosome 1 can
present a variable phenotype, ranging from normality to
severe intellectual disability. However, the region 1p12 to
1q12 appears to be non-dosage dependant and the size ofthe sSMC seems to correlate with the severity of
the phenotype. The resemblance with KS was interest-
i n g l yr e p o r t e d2 0y e a r sa g oi nap a t i e n tp r e s e n t i n ga n
interstitial duplica tion of the short arm of chromosome 1,
in a locus with signi ﬁcant overlap with ours. In conclu-
sion, we illustrate a distinctive phenotype of a rare chro-mosome abnormality, while em phasizing the importance
of resorting to complementary classical cytogenetic
studies.
R. Silveira-Santos: None. J. Dupont: None. J.R. Alves:
None. A. Sousa: None. A.B. Sousa: None.
P11.74B
Tetrasomy 21 pter →q21.3 due to an extra +dic(21;21)
in a severe psychomotor retarded female without Downsyndrome phenotype
T. Takano
1,2, K. Nakabayashi3,H .O t a2, Y. Arai2,
H. Kamura3, K. Hata3
1Tokyo Kasei University, Tokyo, Japan,2Tokyo
Metropolitan Tobu Medical Center for Children with
Developmental Disabilities, Tokyo, Japan,3National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development,Tokyo, Japan
Introduction: Complete or partial tetrasomy 21 without
mosaicism has been reported in only rare cases. We report a
Japanese female patient with tetrasomy 21 due to an extra
chromosome derived from chromosome 21.
Materials and Methods: Chromosome, ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) and whole genome sequencing
(WGS) analyses for the patient, and SNP array-based gen-otyping for the trio were carried out.
Results: The patient had severe psychomotor retardation
without Down syndrome (DS) phenotype; she showed shortstature, microcephaly, round face and some dysmorphic
features. At eight years old, she could not speak any
meaningful words nor walk. The developmental quotientsscore was below 20. The chromosome analyses detected an
extra dicentric chromosome 21, and revealed her karyotype1526to be 47,XX, +dic(21;21). FISH results were consistent with
the karyotype. Allelic ratios of heterozygous SNPs indi-
cated the maternal origin of the extra chromosome 21. Copy
number and structural variant analyses using WGS data
indicated that the distal breakpoint of the dicentric chro-
mosome 21 is located within 21q21, and that the extrachromosome 21 doesn ’t simply consist of inverted dupli-
cations of pter →q21.3region but contain multiple partial
deletions, duplications, and inversions within it.
Conclusions: The patient ’lack of DS phenotype turned
out to be due to the normal copy number of DS critical
region (21q22.2-22.3). We will present the genomic orga-nization of the tetrasomic region being further assessed by
FISH and WGS data, and discuss possible molecular
mechanisms that lead to the complex genomic rearrange-ments in the patient.
T. Takano: None. K. Nakabayashi: None. H. Ota:
None. Y. Arai: None. H. Kamura: None. K. Hata: None.
P11.75C
Delineating the clinical spectrum due to heterozygousTRAF7 missense mutations: A series of 38 cases
J. Amiel
1,2,3, K. Mishra4, L. Castilla5, K. K. Selmer6,
T. Barak4, S. Yang7, B. Blanco-Sánchez1,2, M. Reijnders8,
G. Houge9, H. Cox10, H. Kingston11, J. Clayton-Smith12,
J. W. Innis13, W. Chung14, V. Sanders15, A. Vitobello16,
C. Thauvin16, G. Lesca17, M. Kerstjens-Frederikse18,
K. Christensen19, R. Gannaway20, A. Lehman21, L. Graul-
Neumann22, C. Zweier23, D. Lessel24, B. Lozic24,
R. Peretz25, J. Meira26, B. Schaefer27, E. M. Beaver28,
L. C. Briere29, D. L. Earl30, V. M. Siu31, K. Kosaki32,
M. Gambello33, D. Karlowicz34,T .Y .T a n35, S. White35,
A. Slavotinek36, D. Barbouth37, V. Pingault1,2,3,
A. Munnich2,3, S. Balcells5, V. Cormier-Daire2,3, M. Cho7,
D. Grinberg5, S. Lyonnet1,2,3, M. Gunel4, R. Urreizti5,
C. T. Gordon1,2
1INSERM UMR 1163, Inst. Imagine, Paris, France,2Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité Univ., Paris, France,
3Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France,4Dept. of Genetics,
Yale Sch. of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States,
5Dept. de Genètica, Facultad de Biologia, Univ. de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6Dept. Of Research and
Development, Neuroclinic, Oslo Univ. Hospital, Oslo,Norway,
7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
8Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands,9Haukeland Univ.
Hospital, Bergen, Norway,10Birmingham Women ’s and
Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United
Kingdom,11Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
Manchester, United Kingdom,12Manchester Univ. NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,13Dept. of
Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Univ.of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States,14Columbia
Univ., New York, NY, United States,15Ann & Robert H.
Lurie Children ’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United
States,16Univ. de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon,
France,17CHU Lyon, Lyon, France,18Univ. Medical
Center, Groningen, Netherlands,19Saint Louis Univ. Sch.
of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States,20Virginia
Commonwealth Univ., Richmond, VA, United States,
21Univ. of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
22Humangenetik, Charité Campus Virchow, Berlin,
Germany,23Inst. of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,24Inst. of Human Genetics,
Univ. Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany,25Driscoll Children ’s Hospital, Corpus Christi,
TX, United States,26State Univ. of Bahia, Bahia, Brazil,
27Univ. of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Lowell, AR,
United States,28Mercy Kids Genetics, Saint Louis, MO,
United States,29Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, United States,30Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle,
WA, United States,31London Health Sciences Centre,
London, ON, Canada,32Center for Medical Genetics, Keio
Univ. Sch. of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan,33Emory Univ. Sch.
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States,34Duke Univ.,
Durham, NC, United States,35VCGS, Murdoch Children's
Research Inst., Univ. of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
36Univ. of California, San Francisco, CA, United States,
37Univ. of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, United States
TRAF7 belongs to the Tumor necrosis factor receptor-
associated factor (TRAF) family, involved in a broad rangeof biological functions and recently identi ﬁed by WES in 7
patients associating developmental delay, congenital mal-
formations and dysmorphic features with de novo missense
mutations.
We gathered a series of 38 patients (a family with 3 cases
and 35 sporadic cases) by WES, direct sequencing andGeneMatcher with heterozygous missense mutations within
the WD40 repeats, 8 being recurrent. Facial features are
distinctive and will be described. Many are short (12) with ashort neck (20), pectus carinatum (14) and anomalies of the
extremities with camptodactyly (8), ulna or radial deviation
ofﬁngers (10) and overriding toes (9). Ribs and vertebrae
anomalies are each described in 5 and 16 cases. Conductive
and/or sensorineural hearing loss is frequent (20). Con-
genital cardiac defects are also frequent with persistentductus arteriosus (21) and atrial septal defects (9) being the
most frequent. Worth noting are kidney abnormalities (10),
genitalia anomalies (4), umbilical and/or inguinal hernia (8),dental anomalies (9), sparse hair (5) and lymphedema of
lower limbs (3). Most patients presented feeding dif ﬁculties
and motor delay with independent walking between 18 and24 months of age. They developed mild to moderateAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1527intellectual de ﬁciency with speech delay, frequent nasal
speech and usually preserved social interactions.
A different repertoire of somatic missense mutations
within the WD40 domains of TRAF7 has been identi ﬁed in
meningioma. The clustering of germline and somatic mis-
sense mutations suggests a gain of function or a dominantnegative effect.
J. Amiel: None. K. Mishra: None. L. Castilla: None. K.
K. Selmer: None. T. Barak: None. S. Yang: None. B.
Blanco-Sánchez: None. M. Reijnders: None. G. Houge:
None. H. Cox: None. H. Kingston: None. J. Clayton-
Smith: None. J.W. Innis: None. W. Chung: None. V.
Sanders: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. Thauvin: None.
G. Lesca: None. M. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. K.
Christensen: None. R. Gannaway: None. A. Lehman:
None. L. Graul-Neumann: None. C. Zweier: None. D.
Lessel: None. B. Lozic: None. R. Peretz: None. J. Meira:
None. B. Schaefer: None. E.M. Beaver: None. L.C.
Briere: None. D.L. Earl: None. V.M. Siu: None. K.
Kosaki: None. M. Gambello: None. D. Karlowicz: None.
T.Y. Tan: None. S. White: None. A. Slavotinek: None. D.
Barbouth: None. V. Pingault: None.
A. Munnich: None.
S. Balcells: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. M. Cho:
None. D. Grinberg: None. S. Lyonnet: None. M. Gunel:
None. R. Urreizti: None. C.T. Gordon: None.
P11.76D
Biallelic variants in TRAPPC11 cause syndromic
intellectual disability
A. Lunati1, S. Heide1,2, S. Vuillaumier3, G. Leverger4,
I. Desguerre5, M. Moutard6, M. Spentchian1,
N. Hadouiri7, V. Darmency8, Q. Thomas7,
F. Lecoquierre7, A. Vitobello7, C. Philippe7, L. Faivre9,
C. Thauvin-Robinet7,9, D. Heron1,2
1APHP, Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié Salpêtrière et GHUEP Hôpital Armand-Trousseau,
Paris, France,2Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences
Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France,3APHP,
Service de Biochimie et génétique, Hôpital Bichat-Claude
Bernard, Paris, France,4APHP, Service hématologie-
oncologie-pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris,
France,5APHP,Département de Neurologie, Hôpital
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France,6APHP, Service de
Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France,
7Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique
des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU DijonBourgogne, Dijon, France,
8Service de neurophysiologie et
pédiatrie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,9Centre de
Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement etsyndromes malformatifs », Centre de Génétique, FHU-
TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, FranceTRAPPC11 is a component of the TRAPP complex
involved in intracellular vesicle traf ﬁcking. TRAPPC11
mutations were reported in only 20 patients with various
phenotypes from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD)
phenotype to congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG),characterized by frequent proximal muscle weakness with
elevated creatine kinase (CK), associated with global
developmental delay, and movement disorders. Using triowhole exome sequencing (WES), we identi ﬁed two new
patients with intellectual disability (ID) carrying biallelic
variants in TRAPPC11 . Patient 1: Pregnancy was marked by
agenesis of corpus callosum (ACC) and intrauterine growth
retardation (IUGR). At 4 years old, he presented neurode-
velopemental delay, progressive microcephaly (-4SD) andsmall stature (-2.5SD). Immune screening showed hypo-
gammaglobulinemia, causing multiple infections. CK level
was normal. Postnatal brain MRI showed global cerebralatrophy and thin corpus callosum. He carried compound
heterozygous splicing variants c.965 +5G>T/c.1287 +5G>A
inTRAPPC11 inherited from both parents. Patient 2:
Pregnancy was marked by IUGR. He had epilepsy with
onset at 5 months of age. At 30 months old, he presented
with hypotonia, neurodevelopemental delay, and progres-sive microcephaly (-5SD). He had mildly elevated CK
without myopathy. Brain MRI showed thin corpus
callosum. He carried homozygous variants c.1287 +5>A
inTRAPPC11 , both inherited from his father, due to
uniparental isodisomy (UPD) of chromosome 4. We
conﬁrm the extended phenotype related to TRAPPC11
variants, including syndromic ID. Hypogammaglobuline-
mia was not reported as related to this gene so far.
Moreover, this report demonstrates the importance toexplore UPD in case of homozygous variants inherited
from a single parent.
A. Lunati: None. S. Heide: None. S. Vuillaumier:
None. G. Leverger: None. I. Desguerre: None. M.
Moutard: None. M. Spentchian: None. N. Hadouiri:
None. V. Darmency: None. Q. Thomas: None. F. Leco-
quierre: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. Philippe: None. L.
Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. D.
Heron: None.
P11.77A
First mutation in TSHZ1 in a family with Rasmussen
syndrome
B. Hanker, J. Eckhold, I. Hüning, Y. Hellenbroich,
F. Kaiser
Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany1528In 1979, Rasmussen reported of a family with congenital
bilateral vertical talus, bilateral external auditory canal
atresia and increased interocular distance. After Rasmussen
syndrome was mentioned in 2002 for the ﬁrst time, Feenstra
et al . reported of families with deletion or mutations in
TSHZ1 causing congenital aural atresia (CAA), in 2011.
Here, we describe for the ﬁrst time a family with vertical
talus (VT) and mutation only affecting TSHZ1 .
We report on a family with an eleven year old boy, who
was born at term after uneventful pregnancy. The boy had
CAA and VT. He had mild intellectual disability and facial
features including epicanthus, hypertelorism and broadnasal root. The mother of non-consanguineous parents had
learning dif ﬁculties as well as CAA and VT. The grand-
father had CAA like several members of the family of themother, too. In addition, the daughter of one cousin had
CAA and VT.
In suspicion of Rasmussen syndrome a targeted sequen-
cing analysis of TSHZ1 identi ﬁed a heterozygous frameshift
mutation c.718delA;p.Arg240Gly fs*10 in the index patient
and his mother resulting in a premature stop of translation.
Systematic review of the literature showed that affected
persons of two families with mutations in TSHZ1 show
CAA but VT has not been described in these patients.Therefore, we show for the ﬁrst time the combination of VT
and CAA due to mutation in TSHZ1 .
Therefore, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that het-
erozygous mutations in TSHZ1 cause Rasmussen syndrome
with incomplete penetrance and variable clinical
expressivity.
B. Hanker: None. J. Eckhold: None. I. Hüning: None.
Y. Hellenbroich: None. F. Kaiser: None.
P11.78B
Mutations in TUBB4B can cause a cliopathy
S. Mechaussier
1, J. Rozet1, M. Descartes2, I. Perrault1
1INSERM UMR_1163 - Imagine Institute, Paris, France,
2University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
United States
Introduction: Recently, we reported heterozygous muta-
tions affecting Arg391 in the β-tubulin 4B isotype-encoding
gene (TUBB4B) dampening the dynamics of growingmicrotubules (MT) in a distinctive neurosensorineural
disorder (early-onset and severe retinal dystrophy and
sensorineural hearing loss). Despite abnormal MTdynamics, patient ﬁbroblasts and cells overexpressing the
mutant proteins displayed apparently normal ciliation and
trafﬁcking. Here, we report the identi ﬁcation of a novel
TUBB4B mutation in a sporadic case displaying blindness,
sensorineural hearing loss, short stature, chronic kidneydisease and recurrent sinus and ear infections, a constella-
tion of symptoms strongly reminiscent of ciliopathies.
Consistent with this phenotype, we show that the mutation
which affects Pro358 have a dramatic effect on ciliation.
Material and Methods: Cilia from nasal brushing of the
index cases were analyzed by TEM. The dynamics of MTgrowth and ciliation were analyzed in cultured cells over-
expressing FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B .
Results: Cilia from nasal brushing of the index case
revealed ultrastructural abnormalities with rare axonemes
and disorganized basal bodies. Inspection of the β-tubulin
atomic structure revealed that the Pro358 residue is locatedin a binding domain necessary for the dynamics of micro-
tubules. Functional analysis in cultured cells overexpressing
FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B showed thatthe mutant TUBB4B have a drastic impact on microtubule
growth with no lattice as well as on ciliogenesis with absent
cilia in the vast majority of cells.
Conclusion: This study shows that TUBB4B mutations
can cause a sensorineural disease or a multisystemic cilio-
pathy, depending on the localization of the alteration.
S. Mechaussier: None. J. Rozet: None. M. Descartes:
None. I. Perrault: None.
P11.79C
Further delineation of O2HE syndrome due to
UNC45A biallelic variants and launching of the initiative
adopt a gene for UNC45A
C. Racine
1,2, J. Baptista3,4, L. Hawkes5, C. Thauvin-
Robinet1,2, A. Vitobello2, P. Callier2, Y. Duffourd2,
C. Philippe2, B. De Vries6, A. Verloes7, J. Hugot8,
D. Bremond-Gignac9, F. Huet10, C. Bensignor10,
R. Maudinas10, A. Fabre11, C. Esteve11, S. Ellard3,4,
A. Rodrigues12, E. Blair5, L. Faivre1,2
1Genetics Center, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne
University Hospital, Dijon, France,2INSERM, LNC
UMR1231 team GAD, University of Burgundy andFranche-Comté, Dijon, France,
3Department of Molecular
Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, United Kingdom,4University of Exeter College of
Medicine and Health, Exeter, United Kingdom,5Oxford
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom,
6Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,7Genetics department, Robert
Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France,8Pediatric
Gastroenterology and Nutrition department, Robert Debré
Hospital, APHP, Paris, France,9Pediatric Ophthalmology
department, Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France,
10Pediatric department, Dijon Bourgogne University
Hospital, Dijon, France,11Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1529MMG, Marseille, France,12Oxford Children's Hospital,
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom
Introduction: Only 4 patients with UNC45A -related osteo-
oto-hepato-enteric syndrome (O2HE) have been reported in2018, and no further replication has been published. The
four core clinical features include congenital diarrhea,
cholestasis, bone fragility, deafness, associated to learningdisability.
Material and Methods: We report two novel cases of
O2HE diagnosed by trio WES, enlarging the clinicalspectrum by the presence of malformations.
Results: In patient 1 (20 years), severe congenital diar-
rhea due to microvilli atrophy was diagnosed at week 1,requiring long-term hospitalization with exclusive enteral
nutrition. Diarrhea became intermittent until age 10 and
then stopped. Chronic pruritus caused by congenital cho-lestasis was diagnosed in childhood. He was blind due to
right anophthalmia, Peters anomaly with left pyramidal
cataract, had severe sensorineural deafness, severe intel-lectual disability with behavioral disorder, had 2 fractures
after minimal injury. Trio WES revealed a paternally
inherited UNC45A c.1407delinsGCA variant and a mater-
nally inherited c.2467G>C variant; and a de novo PBRM1
VUS (c.1301G>A). In patient 2 (3 weeks), cleft palate and
severe diarrhea was diagnosed at day 1, with ﬂattening of
brush border, requiring total parenteral nutrition. No cho-
lestasis was diagnosed, and testing of the audition is plan-
ned. Rapid trio exome revealed a maternally inheritedc.721C>T;p.(Arg241*) UNC45A variant and paternally
inherited c.2182G>A variant.
Conclusion: Further cases will be needed in order to
better describe the phenotypic spectrum of UNC45A , and
particularly the level of the neurocognitive phenotype, and
the associated congenital malformation spectrum. There-fore, we decided to adopt this gene, to compile the clinical
consequences of novel variants.
C. Racine: None. J. Baptista: None. L. Hawkes: None.
C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Vitobello: None. P. Cal-
lier: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C. Philippe: None. B. De
Vries: None. A. Verloes: None. J. Hugot: None. D. Bre-
mond-Gignac: None. F. Huet: None. C. Bensignor: None.
R. Maudinas: None. A. Fabre: None. C. Esteve: None. S.
Ellard: None. A. Rodrigues: None. E. Blair: None. L.
Faivre: None.
P11.80D
Theﬁrst 30 months of experience of the Telethon
Undiagnosed Diseases Programs
A. Torella
1,2, M. Pinelli1,3, R. Castello1, F. Musacchia1,
M. Mutarelli1, G. Cappuccio1,3, D. Carrella1, G. Vitiello3,S. Maitz4, V. Leuzzi5, G. Parenti1,3, M. Scala6, M. Donati7,
R. Guerrini7, C. Pantaleoni8, S. D'Arrigo8, M. Zollino9,
V. Capra6, A. Selicorni10, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,3,S .B a n ﬁ1,2,
TUDP, V. Nigro1,2, G. Casari1,11
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli,
Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli, Italy,2Department of Precision
Medicine, University of Campania –“Luigi Vanvitelli ”,
Naples, Italy,3Department of Translational Medicine,
Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,
4San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy,5Department of
Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,Italy,
6Neurosurgery service, Giannina Gaslini Institute,
Genoa, Italy,7Meyer Children Hospital, Florence, Italy,
8Neurological Institute Besta, Milan, Italy,9Cattolica
University, Rome, Italy,10Department of Pediatrics. ASST-
Lariana. Sant'Anna Hospital, Como, Italy,11Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University and Neurogenomics Unit, Divisionof Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc
Institute, Milan, Italy
We present the experience of the ﬁrst 30 months of the
Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program (TUDP), a pilot
program devoted to unsolvable pediatric patients withcomplex syndromes. Pediatric patients with genetic com-
plex disorders who went undiagnosed through array-CGH,
biochemical and speci ﬁc genetic tests, are discussed and
prioritized in clinical plenary meetings. Patients may be
recruited also by web form at http://www.telethon.it/cosa-fa
cciamo/malattie-senza-diagnosi . Human Phenotype Ontol-
ogy is used for phenotype description. Selected patients and
parents (mostly as trios or quartet) are studied by high
coverage (150x) WES. From June 2016 to December 2018,twelve national pediatric centers have presented 503
undiagnosed families. Fifty-two have been considered
low-priority since outside inclusion criteria (i.e. severity,pediatric age, complexity). Of the 451 enrolled families,
196 have completed the entire diagnostic NGS work ﬂow
andﬁnal result has been provided. In 71 families (36%) we
detected causative variants in known genes, mostly
extending the phenotype appearance. Forty-six (65%) are
de novo mutations, while 16 are autosomal recessive, 8 X-linked and one autosomal dominant with variable expres-
sion. In 67 trios (34%), we identi ﬁed a strong candidate
gene, while the pathogenic role of speci ﬁc genetic variants
is under investigation. In 58 trios (30%) no putative
causative or candidate variant was identi ﬁed. A fraction of
families shares different mutations in the same genes, suchasDDXD3 and ASXL3 (in three families) and EEF1A2,
GRIN1, IRF2BPL, RARS2 and SMAD4 (in two families).
Selected WES-negative cases are being studied by WGS orby linked read WES using 10x technology. Telethon Grant:
GSP150011530A. Torella: None. M. Pinelli: None. R. Castello: None.
F. Musacchia: None. M. Mutarelli: None. G. Cappuccio:
None. D. Carrella: None. G. Vitiello: None. S. Maitz:
None. V. Leuzzi: None. G. Parenti: None. M. Scala:
None. M. Donati: None. R. Guerrini: None. C. Panta-
leoni: None. S. D'Arrigo: None. M. Zollino: None. V.
Capra: None. A. Selicorni: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri:
None. S. Ban ﬁ:None. V. Nigro: None. G. Casari: None.
P11.81A
A homozygous VPS26C nonsense variant is associated
with a novel syndromic phenotype
C. Beetz1, A. Kdissa1, V. Karageorgou1, N. Ameziane1,
P. Bauer1, J. Suleiman2,3, V. R. Sutton4, A. W. El-
Hattab5,6,7
1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany,2Tawam Hospital, Al
Ain, United Arab Emirates,3United Arab Emirates
University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates,4Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,5KidsHeart
Medical Center, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
6KidsHeart Medical Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates,
7KidsHeart Medical Center, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates
Introduction: Novel fully penetrant monogenic disorders
are presumably very rare. Initial non-availability ofunrelated patients is therefore likely. To still enable the
molecular classi ﬁcation of such cases, several types of
information need to be considered.
Materials and Methods: Two reportedly related indivi-
duals with a distinct syndromic phenotype were investi-
gated. Following negative chromosomal microarray andexome sequencing in the proband, patients were subjected
to whole genome sequencing. The variants from the duo
were analysed in a comparative manner, and used to esti-mate the degree of relatedness.
Results: The major clinical ﬁndings in both patients
overlapped; they included neurodevelopmental de ﬁcit,
skeletal abnormalities and distinctive facial features. Variant
ﬁltering demonstrated a single unique shared homozygous
high impact variant, c.178G>T (p.Glu60*), in VPS26C .
Variation databases do not list individuals with bi-allelic
truncating variants in this gene, which codes for a protein
involved in membrane protein recycling. Detailed geneal-ogy analysis suggested close relationship for the patients ’
fathers, but very distant relationship for the mothers. An
overall low degree of relatedness of the two patients, asconﬁrmed by comparative analysis of the genomes, implies
a low likelihood for the genotype-phenotype association to
be a chance observation.
Conclusion: Based on the genealogical information,
clinical ﬁndings, and comprehensive consideration of thegenetic data, we propose VPS26C as a novel disease gene in
humans. Consistent with widespread expression of VPS26C
and with the fundamental biological function of the encoded
protein, its bi-allelic inactivation causes a wide range of
symptoms involving multiple organs.
C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. A. Kdissa: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. V. Karageorgou: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
N. Ameziane: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Centogene AG. P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. J. Suleiman: None.
V.R. Sutton: None. A.W. El-Hattab: None.
P11.82B
Diagnostic microdeletion/microduplication detection by
exome sequencing enabling copy number variation
analysis
G. Christopoulou
1, A. Oikonomaki1, S. Samara1,
L. Florentin2, F. Sachinidi2, S. Vitas3, P. Constantoulakis1
1Genotypos Science Labs, Athens, Greece,2AlfaLab,
Athens, Greece,3DNA Analysis, Athens, Greece
Introduction: We present two cases where copy number
variation (CNV) analysis by exome sequencing revealed amicrodeletion and a microduplication, respectively, explain-
ing the under-investigation phenotypes.
Materials and Methods: A 31 y.o. pregnant woman with
mild symptoms of Waardenburg Syndrome (WS) and a 35
y.o. woman with absence of the uterus were tested. Clinical
exome sequencing was performed using Sophia Genetics ’
Clinical Exome Solution v2, which includes 4,493 genes.
Following preparations according to the manufacturer ’s
protocol, DNA libraries were sequenced on an IlluminaNextSeq-500 genetic analyzer. Data processing, variant
calling and CNV analysis were conducted by SOPHiA
DDM ®bioinformatics pipelines.
Results: The analyses revealed a PAX3 gene deletion,
conﬁrming WS in the ﬁrst patient and a duplication,
including at least SCARF2, SERPIND1, SNAP29 andCRKL
genes , consistent with Mayer-Rokitanski-Kuster-Hauser
syndrome, in the second patient. Both CNVs were ascer-
tained and their exact size determined ( ≈725kb and
≈1.05Mb respectively) by arrCGH.
Discussion: Until recently, exome sequencing rose the
diagnostic yield of genomic investigations by revealingSNV/INDEL disease-causing variants. The design and
analysis pipelines of the exome sequencing we implement
empowers CNV detection as well. We believe that in thenear future, technology and bioinformatics advancements
may permit CNV analysis as effectively as with well-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1531established approaches thus, facilitating more ef ﬁcient
genetic diagnosis and healthcare management.
G. Christopoulou: None. A. Oikonomaki: None. S.
Samara: None. L. Florentin: None. F. Sachinidi: None. S.
Vitas: None. P. Constantoulakis: None.
P11.83C
Exploring WAGR syndrome: genotype-phenotype
associations in the 11p13 region
G. Buglyó, S. Biró, K. Szakszon, J. Mátyus, G. Méhes,
G. Vargha, É. Oláh, B. Nagy
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
Introduction: WAGR syndrome (Wilms ’tumor, aniridia,
genitourinary malformations and impaired mental develop-
ment) is associated with deletions of chromosomal region11p13. Recently, some evidence accumulated on micro-
deletions within 11p13 with varying clinical manifestations.
We report two such cases, and tentatively outline possiblegenotype-phenotype associations in the region.
Patients and Methods: Ourﬁrst case featured normal
intellectual ability, pseudohermaphroditism, acute lympho-blastic leukemia, Wilms tumor, glomerulonephritis and
cerebellar angioblastoma. The second patient had complex
genitourinary malformations, global developmental delayand mental de ﬁcit. RT-PCR was used to detect gene copy
numbers in the 11p13 region in both cases. FISH and a
dPCR-based analysis were performed in case 2.
Results: In patient 1, a heterozygous deletion was found
affecting the whole WT1 gene but neither one of the
ﬂanking genes. In patient 2, a microdeletion was seen in the
11p13 region affecting only WT1 and EIF3M. In this case,
we also detected a deletion at 22q13.
Conclusions: While WAGR syndrome is generally con-
sidered as a single clinical entity caused by a relatively large
deletion, the seemingly high frequency of microdeletions in
the area (as seen in our cases and various anecdotal reportsin the literature) suggests that it may represent a spectrum of
clinical features, the observed phenotype depending on
which genes happen to be deleted. WT1 seems to beresponsible for genitourinary tumors and malformations,
while in cases featuring a PAX6 or BDNF deletion, we may
observe aniridia or obesity, respectively. Genes PRRG4 andSLC1A2 are likely candidates for causing intellectual de ﬁcit
when deleted.
G. Buglyó: None. S. Biró: None. K. Szakszon: None. J.
Mátyus: None. G. Méhes: None. G. Vargha: None. É.
Oláh: None. B. Nagy: None.
P11.84D
Whole exome sequencing reveals a homozygousmutation in NBAS in a critically sick newborn with a
complex immunologic phenotype
G. M. A. Forzano
1, G. Mancano2, A. La Barbera1,
A. Pagliazzi1, F. Peluso1, F. Di Giovanni1, G. Contrò1,
R. Artuso2, A. Provenzano1, S. Ricci3, M. Moroni4,
P. Fiorini4, D. Serranti5, S. Giglio6
1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence,
Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University
Hospital, Florence, Italy,3Immunology Unit, Meyer
Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy,4Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital,
Florence, Italy,5Hepatology Unit, Meyer Children's
University Hospital, Florence, Italy,6Medical Genetics
Unit, University of Florence, Meyer Children's University
Hospital, Florence, Italy
We report a newborn with a multisystemic disease severely
affecting immune and gastrointestinal systems and skin. He
was admitted to Neonatal Intensive Care Unit because ofgrowth failure, recurrent infections with sepsis and
dehydration, hypogammaglobulinemia, absence of B lym-
phocytes, reduced NK cells, ichthyosis, hepatosplenome-galy and facial dysmorphism (proptosis, thin lips, loose skin
and reduced subcutaneous fat). At a ﬁrst glance, clinical
presentation made us think about a syndromic immuno-dysregulation; we performed whole exome sequencing
(WES) which identi ﬁed a biallelic variant in NBAS .
Neuroblastoma ampli ﬁed sequence (NBAS) gene encodes
a protein highly expressed in connective tissue, eye, brain
and spinal cord, and it is involved in nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. Mutations in NBAS cause disregulation ofgenes involved in instruction of in ﬂammatory response.
Biallelic mutations in this gene have been associated with
phenotypic spectrum that ranges from isolated acute liverfailure in infancy to a multisystemic condition including
short stature, optic nerve atrophy and Pelger-Huet (PH)
anomaly of granulocytes (SOPH). Moreover, biallelicvariants were reported recently in two unrelated patients
with characteristic facial appearance, PH anomaly and
severe hypogammaglobulinemia with frequent infections.Clinical exome sequencing uncovers monogenic disorders
in a signi ﬁcant number of infants in NICU when suspected
to have genetic disorders, signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuencing the
medical care. Performing exome sequencing as ﬁrst-line test
can achieved over three times diagnosis rate, with less than
one-third of the cost, compared with traditional tieredtesting strategy of single gene or gene panels.
G.M.A. Forzano: None. G. Mancano: None. A. La
Barbera: None. A. Pagliazzi: None. F. Peluso: None. F.
Di Giovanni: None. G. Contrò: None. R. Artuso: None.1532A. Provenzano: None. S. Ricci: None. M. Moroni: None.
P. Fiorini: None. D. Serranti: None. S. Giglio: None.
P11.85A
Family trio analysis in rare syndromes - Clinical
experience and outcome
K. Lagerstedt-Robinson, B. Anderlid, A. Nordgren,
G. Grigelioniene, M. Kvarnung, P. Gustavsson, E. Tham,D. Nilsson, M. Johansson Soller, M. Nordenskjöld,
A. Lindstrand, H. Malmgren
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Karolinska Institutet and Department of Clinical Genetics,
Karolinska Univ Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Whole exome (WES) or whole genome (WGS) sequencing
in trios is becoming a common molecular diagnostic tool foranalysis of rare genetic disorders.
At Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital,
clinical trio analysis has increased tenfold from 2012 -2018. In total, trio analysis has been ﬁnalized for 503
patients with undiagnosed, suspected rare genetic condi-
tions. Data was analyzed for sequence variants in the codingpart or splice regions of the OMIM genes that were con-
sistent with Mendelian inheritance. In general CGH-array
and FRAXA analyses had been performed on the patientsprior to trio analysis.
Of the 503 cases, the molecular diagnosis rate was 33%.
De novo heterozygote sequence variants were the most
prevalent causes of genetic disorder, 55%. Sequence var-
iants consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance were
detected in 32% and X-linked recessive inheritance in 8%of the cases. In eight cases, an autosomal dominant inher-
ited sequence variant was identi ﬁed - explained by a known
dominant trait or variable expressivity. Most patients werereferred regarding intellectual disability and/or a syndromic
phenotype. The different detected genetic diagnoses are
rare, and for most cases the genetic outcome could not havebeen predicted.
In conclusion, trio analysis in families with an unknown
rare disorder has proven to be a valuable tool to obtain agenetic diagnosis. The identi ﬁcation of the genetic aberra-
tion in these patients is crucial for estimation of recurrence
risk. It is also a pre-requisite for carrier testing, prenatal- orpreimplantation diagnostics.
K. Lagerstedt-Robinson: None. B. Anderlid: None. A.
Nordgren: None. G. Grigelioniene: None. M. Kvarnung:
None. P. Gustavsson: None. E. Tham: None. D. Nilsson:
None. M. Johansson Soller: None. M. Nordenskjöld:
None. A. Lindstrand: None. H. Malmgren: None.P11.86B
Whole exome sequencing reveals novel mutations in a
cohort of undiagnosed patients with multiple
malformation syndromes
E. Kritioti
1,2,3, N. Nicolaou2, A. Alexandrou1,
I. Papaevripidou1, A. Theodosiou1, V. Christophidou-
Anastasiadou2,4, G. A. Tanteles2, C. Sismani1,3
1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus
Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3The Cyprus
School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Clinical
Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Multiple malformation syndromes (MMS) represent a
heterogeneous group of genetic disorders associated with
developmental anomalies in two or more systems. Usingwhole exome sequencing (WES) our ongoing study aims to
molecularly characterise a cohort of undiagnosed Cypriot
MMS patients. Recruitment criteria included: normalkaryotype and array-CGH analyses and negative results
for fragile-X syndrome and targeted gene testing. The study
also aims to develop an in-house population-speci ﬁc allele
frequency database.
Family-based WES was performed in 21 families (67
individuals) comprising 26 MMS patients, using Illumina ’s
TruSeq DNA exome library preparation kit and the Next-
Seq500. Bioinformatics analysis was carried out using an
in-house pipeline according to the Genome AnalysisToolkit Best Practices. Possible pathogenic mutations were
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing followed by segregation
analysis.
NGS analysis revealed 11 potentially pathogenic variants,
including 9 novel and 2 known variants, achieving an
overall detection rate of 42% (11/26 patients). Flaggedvariants were found in PCNT, SPR, PXDN ,COL27A1 ,
UBE3A ,KAT6A, KDM6A, POMGNT1 andPIEZO2 , caus-
ing microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwar ﬁsm type
II, sepiapterin reductase de ﬁciency, anterior segment dys-
genesis of the eye, Steel syndrome, Angelman syndrome,
intellectual disability, Kabuki syndrome-2, muscle-eye-brain disease and distal arthrogryposis, respectively.
In conclusion, this study has identi ﬁed 9 novel mutations
in known genes and has expanded the phenotypic spectrumassociated with these genes. This study also reports the ﬁrst
COL27A1 mutation in the Caucasian population. The
detection rate of 42% indicates that WES is a reliable andcost-effective tool for identifying the molecular basis of
MMS. Further functional studies are ongoing.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1533E. Kritioti: None. N. Nicolaou: None. A. Alexandrou:
None. I. Papaevripidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. V.
Christophidou-Anastasiadou: None. G.A. Tanteles:
None. C. Sismani: None.
P11.87C
The utility of reverse phenotyping using whole-exome
sequencing in an undiagnosed infant with neurological
symptoms
D. Ayyildiz Emecen, E. Is ık, M. KOSE, T. Atik,
F. Ozkinay
Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,Turkey
Aim: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) is being used
increasingly to diagnose rare complex diseases. The
purpose of this study is to determine the contribution of
reverse phenotyping in diagnosing diseases with blendedphenotypes.
Method: A 22-month-old girl was referred to our clinic
with developmental delay, hypotonia, convulsion andvomiting. She was the ﬁrst child of consanguineous parents.
On physical examination she had growth retardation,
hypotonia and dysmorphic facial features. Her laboratorytests were normal. A brain MRI revealed a white matter
hypomyelination.
Result: A speci ﬁc diagnosis could not be established via
clinical features and laboratory tests, however WES
revealed homozygous mutations in three different genes.
The variant c.3412_3418del (p.Val1138Metfs*25) inCNTNAP1 gene has been classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic,
c.1090G>A (p.Val364Met) variant in DPYS gene classi ﬁed
as a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VOUS), and
c.2480G>A (p.Arg827Gln), in ATP7B gene classi ﬁed as a
VOUS in accordance with ACMG 2015 criteria. The par-
ents were found to be heterozygous for the same mutations.
Disscussion: Following WES results, clinical compat-
ibility was investigated. Developmental delay and hypo-
myelination in the patient were suggestive of CongenitalHypomiyelinating Neuropathy caused by CNTNAP1 muta-
tions. Persistent vomiting is a symptom of Dihy-
dropriminidase de ﬁciency caused by DPYS mutations. A
decreased level of ceruloplasmin in the patient is considered
as the ﬁrst sign of Wilson's disease caused by ATP7B
mutations.
Conclusion: Reverse phenotyping using WES shortens
the diagnostic process, identi ﬁes the additional diseases in
patients with blended phenotypes and improves the qualityof genetic counseling.D. Ayyildiz Emecen: None. E. Is ık:None. M. Kose:
None. T. Atik: None. F. Ozkinay: None.
P11.88D
BAZ1B is a candidate gene responsible for
hypothyroidism in Williams syndrome
L. Allegri1, F. Baldan1, C. Mio1, M. De Felice2,
E. Amendola2, A. Franzoni3, D. Fabbro3, G. Damante1
1University of Udine, Udine, Italy,2University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy,3Academic Hospital “Azienda
Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Udine ”, Udine, Italy
Williams syndrome (WS) is a rare neurodevelopmental
disorder affecting 1/7500 live births resulting from a
hemizygous deletion of 28 genes on chromosome
7q11.23. This condition is characterized by mild tomoderate intellectual disability or learning problems, unique
personality characteristics, distinctive facial features, and
heart and cardiovascular problems. Moreover, WS subjectsfrequently suffer of several endocrine abnormalities includ-
ing hypothyroidism, idiopathic hypercalcemia, early pub-
erty, impaired glucose tolerance. Full hypothyroidismoccurs in about 10% of WS subjects; however, subclinical
hypothyroidism occurs in about 30% of patients. Several
data indicate that the hypothyroidism is due to thyroidmorphology defects: thyroid hypoplasia has been found in a
large fraction of WS patients suffering of full or subclinical
hypothyroidism. Several genes involved in thyroid dysgen-esis have been identi ﬁed; however, none of them is in the
7q11.23 region. Thus, the hypothyroidism molecular bases
in WS are not known. By a microarray approach weanalyzed the expression levels of 7q11.23 region genes in
embryo mice and selected those expressed also in thyroid or
involved in its development. Among them, BAZ1B, amember of bromodomain protein family, appeared particu-
larly relevant. Silencing, by RNA interference, BAZ1B in a
normal thyroid cell line (Nthy-ori-3.1) and in two anaplasticthyroid cancer derived cell line (SW1736 and 8505C), we
observed a signi ﬁcant cell viability reduction (about 50% in
both cell lines), demonstrating the importance of BAZ1Bfor thyroid cell proliferation. These results demonstrate the
relevance of BAZ1B loss in thyroid cells proliferation,
suggesting a correlation between its deletion and thyroidhypoplasia in WS.
L. Allegri: None. F. Baldan: None. C. Mio: None. M.
De Felice: None. E. Amendola: None. A. Franzoni: None.
D. Fabbro: None. G. Damante: None.
P11.89A
A new phenotype associated to an unreported ZFPM2
variant: call for additional cases1534A. JUVEN1,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, A. Garde1, A. Bruel2,
J. Thevenon3, A. Vitobello2, F. Tran-Mau Them1,
S. Falcon-Eicher4, C. Philippe2, L. Faivre1,
A. S. Denommé-Pichon1,2
1Centre de génétique de Dijon, Dijon, France,2Equipe
Génétique des Anomalies du Développement (GAD),
UMR1231 Inserm/uB, Dijon, France,3Unité de génétique
clinique, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France,4Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Hôpital d'enfant, Dijon,
France
Introduction: ZFPM2 is a gene coding for a zinc ﬁnger
protein. It is a transcription factor involved in lung,
diaphragm and cardiac development regulating the GATAfamily proteins. Three distinct phenotypic entities related to
ZFPM2 have been described: disorders of sex development,
non-syndromic diaphragmatic hernia and congenitalcardiopathies.
Material and Methods: We report on a patient present-
ing with major facial features associated with a poly-malformative syndrome and a novel truncating ZFPM2
variant.
Results: This 31-year-old patient presented at birth with
diaphragmatic anterior eventration, pulmonary stenosis and
right ventricular hypertrophy. He also had growth de ﬁ-
ciency, micropenis, cryptorchidism and a shawl scrotum.He had a coarse face, hypertelorism, anteverted nares, a
long philtrum, macrostomia, gingival hyperplasia and teeth
agenesis. He was in a school for special needs, but intel-lectual de ﬁciency was ruled out. He developed a dilatation
of the ascending aorta in adulthood. Multiple investigations
were normal. Exome sequencing revealed a frameshiftinsertion in ZFPM2 (c.621delA; p.Ala208Leufs*5), not
inherited from the father (mother not available).
Conclusion: The patient presents a peculiar association of
malformations that belong to the ZFPM2 spectrum, but
usually in a non-syndromic context. Such observations are
needed in order to be able to describe a novel ZFPM2
associated phenotype.
A. Juven: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Garde:
None. A. Bruel: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Vitobello:
None. F. Tran-Mau Them: None. S. Falcon-Eicher:
None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. A.S.
Denommé-Pichon: None.
P12
Cancer genetics
P12.001B
Mutational pro ﬁling of pediatric acute myeloid leukemiasubtypes in the absence of recurrent chromosomal
aberrations
T. Nasedkina
1, L. Ghukasyan1, G. Krasnov1, L. Baidun2,
S. Ibragimova3
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Russian Children's Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian
Federation,3Scienti ﬁc Research Institute of Hematology
and Blood Transfusion, Tashkent, Uzbekistan
Introduction: Recurrent cytogenetic aberrations leading to
the formation of fusion genes are found in more than 40%
of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML), while inapproximately 20% of the patients their blast cells display
cytogenetically normal karyotype (NK-AML). The aim of
the work was to investigate mutational pro ﬁle of AML
patients without known chromosomal translocations regard-
ing to immunophenotype data and clinical features.
Patients and Methods: The 34 patients from Uzbekistan
with AML without known recurrent chromosomal aberra-
tions were investigated (18 boys and 16 girls, mean age
10.6 years). The coding regions of 26 genes involved in thepathogenesis of AML were captured with SeqCap EZ
Target Enrichment System (NimbleGen, Roche) and
sequenced using Illumina ’s MiniSeq platform. The muta-
tions were veri ﬁed using Sanger sequencing.
Results: Most patients (20 from 34) had one or more non-
synonymous mutations. One patient with M4 variant hadbiallelic CEBPA mutation, two patients had previously
undescribed ETV6 mutations. Also, known somatic muta-
tions were revealed in the following genes: NPM1 (8.8%),JAK2 (5.9%), IDH1 (5.9%), NRAS (8.8%). In addition, rare
germline variants with minor allele frequency less than 1%
were found in CUX1, FLT3, TET2, PTPN11 and NUP98genes, that may indicate their role in genetic susceptibility
to pediatric leukemia.
Conclusion: The data may contribute to understanding
the mechanisms of leukemogenesis in pediatric AML in the
absence of known fusion genes. The work was supported by
the Russian Science Foundation (grant # 18 −15-00398).
T. Nasedkina: None. L. Ghukasyan: None. G. Kras-
nov: None. L. Baidun: None. S. Ibragimova: None.
P12.002C
Integrative analysis of miRNA and mRNA paired
expression pro ﬁling of androgen-dependent and
-independent prostate cancer cells treated with
anticancer imidazoacridinone C-1311
M. Niemira
1, A. Bielska1, M. Kwasniewski2,
A. Kretowski1,3, A. Skwarska4Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15351Clinical Research Centre, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland,2Centre of Bioinformatics and Data
Analysis, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok,
Poland,3Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and
Internal Medicine, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland,4Department of Oncology, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Introduction: Prostate cancer remains one of the most
common cancer in the male population. Imidazoacridinone
C-1311 (Symadex ™) is a new inhibitor of topoisomerase II
and receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 that has been tested inphase II studies against metastatic breast cancer. Here, we
assessed the effect of C-1311 on the miRNA and mRNA
integrated pro ﬁles of prostate cancer cells with different
expression of androgen receptor (AR).
Materials and Methods: Prostate cancer cells were
exposed to C-1311 for 24h. The miRNA and mRNAexpression pro ﬁles (adj. p < 0.05 and log fold change > 1)
were generated from total RNA using nCounter Nanostring
platform and RNA-seq using Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform,respectively. MiRNA-mRNA expression pairing and path-
ways analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis software.
Results: Paired genomic analysis identi ﬁed a total of 33
miRNA-mRNA pairs in LNCaP (AR +) and 65 miRNA-
mRNA pairs in DU-145 (AR-) cells. Selected miRNAs andmRNAs associated with tumor formation and progression,
cell cycle or apoptosis (including miR-542, miR-138, miR-
590, miR-125, miR-34, BIRC5, CDKN1A, CDC25A,KNTC1) were validated by qPCR. Paired miRNA-mRNA
proﬁles revealed activation of diverse signaling pathways
depending on AR status. In LNCaP (AR +) cells major
changes were found for genes involved in cell cycle control,
p53 signaling and DNA damage response, whereas path-
ways enriched for DU-145 (AR-) cells were involved incancer-related in ﬂammation and cellular metabolism.
Conclusions: Our study identi ﬁed C-1311 induced
miRNA candidates which may be effective targets for futureprostate cancer therapy. Founded by the National Science
Centre, Grant No 2013/09/D/NZ7/04185.
M. Niemira: None. A. Bielska: None. M. Kwasniewski:
None. A. Kretowski: None. A. Skwarska: None.
P12.003D
Study of androgen-receptor pathway in breast cancer
cell lines: a new potential target
M. Ovejero-Sánchez
1,2,3, P. Vázquez-Cárdenas1,2,3,
M. Martínez-Soto2, S. Vallejo-Fuente2,3, C. Gutiérrez-
Cerrajero1,2,3, J. Perez-Losada1,3, R. González-
Sarmiento1,2,31Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL),
Salamanca, Spain,2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department
of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,
3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer
(IBMCC), University-CIC, Salamanca, Spain
Introduction: Breast and prostate cancers depend on
steroid hormones (oestrogens, androgens) to stimulate their
growth. This makes hormonal pathways prime targets totreat these kinds of cancer. Counter-intuitively, it has been
shown that the androgen receptor (AR) is expressed in
approximately 80% of breast cancer patients and over 30%of triple-negative breast cancer patients. Thus, we aim to
study the effects of androgen receptor-inhibitor enzaluta-
mide on breast cell lines
Material and methods: HCC-1937, HCC-1569, MCF-
7, Hs578T, HBL100, BT-549, MDA-MB231, AU-565,
MDA-MB-415, BT-474 (breast cancer cell lines) andVCAP (androgen receptor-positive prostate cancer cell
line used as a positive contro l ) ,w e r eu s e dt oe x t r a c tR N A
a n dp r o t e i n s .E x p r e s s i o no fA Ra n dv a r i a n t7( A R - V 7 )was con ﬁrmed by RT-PCR, droplet digital PCR and
simple western analyses. MTT viability assays with
enzalutamide (50, 75 μM) were performed.
Results: The PCR and simple western results are shown
in the table below. MTT assays show growth inhibition at
enzalutamide concentrations of over 50uM in BT-474,MDA-MB-231, Hs578T, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-415.
Cell Lines ER PR HER2 TP53 AR AR-
V7Simple
Western ARMTT
response
HCC-
1937−−− − −− − NA
HCC-
1569−− +−M +−− NA
MCF-7 ++ −+/−WT+−++
Hs-578T −−− +M ++ + +
HBL-100 −−− ++ + + − NA
BT-549 −−− ++M++ + NA
MDA-
MB-231−−− ++M+−++
AU-565 −− ++ WT −− + NA
MDA-
MB-415+−− ++ + + +
BT-474 +++ + ++ + +
Conclusions: Androgen inhibitors could be a potential
therapeutic target for androgen receptor-positive breast
cancers.
This Project was funded by PI16/01920.M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas:
None. M. Martínez-Soto: None. S. Vallejo-Fuente: None.1536C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. J. Perez-Losada: None.
R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.004A
Mosaic APC mutations in patients with mild polyposis
phenotypes
D. Terlouw1, M. Suerink1, C. Tops1, A. Langers2,
F. J. Hes3, S. ten Broeke4, L. Dams1, T. van Wezel5,
H. Morreau5, M. Nielsen1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden,
Netherlands,2Department of Gastroenterology, LUMC,
Leiden, Netherlands,3Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel,
Brussel, Belgium,4Department of Clinical Genetics,
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands,5Department of
Pathology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands
Introduction: Mosaic mutations in the APC gene have
been identi ﬁed as a common cause (25%) for polyposis in
patients with >20 adenomas and no germline mutation. Thefrequency remains unknown in patients with milder
phenotypes.
Materials and Methods: The APC gene was sequenced
in DNA isolated from 4 adenomas in a cohort of polyposis
patients (n =120) using Next Generation Sequencing.
Patients were considered mosaic if an identical mutationwas identi ﬁed in all lesions. Detection rates were compared
between subgroups according to the number of adenomas.
Clinical characteristics were compared between those withand those without a mosaic mutation.
Results: The mosaicism detection rate was 18% in the
whole cohort (22/120), 0% in patients with <10 adenomas(0/18), 9% in those with 10-20 adenomas (3/34) and 12%
in patients over age 70 (2/17). Some patients were found
to have an identical variant in only a subset of adenomas(n=21) and were called hybrid cases. Mean age of diag-
nosis was comparable in hybrid and non-mosaic cases
(both 62 years) and lower in pur e mosaic cases (50 years).
Number of adenomas was also comparable between
hybrid and non-mosaic cases (n =22 versus n =18) and
higher in mosaic cases (n =38)
Conclusions: Our results indicate that mosaic APC
mutations also play a role in patients with less than 20
adenomas and/or older age at presentation. Further expan-sion of the cohort is needed to validate our results and to
elucidate the cause and clinical signi ﬁcance of hybrid
mosaic mutation patterns. Dutch Cancer Societyproject 11292
D. Terlouw: None. M. Suerink: None. C. Tops: None.
A. Langers: None. F.J. Hes: None. S. ten Broeke: None.
L. Dams: None. T. van Wezel: None. H. Morreau: None.
M. Nielsen: None.P12.005B
An ALK inhibitor, AZD3463 improves the anticancer
effects of rapamycin in breast cancer cells
N. P. Ozates Ay, F. Sogutlu, C. Gunduz, C. Biray Avci
Ege University, Izmir, Turkey
Introduction: Breast cancer is the most common type of
neoplasia in women and rapamycin analogues are
frequently used in current treatment protocols. The
limitations of the use of rapamycin in therapy includethe activation of the PI3K si gnaling pathway by other
signaling pathways and reactiv ation via feedback regula-
tion. AZD3463 is an anticancer agent used as a potentialALK/IGF1R inhibitor and it has been determined that
ALK inhibitors induce PI3K/AKT/mTOR-mediated apop-
tosis and autophagy. In this study we investigated thein vitro effect of the rapamycin-AZD3463 combination on
breast cancer by providing lateral inhibition of PI3K
signaling pathway.
Material Methods: Cytotoxic, apoptotic, autophagic and
cytostatic effects of rapamycin, AZD3463 and combination
on MCF7 cell line were assessed by the WST1, Annexin Vand JC-1, Tb/GFP TR-FRET LC3B Expression, Cycletest
assays in a dose ‐and time ‐dependent manner. Expression
level alterations of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway related genes
in treated MCF7 cells were evaluated by quantitative Real-
time PCR (qRT-PCR), compared to control cells.
Result: The effects of AZD, rapamycin and combination
on cell viability, apoptosis, autophagy, cell cycle and gene
expression levels in MCF7 cell line are summarized in the
table.
AZD3463 Rapamycin Combination Comment
IC50Values 765nM
(72nd)10.03nM
(72nd)AZD-0.3nM
Rapa-
28.85nM
(72nd)A synergistic effect
was observed in the
combination.
Annexin V
Assay (Fold
change relative to
a control)(+) 3.6 ( +) 1.2 ( +) 7.4 It was determined
that apoptosis
increased in
combinationaccording to
separate
applications.
JC-1 Assay (%
change of
mitochondrial
membrane
potential)(+) 0.04 ( +) 5.5 ( +) 48.2 Combination
application
increased
mitochondrial
membrane
potential.
Cell Cycle Assay
(Fold change of
check point
arrest)G
0/G1(+)
2.4 S-
1.05 G 2/
M- (-) 2.7G0/G1-(+)
2.8 S-1.12
G2/M-
(-) 4.7G0/G1-(+)2
S-1.2 G 2/M-
(-) 1.8Rapamycin,
AZD3463, and
combination have
been found toeffectively induce
G0/G1 arrest.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1537Autophagy
Assay (Fold
change ofautophagosome
accumulation)(+) 3.84 ( +) 3.31 ( +) 4.17 Combination
application in terms
of autophagiceffects is more
effective than
individual doses.
Gene Expression
Analysis (PI3K/
AKT/mTOR
pathway
related genes)WASL (-)
5,7
RHOA
(+)5,4
FOS (+)
0,19WASL (-)
4,5 RHOA
(-) 0,9 FOS
(+) 2,0WASL (-)
12,5 RHOA
(-)4,2 FOS
(-) 4.2It was determined
that the
combination
application was
more effective than
the other groups.
Conclusion: In this study, we suggest that the combina-
tion of rapamycin-AZD3463 can increase the ef ﬁcacy of
treatment by overcoming factors limiting the use of rapa-
mycin in the treatment by simultaneous inhibition of ALK /
IGF1R pathway.
N.P. Ozates Ay: None. F. Sogutlu: None. C. Gunduz:
None. C. Biray Avci: None.
P12.006C
BAP1 loss of protein expression: an analysis for BAP1
germline Variants of Unknown Signi ﬁcation (VUS)
interpretation
O. Cabaret1, C. Caillot2, T. Fenouil3,N .S o u ﬁr4,
B. Bressac - de Paillerets1,5, A. de la Fouchardière2
1Département de Biologie et Pathologie Médicales, Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France,2Département de Biopathologie,
Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France,3Laboratoire
d'Anatomie Pathologique Est, Groupement Hospitalier Est -Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,
4Inserm U976,
Université Paris 7, Paris, France,5Inserm U1186,
Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France
The BRCA1 ‐associated protein ‐1(BAP1 ) tumor-
predisposition syndrome ( BAP1- TPDS) is a hereditary
cancer syndrome with increased risk to develop a variety
of cancers including four core tumors types, uveal and
cutaneous melanomas, mesotheliomas and renal clear cellcarcinomas (Walpole et al. 2017). Worldwide, 40 different
missense variants were identi ﬁed, but only 9 were classi ﬁed
as likely pathogenic upon modi ﬁed ACMG criteria (higher
weight for phenotypical evidence for rare tumors). BAP1
gene being a tumor suppressor, genetic inactivation leads to
loss of nuclear expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC).The frequency of inactivation by two somatic genetic events
varies upon tumor types; therefore, the speci ﬁcity of BAP1
loss of staining to indicate a germline BAP1 mutation
(positive predictive value, PPV) varies also.
In the present study, we performed 217 BAP1 IHC (145 of
them in cutaneous melanocytic tumors) in 118 members of102 families, analyzed in parallel for BAP1 germline muta-
tions to address the interest of BAP1 IHC to the BAP1 -TPDS diagnostic. Given the variable PPV upon tumor types,
only results of the 28 families with at least BAP1 IHC for
two independent tumors are presented in the table below:
Number of tumors
with BAP1 lossNumber of
tested tumorsNumber of
familiesBAP1 genetic test
results
1 2 to 7 7 6 wild type
1 class 3variant (VUS)
2 2 9 8 class 5 variants
(deleterious)1 wild type
More than 2 3 to 21 12 9 class 5 variants
(deleterious)3 class 3
variants (VUS)
In conclusion, we propose that the presence of two lesions
with BAP1 expression loss in a family (same or different
patients) be considered as a Pathogenic Moderate criterion
to classify BAP1 variants under ACMG criteria.
O. Cabaret: None. C. Caillot: None. T. Fenouil: None.
N. Sou ﬁr:None. B. Bressac - de Paillerets: None. A. de la
Fouchardière: None.
P12.007D
Insights in genetic mechanisms of aggressiveness ofBasal Cell Carcinoma
S. I. Nikolaev
1, A. Yurchenko1, L. Flatz2, M. Ighil3,
N. Basset-Seguin3
1Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,2Kantonsspital St.
Gallen, Department of Dermatology, St. Gallen,
Switzerland,3Saint Louis Hospital, Paris, France
Vismodegib is a smo inhibitor approved for the treatment of
advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC) with activated
Hedgehog pathway. Most patients show clinical bene ﬁt
from the drug but a small subset shows intrinsic resistance
(IR) and progresses on treatment. We report for the ﬁrst
time molecular mechanisms of IR in 4 aggressive BCCcases. Using whole exome sequencing, analysis of copy
number aberrations and transcriptional pro ﬁling we were
able to uncover the major determinants of IR in the studiedsamples. Our results show that these BCCs harbor either
molecular signature earlier reported in BCCs with acquired
resistance to vismodegib, such as p.W535L SMO mutationand ampli ﬁcation of GLI2; or bear molecular signature
compatible with squamous cell carcinoma evolution (muta-
tions and focal copy number alterations of MYC, LGR4 andTCF7L1). In line with the detected driver events at DNA
level upregulation of target genes of either Hh or WNT1538pathway was con ﬁrmed with RNA sequencing. Addition-
ally we report that all the BCC IR cases overexpress
TRAG3, SNORA42 and microRNA711, markers of poor
prognosis and resistance to treatment which were previously
identi ﬁed in other types of cancer.
S.I. Nikolaev: None. A. Yurchenko: None. L. Flatz:
None. M. Ighil: None. N. Basset-Seguin: None.
P12.008A
Molecular signature for improvement of clinical
prognosis accuracy in super ﬁcial bladder carcinoma
O. S. Antonova1, B. S. Mladenov2, S. Rangelov3,
B. B. Rukova1, Z. A. Hammoudeh1, D. V. Nesheva1,
D. Serbezov1, R. G. Staneva1,4, M. B. Ganev1,
S. Karachanak-Yankova1,5, V. G. Spasova1,
S. P. Hadjidekova1,4, L. Balabanski1,6, R. Vazharova6,7,
C. Slavov3, D. Toncheva1,6
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of Urology, UMBALSM
"N. I. Pirogov", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Department of Urology,
University Hospital "Tsaritsa Yoanna", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Women ’s Health Hospital “Nadhezda ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
5Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, So ﬁa
University “St. Kliment Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,6GARH
“Malinov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,7Department of Biology,
Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Soﬁa University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Background: The aim of our study is to identify the
correlation between molecular changes in uroepithelial
tumors and tumor stage, grade and progression, as well asto evaluate potential prognostic markers.
Materials and Methods: Tumour samples from 65 Bul-
garian patients, staged pTa, pT1, pT2, pT2a, pT2b, pT3 andpT4 were collected. Four genes ( AP1S1, FIGF, HDAC11,
CDK9 ) that showed signi ﬁcant difference between invasive
and non-invasive bladder carcinoma in a previous poolanalyses were selected for individual validation by RT-PCR
analysis (Qiagen). CNVs of 30 uroepithelial neoplastic
samples (CytoChip Oligo aCGH, 4x44K and In ﬁnium
OncoArray-500K BeadChip, Illumina) were performed.
Data was analyzed by BluefuseMulti software and
Karyostudio.
Results and discussion: The gene expression analysis
revealed 4-12 fold change difference in the expression level
between pT2 and pTa and pT1 tumors. The highest up-regulation was shown for AP1S1 gene, involved in protein
trafﬁcking by clathrin-coated vesicles. Five LOH variants in
two pT2 samples were determined: arr 6p12.1p11.1(55721511-58767335)x2hmz, arr (7q21.3(94372640-
97676259), 7q22.1q22.2(99552168-104336782))x2hmz,arr (11q14.1q14.2(81417643-86071005), 17q25.1q25.3
(73593574-77382564))x2hmz. No chromosomal abbera-
tions were found only in two pTa samples. Genomic
imbalances –losses were mostly found for arr 6p21.32
(32453988-32538289)x0 and arr 9p21.3(20351075-
22755025)x0. CNVs gains were identi ﬁed in almost all
chromosomes, but the most frequent were in chromosome
(9)(q21.11q21.13), (9)(q31.2q31.3), (20)(q11.21q13.33)
and (20)(p13p11.1) mainly in pT1 and pT2 tumours.Unexpectedly in pT3 and pT4 tumour samples only gains in
chromosomes:1p, 11q, 17p and 17q were detected.
Acknowledgements: Contract DM13/4, 2017 NSF, -60/
03.05.2018, Bulgaria, MANU-BAS.
O.S. Antonova: None. B.S. Mladenov: None. S. Ran-
gelov: None. B.B. Rukova: None. Z.A. Hammoudeh:
None. D.V. Nesheva: None. D. Serbezov: None. R.G.
Staneva: None. M.B. Ganev: None. S. Karachanak-
Yankova: None. V.G. Spasova: None. S.P. Hadjidekova:
None. L. Balabanski: None. R. Vazharova: None. C.
Slavov: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P12.009B
Cytogenetic abnormalities in B-precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia from a tertiary care centre inIndia
D. Shetty
1, H. Jain1, V. Mistri1, H. Jain2, B. Bagal2,
A. Bonda3, S. Punatar3, A. Gokarn3, L. Nayak3,
M. Prasad2, G. Narula2, M. Sengar2, N. Khattry3,
S. Banavali2, P. Tembhare4, P. Subramanian4
1Department of Cancer Cytogenetics, Advanced Centre for
Treatment, Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC),Navi Mumbai, India,
2Department of Medical Oncology,
Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India,
3Department of Medical Oncology, Advanced Centre for
Treatment, Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC),
Navi Mumbai, India,4Department of Hemato-pathology,
Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research & Education inCancer (ACTREC), Navi Mumbai, India
Introduction: B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(BCP-ALL) is a neoplastic disease characterized by clonal
expansion of leukemic cells and cytogenetics is an
important diagnostic parameter in its classi ﬁcation.
Material and Methods: Retrospective study was carried
out in 2270 patients (Adult- 759; Pediatric- 1511) diagnosed
as BCP-ALL (January 2016 to December 2018). Fluores-cence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) was performed using
commercial probes for LSI BCR/ABL1; MLL; ETV6/
RUNX1; TCF3/PBX1 and centromeric probes for chromo-
somes 4, 10 and 17 for ploidy status. A pilot study was
conducted for Ph-like ALL (FISH was performed for ABL1,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1539ABL2 ,PDGFR β,CSF1R and CRLF2 rearrangements) on
219 cases (June 2018 to December 2018).
Results: Cytogenetic abnormality was detected in 51%
cases (1162/2270) [Adult: 60% (454/759); Pediatric: 47%
(708/1511)]. Incidence of t(9;22); BCR-ABL1 , t(1;19);
TCF3-PBX1 and MLL translocations was 31%, 4% and 3%
in adult B-ALL while 6%, 7% and 3% in pediatric B-ALL
respectively. Translocation (12; 21): ETV6/RUNX1 was
found in 13% pediatric cases. Trisomy 4, 10, 17 weredetected either as a sole or in combination with each other
in 31% (462/1511) pediatric cases and 22% (165/759) adult
cases. Chromosomal counting revealed hyperdiploidy andhypodiploidy in 25% and 5% pediatric cases; 12% and 6%
in adult cases which was correlated with ﬂow cytometry
DNA index. Of 219, 4 cases (1.8%) showed rearrangementinCRLF2 (1 Pediatric case with Down syndrome) and
CSF1R (Adult-1; Pediatric-2). Follow-up studies were
performed.
Conclusions: Various cytogenetic subtypes have sig-
niﬁcant impact on risk strati ﬁcation and hence remain
strong independent indicators of disease outcome.
D. Shetty: None. H. Jain: None. V. Mistri: None. H.
Jain: None. B. Bagal: None. A. Bonda: None. S. Punatar:
None. A. Gokarn: None. L. Nayak: None. M. Prasad:
None. G. Narula: None. M. Sengar: None. N. Khattry:
None. S. Banavali: None. P. Tembhare: None. P.
Subramanian: None.
P12.010C
Constitutional mosaicism of BRCA2 gene mutationdetected by massive parallel sequencing in a case of
early onset breast cancer
V. Cusin
1,2, N. Basset1, E. Guillerm1, M. Eyries1,
T. Lisner1, R. Nicolle1, G. L'Helgoualc'h2, F. Coulet1
1Département de Génétique, Paris, France,2Hôpital Privé
d'Antony, Antony, France
Pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are
responsible for over 50% of gene tic susceptibility to breast
and ovarian cancer. Nowadays, the screening of those genes iscommonly performed with expanded panel genes using
massive parallel sequencing (MPS). This technology is more
sensitive and improves the capacity for detection of mosaicevents. Very few cases of de novo mutations have been
described in BRCA genes wit h only one constitutional
mosaicism of BRCA1 mutation d emonstrated b y Friedman
and coll. Here, we report the ﬁrst case of constitutional
mosaicism of BRCA2 mutation in a 46 years old woman
referred to genetic counselling for bifocal lobular breast cancer.Two sisters developed breast cancer at 74 and 58 years old.
Any cancer wasn ’t diagnosed in upper generation. We performgenetic testing of a large panel of breast cancer susceptibility
genes by MPS on a blood sample. The c.4688G>A, p.
(Trp1563*) BRCA2 mutation was detected in 23% of sequence
reads (>500X depth coverage) suggesting mosaic condition.
Mosaic rate was con ﬁrmed in other tissues as bladder cells and
salivary sample. Higher rate w as found in capillary bulb. The
analysis of the non-cancerous breast tissue is in progress.
Finally, this case suggests that, although rare, this event
should be taken into account in the evaluation of high-riskfamilies and it is probably underestimate. Two reasons
should increase the number of cases reported: large
screening performed by highly accurate MPS and enhancedBRCA testing (outside of the ful ﬁlled high-risk selection
criteria) because of targeted therapies.
V. Cusin: None. N. Basset: None. E. Guillerm: None.
M. Eyries: None. T. Lisner: None. R. Nicolle: None. G.
L'Helgoualc'h: None. F. Coulet: None.
P12.011D
The BRCA1 intronic c.5407-25T>A variant: effect on
splicing and association with breast and ovarian cancer
H. Høberg-Vetti
1,2,3, E. Ognedal1,2, A. Buisson4,
T. Vamre5, S. Ariansen5, G. Houge2,3, T. Fiskerstrand2,3,
B. I. Haukanes2, C. Bjorvatn1,3,6, P. M. Knappskog2,3
1Western Norway Familial Cancer Center, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway,2Department of
Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway,3Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway,4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France,5Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway,6Department of Research and
Development, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway
Introduction: The increasing genetic testing for hereditary
breast and ovarian cancer leads to detection of rare sequence
variants of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance in the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes. Correct interpretation of these variants is
challenging, but important for correct clinical management.
The aim of this study was to determine the pathogenicity ofthe intronic BRCA1 c.5407-25T>A variant found in
Norwegian and French families.
Results: TheBRCA1 c.5407-25T>A variant was detected
in 17 families with suspected hereditary breast and ovarian
cancer (mean Manchester score 16.1). This is a rare variant
with a reported frequency of 0.00001579 in non-FinnishEuropean population in the gnomAD database. It was found
in 1/370 anonymous Norwegian blood donors and 0/784
patients included in an in-house diagnostic exome database.NGS-based RNA sequencing of BRCA1 in blood revealed
that the variant leads to skipping of exon 22 and frameshift1540predicting the truncated BRCA1 protein p.(Gly1803Glnf-
sTer11). This exon skipping was con ﬁrmed by PCR and
Sanger sequencing of the BRCA1 mRNA booth in blood,
breast and in ovarian tissue. However, sequencing of two
c.5407-25T>A carriers heterozygous for a transcribed SNP
(c.4837A>G), showed that a low amount of correctlyspliced transcript including exon 22 is generated from the
c.5407-25T>A allele. Western blot analysis of transiently
expressed BRCA1 proteins in HeLa cells showed a reducedamount of the mutant p.Gly1803GlnfsTer11 compared to
wild-type protein.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that BRCA1 c.5407-
25T>A is a likely pathogenic splice variant associated with
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer.
H. Høberg-Vetti: None. E. Ognedal: None. A. Buisson:
None. T. Vamre: None. S. Ariansen: None. G. Houge:
None. T. Fiskerstrand: None. B.I. Haukanes: None. C.
Bjorvatn: None. P.M. Knappskog: None.
P12.012A
Functional studies of SNPs in glycosylase genes asmodi ﬁers of cancer risk in BRCA1 andBRCA2 mutation
carriers
J. M. Baquero
1, C. Benítez-Buelga2, V. Fernández1,
M. Urioste1,3, J. García-Giménez4,3, A. Osorio1,3,
J. Benítez1,3
1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain,
2Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden,3Spanish Network on
Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain,4Universitat de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain
Introduction: In a previous association study, we found
three SNPs in different DNA glycosylase genes ( OGG1 ,
NEIL2 , and UNG ) that modify breast or ovarian cancer risk
inBRCA1 andBRCA2 mutation carriers.
Materials and Methods: We have used a series of 300
familial breast and ovarian cancer patients to try to gainmolecular insights into how these variants exert their cancer
risk modi ﬁer effect. In this series, we have measured gly-
cosylase expression and activity and different genomeinstability and oxidative stress hallmarks to explore the role
of these SNPs.
Results: The studied SNPs are associated with expression
changes in their respective glycosylases. We have also
found associations of the SNPs with DNA damage levels,
telomere length or oxidative stress levels, speci ﬁcally for
the group of mutations carriers where the different SNPs
respectively exert their cancer risk modi ﬁer effect.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings help to explain the association
of these SNPs with cancer risk in BRCA1/2 mutation car-
riers, highlighting the importance of genetic changes inglycosylase genes as modi ﬁers of cancer susceptibility for
BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Grants: J.M.B. is supported by
grant FPU15/01978 from the Spanish Ministry of Educa-
tion, Culture and Sport.
J.M. Baquero: None. C. Benítez-Buelga: None. V.
Fernández: None. M. Urioste: None. J. García-Giménez:
None. A. Osorio: None. J. Benítez: None.
P12.013B
Impact of germline BRCA mutation identi ﬁcation on
subsequent breast cancer stage, therapy and survival -
implications for routine screening
S. Lieberman
1, T. Hadar2, P. Mor1, G. Amit2,3,
E. Tahover4, O. Rosengarten4, M. Carmon2, O. Olsha2,
R. Abu-Dalo2, R. Michaelson-Cohen1,3, E. Golomb5,
R. Rabinovitch6, E. Levy-Lahad1,3
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Breast Surgery Unit, General Surgery
Department, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem,Israel,
3Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, Israel,4Oncology Department, Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,5Pathology Department;
Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,
Jerusalem, Israel,6Department of Radiation Oncology;
University of Colorado Comprehensive Cancer Center,Aurora, CO, United States
Background: Screening healthy Ashkenazi Jews for
germline BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations (g BRCA ) is not stan-
dard policy, despite high (2.5%) carrier rates. Most carriers
are identi ﬁed only after breast cancer diagnosis.
Aim: to determine if pre-symptomatic knowledge of
carrier status affects breast cancer stage and management.
Methods: Record review of g BRCA carriers (excluding
women with risk-reduction mastectomy), diagnosed with
breast cancer between 1/2005-4/2016. We compared out-
comes between carriers whose g BRCA was identi ﬁed pre-
breast cancer (PRE-C-D) vs. post-breast cancer (POST-C-
D) diagnosis.
Results: 105 women with breast cancer had g BRCA: 42
(40%) PRE-C-D and 63 (60%) POST-C-D. Mean age at
diagnosis (50.4y) and BRCA1:BRCA2 distribution
(64%:36%) were similar in both groups. PRE-C-D carrierswere signi ﬁcantly more likely to have suggestive family
history (93% vs. 63%), prior breast cancer screening (78%
vs 64%) and diagnosis by imaging (78% vs 25%) ratherthan clinical symptoms (19% vs 73%) (p<0.001, all com-
parisons). PRE-C-D carriers had lower stage at diagnosis
(p<0.001), with no differences in tumor grade, hormonalreceptor or Her2 status. PRE-C-D carriers were less likely to
receive chemotherapy (34% vs. 94%), and more likely toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1541elect bilateral mastectomies (66% vs 17%) (p ≤.001 all
comparisons). In multivariate analysis, PRE-C-D g BRCA
identi ﬁcation predicted for early stage (0-I) breast cancer
diagnosis (OR =18.4, p<0.001). Initial analysis indicates
better overall survival (HR =0.16, p=0.087)
Conclusions: Presymptomatic identi ﬁcation of g BRCA
status is signi ﬁcantly associated with earlier stage breast
cancer diagnosis, less extensive treatment, and possibly
improvement in overall survival. This supports routinegBRCA testing in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Funded
by the BCRF
S. Lieberman: None. T. Hadar: None. P. Mor: None.
G. Amit: None. E. Tahover: None. O. Rosengarten:
None. M. Carmon: None. O. Olsha: None. R. Abu-Dalo:
None. R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. E. Golomb: None. R.
Rabinovitch: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None.
P12.014C
Estimation of mutation frequency in new breast cancer
susceptibility genes in a Greek patients ’cohort
M. Chatzidaki
1, Y. L. Loukas1, G. Thodi2, O. Trianta ﬁlli2,
C. A. Sarri2, E. Molou2, Y. Dotsikas1
1Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece,2Neoscreen
LTD, Athens, Greece
Introduction: Many other than BRCA1 andBRCA2 genes
have been implicated in breast cancer predisposition duringthe last decade enabling the identi ﬁcation of more women at
higher risk for breast cancer compared to the general
population and develop surveillance protocols tailored totheir needs in the near future.
Purpose: The purpose of the current study was to esti-
mate the prevalence of pathogenic mutations in the “new”
breast cancer susceptibility genes in a Greek patients ’
cohort.
Patients and Methods: 104 women who developed
breast cancer under the age of 55 years old with or without
family history and women free of cancer but with two or
more affected ﬁrst degree relatives constitute our patients ’
cohort. DNA was extracted with Nucleospin tissue kit and
libraries were prepared using the TruSight ®Cancer
Sequencing Panel, which includes 40 breast cancer sus-ceptibility genes, following the manufacturer ’s instructions.
Massive parallel sequencing was conducted on Miseq
platform (Illumina).
Results: Two cases carrying missense mutations of
unknown clinical signi ﬁcance were identi ﬁed in MLH1 and
PALB2 genes, respectively. One case harbors the CHEK2
c.1100delC mutation, which confers three- to ﬁve-fold
increased risk compared to the general population, whiletwo women were heterozygote for pathogenic mutation in
theRAD51C andRAD51D genes, respectively.
Conclusion: The overall occurrence of possibly patho-
genic mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes,
excluding the ones detected in the highly penetrant BRCA1
and BRCA2 genes, is 4.8%. Thus, these genes seem to
enable the identi ﬁcation of more clinical cases which may
be bene ﬁted by closer monitoring.
M. Chatzidaki: None. Y.L. Loukas: None. G. Thodi:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen
LTD. O. Trianta ﬁlli:A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Neoscreen LTD. C.A. Sarri: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen LTD. E. Molou: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen LTD.
Y. Dotsikas: None.
P12.015D
Detection of variants of pathogenic and uncertainsigniﬁcance in an Irish population using multi-gene
panels for breast cancer risk
U. M. McVeigh
1, T. P. McVeigh2, N. Miller1,
D. W. Morris3, M. J. Kerin1
1Discipline of Surgery, Lambe Institute for Translational
Research, NUI, Galway, Ireland,2Cancer Genetics Unit,
The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UnitedKingdom,
3Discipline of Biochemistry, NUI, Galway,
Ireland
Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common cancer
worldwide. Twin studies estimate that >30% BCs are the
result of hereditary factors. While hugely informative,pathogenic variants in BRCA1 andBRCA2 explain only 16-
22% of hereditary BCs. Several high- and moderate-risk
genes, and >100 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)have been identi ﬁed which explain 33% of hereditary BCs.
Approximately 50% of the hereditary risk of BC is
unknown. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a cost-effective method of investigating numerous genes in one
assay. There are an abundance of clinical multi-gene panel
tests aimed at assessing the inherited risk of BC ± ovariancancer. This study aimed to investigate germline variants
genes included on breast ± ovarian cancer risk panels in an
Irish population. DNA from 90 BCs and 77 controls weresequenced for variants in 83 genes from clinical breast ±
ovarian cancer risk panels. Variant calling was performed
following GATK best practices, and prioritised as loss-of-function(LOF) and missense variants; further grading was
performed using ﬁvein silico prediction tools. Excluding
common/benign variants, 56 variants were identi ﬁed in 37
genes. 36.5% and 39.2% of cases and controls carried ≥one
variant. Nine variants were classi ﬁed as pathogenic/likely1542pathogenic; three occurred in ATM, BRCA1 , and CHEK2 .
Eight novel variants were identi ﬁed, including a frameshift
variant in NF1. Six variants were identi ﬁed in the Lynch
syndrome genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 , and PMS1 . These
results highlight the need for caution when considering the
use of multi-gene testing in the clinic given the challengesof accurately predicting variant pathogenicity.
U.M. McVeigh: None. T.P. McVeigh: None. N. Miller:
None. D.W. Morris: None. M.J. Kerin: None.
P12.017B
Genetic models of breast cancer based on eight commongenetic variants
Z. Dankova
1, K. Zelinová1, M. Jagelková1, M. Grendár2,
P. Kasajová3, M. Kalman4, Z. Lasabová1,P . Žúbor3
1Biomedical Center Martin - Division of Oncology, Martin,
Slovakia,2Biomedical Center Martin - Bioinformatic Unit,
Martin, Slovakia,3Clinic of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Martin University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia,4Department
of Pathology, Martin University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia
Introduction: This study analyses eight SNPs of low
penetrant genes to detect possible importance in breast
cancer (BC) risk.
Materials and Methods: The study consists of 317
women: 171 with breast cancer (57.06±11.60 years) and
146 without previous history of any malignancy (50.24
±10.69 years). Major breast cancer histological type wasDIC (76.0%), followed by LIC (7.8%). We genotyped eight
genetic variants (rs4415084 FGF10 , rs2981582 FGFR2 ,
rs889312 MAP3K1 , rs3817198 LSP1 , rs3803662 TOX3/
TNRC9 , rs2293554 CASP8 , rs13387042 and rs13281615
CASC21) by High Resolution Melting method and vali-
dated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: General, dominant and multiplicative genetic
models con ﬁrmed signi ﬁcant association with BC in the
case of FGFR2 (C/T) and MAP3K1 (A/C´) polymorphisms
(in all cases p ≤0.03). Odd ratios for general model:
CT=1.771, TT =1.953, AC ´=1.760, C ´C´=2.894. Odd
ratios for dominant model: CT +TT=1.822 and AC ´+
C´C´=1.868 and odd ratios of multiplicative genetic models
T=1.517 (95%CI =1.083-2.131), C´=1.676 (p ≤0.04).
Logistic regression of interaction revealed the lowest ORfor the combination of original homozygote genotypes (AA
+CC+TT) of MAP3K1 ,FGFR2 and LSP1 genotypes
(OR=0.024, 95%CI 0.001-0.306, p =0.011), indicating
lower risk for those without risk alleles.
The risk allele genotype (CC) of LSP1 (T/C) gene poly-
morphism showed solely ER-positivity (100%), hetero-zygotes with one risk allele (TC) were also mostly ER +
(90.6%). The risk genotype (GG) of CASP8 polymorphismshowed 100% of HER2 +, 100% of PR- and the same 50%
of ER+and ER- (p =0.006, p =0.018, p =0.04).
Conclusion: Out of eight genetic variants analysed in our
study, four were identi ﬁed to associate with BC, namely
within genes FGFR2 ,MAP3K1, LSP1 andCASP8 .
Z. Dankova: None. K. Zelinová: None. M. Jagelková:
None. M. Grendár: None. P. Kasajová: None. M. Kal-
man: None. Z. Lasabová: None. P.Žúbor: None.
P12.018C
Analysis of a CHEK2 variant in a family with an ATM
mutation and multiple breast cancer cases
M. Barzily-Rokni
1, R. Michaelson-Cohen1, S. Lieberman1,
S. Casadei2, O. Weiss1, O. Freireich1, S. Zuckerman1,
M. Sebbagh1, M. C. King2, R. Beeri1, E. Levy-Lahad1,3
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel,2Departments of
Medicine and Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States,3Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew
University, Jeruslaem, Israel
We present analysis of a CHEK2 variant found in a family
of Moroccan Jewish origin with multiple breast cancer
cases. Of 11 sisters, 5 were diagnosed with breast cancer in
their 60 ’s; one had both papillary thyroid cancer (age 67)
and pancreatic cancer (age 76). Their mother had breast
cancer (age 70). Panel testing in four sisters revealed two
germline variants: a known pathogenic mutation in ATM-p.Q1970X; and a variant in CHEK2 classi ﬁed as being of
uncertain signi ﬁcance - c.592 +3A>T. (rs587782849, gno-
mAD allele frequency =0.000032). This variant has been
reported once to alter CHEK2 splicing (Kraus C et al, Int J
Cancer, 2017). 8 sisters were tested. Of the 5 with breast
cancer, 3 (ages 60-66) carried of both variants and two (ages61, 67) carried only the CHEK2 variant. The sister affected
with thyroid and pancreatic cancer carried only the ATM
mutation, as did 2 unaffected sisters (ages 53, 67). CHEK2c.592+3A>T was found in 2/234 (0.8%) Sephardi breast
cancer patients (also of Moroccan origin), and was also
observed in an unaffected woman of Balkan origin (age 36).cDNA analysis revealed two alternate transcripts, one
lacking exon 4, and one lacking exons 4-5 (both out-of-
frame, con ﬁrming the previous report). Semi-quantitative
PCR indicated 50% reduction of the wild-type transcript. In
summary, CHEK2 c.592 +3 A>T is a rare splicing variant,
which should be reclassi ﬁed as mild pathogenic. In this
family, the presence of two pathogenic variants in
moderate-risk breast cancer genes may explain the high
load of late-onset breast cancer.
M. Barzily-Rokni: None. R. Michaelson-Cohen: None.
S. Lieberman: None. S. Casadei: None. O. Weiss: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1543O. Freireich: None. S. Zuckerman: None. M. Sebbagh:
None. M.C. King: None. R. Beeri: None. E. Levy-
Lahad: None.
P12.019D
Deregulation of TRAIL apoptotic pathway mRNAexpression in breast tumours
E. Roupou
1, M. Michelli1, I. Chatziandreou1,
N. V. Michalopoulos2, P. Karathanasis3, A. A. Saetta1
11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Ath,
Athens, Greece,2Department of Surgery Attikon Hospital,
School of Medicine, University of Athens N.K.U.A., Athens,Greece, Athens, Greece,
31st Department of Propaedeutic
Surgery Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine,
University of Athens N.K.U.A., Athens, Greece, Athens,Greece
Introduction: TRAIL apoptotic pathway constitutes a
promising therapeutic target for cancer patients, due to
high selectivity and low toxicity of TRAIL agents when
administered in monotherapy/combination therapies. Theaim of our study was to search for possible predictive
biomarkers for patient strati ﬁcation to ensure maximum
treatment ef ﬁcacy of TRAIL targeted therapy.
Materials and Methods: 88 breast cancer tissues were
examined for relative mRNA expression of TRAIL and its
receptors ( DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2 ), using RT-PCR/ ΔΔCt
method. For statistical analysis SPSSv22 package was used.
Death receptor (DR4, DR5) protein levels were analyzed by
Western blot in a subset of cases.
Results: Elevated mRNA levels were observed in 11%,
19.3%, 23.9%, 11.6% and 12% of the cases for TRAIL,
DR4, DR5, DcR1 and DcR2 genes respectively. Reduced
mRNA levels were detected in 64.6%, 38.6%, 31.8%,
45.3% and 42.2% of the cases for TRAIL, DR4, DR5, DcR1 ,
andDcR2 genes respectively. TRAIL expression was cor-
related with molecular subtype (p =0,011), DR4 with N
category (p =0,029) and tumor grade (p =0,015), DcR1 with
tumor grade (p =0,001) and ER/PR expression (p =0,051).
All receptors correlated with the prognostic stage (DR4
p=0,005, DR5 p =0,029, DcR1 and DcR2 p =0,006). The
receptors ’mRNA levels presented linear correlations and
the strongest was found between DR4/DR5 (R =0,634,
p<0,001).
Conclusions: A signi ﬁcant deregulation of TRAIL
pathway components mRNA expression in breast cancer
was observed in the present study. Multiple simultaneous
expression patterns of TRAIL receptors emerged, under-scoring the importance of patient selection using predictivebiomarkers in order to achieve ef ﬁcient TRAIL targeted
therapy.
E. Roupou: None. M. Michelli: None. I. Chatzian-
dreou: None. N.V. Michalopoulos: None. P. Kar-
athanasis: None. A.A. Saetta: None.
P12.020A
Identi ﬁcation of signi ﬁcant network markers for breast
cancer in Middle Eastern women using integratedtranscriptomic and network analysis
O. Al-Harazi
1,2, I. H. Kaya1,3, A. El Allali2, N. Kaya4,
D. Colak1
1Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scienti ﬁc
Computing, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2College of Computer and
Information Sciences, Computer Science Department, KingSaud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
3College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Introduction: Breast cancer is a major health problem in
the world and it is the most common cause of cancer death
among women. The integration of gene expression pro ﬁles
and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network provides abetter understanding of the molecular architecture of
diseases. Recently, many researchers have invested efforts
for identifying subnetwork biomarkers for cancer. It hasbeen shown that these subnetwork biomarkers are more
robust and reliable than single biomarker genes that are
selected based on the gene expression data only.
Materials and Methods: We performed an integrated
network analysis of gene expression data with the PPI to
identify signi ﬁcant subnetwork biomarkers. In addition, we
used the k-nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithm to de ﬁne the
classi ﬁer. We validated the classi ﬁcation performance on an
independent gene expression dataset of breast cancer sam-ples. Moreover, we performed survival analyses using dif-
ferent transcriptomic datasets that consisted of over
3,000 samples.
Results: We have identi ﬁed four subnetwork biomarkers
that signi ﬁcantly distinguished breast cancer patients from
healthy controls. The identi ﬁed classi ﬁer achieved 97%
predictive accuracy between tumor and normal samples.
Moreover, the survival analysis demonstrated that high
expression of our biomarkers is associated with poor diseaseoutcome.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the network ana-
lysis coupled with genomic data may provide a robustmethodology to identify key biological programs associated
with breast cancer progression and invasion and may lead to1544improved diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic options.
Funding: This study is funded by KFSHRC Research Grant
(2110006 to DC).
O. Al-Harazi: None. I.H. Kaya: None. A. El Allali:
None. N. Kaya: None. D. Colak: None.
P12.021B
Integration of tumour sequencing and case-control
analyses is a powerful tool for identi ﬁcation of cancer
predisposition genes
I. Campbell, N. Li, B. Lim, S. McInerny, M. Zethoven,
D. Cheasley, S. Rowley, L. Devereux, A. Lee, N. Grewal,
P. James
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia
Background: The genetic causes of a large proportion of
breast cancer families is unknown and while our targeted
sequencing of over 12,000 index cases and controls has
identi ﬁed numerous strong candidates, individually muta-
tions in these genes are rare. Our work highlights the fact
that in isolation, case-control studies will remain substan-
tially underpowered to establish a clear role for novel breastcancer predisposition genes and orthogonal validation
approaches will be required. Genomic analysis of tumours
from carriers of germline variants in candidate genes canprovide powerful additional evidence for involvement of a
gene in cancer predisposition through identi ﬁcation of
“second hit ”somatic inactivation events and characteristic
“mutational signatures ”.
Results: We applied this approach to assess the role of
RAD51C in breast cancer predisposition. Full exon
sequencing of RAD51C in a case/control analysis identi ﬁed
a signi ﬁcant excess of loss of function variants in cases
compared with controls (0.36% versus 0.04%; OR =8.67,
95% CI =1.89 to 80.52, P=9.87x10
-04). In addition, the
association was highly signi ﬁcant among cases with ER
negative ( P=1.57x10-05) or triple-negative cancer
(P=7.33x10-06), but not in ER positive cases. Tumour
sequencing from carriers con ﬁrmed bi-allelic inactivation in
all the triple-negative cases and this was associated withhigh levels of large-scale genomic alterations and a muta-
tional signature 3, both indicative of homologous recom-
bination repair de ﬁciency.
Conclusions: This study provides compelling evidence
that germline loss of function variants in RAD51C are
associated with triple-negative breast cancer and demon-strates the substantial power of tumour sequencing to
advance the discover new cancer genes.
I. Campbell: None. N. Li: None. B. Lim: None. S.
McInerny: None. M. Zethoven: None. D. Cheasley:None. S. Rowley: None. L. Devereux: None. A. Lee:
None. N. Grewal: None. P. James: None.
P12.022C
Genomic mapping of Crete via BRCA1 andBRCA2
mutation analysis
P. Apostolou
1, F. Fostira1, C. Kourousis2, A. Vagena1,
A. Delimitsou1, M. Papamentzelopoulou1,
V. Georgoulias3, D. Mavroudis3, K. Kalpakis3,
N. Androulakis4, I. Drositis4, D. Yannoukakos1,
E. Saloustros5, I. Konstantopoulou1
1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos,
Athens, Greece,2General Clinic "IASO", Chania, Crete,
Greece,3Department of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion-Crete, Greece,4General
Hospital of Heraklion "Venizelio-Pananio", Heraklion-Crete, Greece,
5Department of Oncology, University
Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece
Introduction: Germline BRCA1/2 loss-of-function variants
are linked to increased breast and ovarian cancer risk. Up to
date, more than 5000 distinct BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants
have been reported, while their frequency and distribution
varies between populations and ethnicities. In the Greek
population, founder effects have been described, mainlyinvolving BRCA1 loss-of-function variants. However,
certain geographical regions were underrepresented in
previous studies. We therefore aimed to de ﬁne and
molecularly characterize the BRCA1/2 mutational spectrum
in Crete, the largest Greek island with unique demographic
and cultural characteristics.
Materials and Methods: Patients of Cretan descent, with
breast or/and ovarian cancer ful ﬁlling NCCN guidelines
were selected for genetic testing by NGS or Sangersequencing, followed by MLPA. Haplotype analysis was
subsequently performed to investigate potential founder
effects of recurrent alleles.
Results: In total 291 patients (273 females, 18 males)
were included. Forty-eight patients (16.5%) carried 21 dif-
ferent pathogenic variants in BRCA1 (45.8%; 22/48) and
BRCA2 (54.2%; 26/48). The deleterious variants c.6842-
2675_7008-5558del and c.7806-2A>T in BRCA2 and
c.5492del in BRCA1 were recurrent and constituted 50% of
all identi ﬁed pathogenic variants. Haplotype analysis con-
ﬁrmed a founder effect for all three variants with a particular
origin for each of them. Subsequent analyses indicate thatthese are Cretan founders, since they have not been detected
in patients originating from other regions of Greece.
Conclusions: The BRCA1/2 mutational spectrum of the
Cretan population shows particular geographical distribu-
tion, in ﬂuenced by strong founder effects. These ﬁndingsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1545may facilitate a population-based genetic screening for
identi ﬁcation of unaffected mutation carriers and primary
cancer prevention.
P. Apostolou: None. F. Fostira: None. C. Kourousis:
None. A. Vagena: None. A. Delimitsou: None. M.
Papamentzelopoulou: None. V. Georgoulias: None. D.
Mavroudis: None. K. Kalpakis: None. N. Androulakis:
None. I. Drositis: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. E. Sal-
oustros: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None.
P12.023D
Putative non-coding regulatory driver discovery usingunmatched tumor-normal samples
N. M. R. Lykoskou ﬁs, H. Ongen, E. T. Dermitzakis
University of Geneva, Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland
We had previously developed a methodology using allele
speciﬁc expression (ASE) as a proxy to discovering Genes
with Allelic Dysregulation (GADs) impacted by non-codingsomatic mutations, which requires matched healthy-tumour
samples. Here, we describe a methodology to discover
GADs using unmatched samples to compare tumor andreference RNAseq ASE (e,g. GTEx). Somatic mutations
under selection for tumorigenesis and falling in non-coding
regulatory regions of a gene tend to affect transcription in anallelic fashion that is observed as altered allelic imbalance
between normal and tumor samples. Moreover, we also
expect this gene to have altered gene expression forselection to occur. Hence, to detect non-coding regulatory
drivers in tumorigenesis, discriminating genes under
selection or under an eQTL effect, we devised three criteriato discover true driver genes. To test our method, we used
colorectal cancer data from the SYSCOL project treating
tumor and healthy samples as unmatched. We discov-ered702 genes passing all ﬁltering criteria. Of them, 197
overlapped with the 373 GADs previously discovered with
matched samples. Next, we used SYSCOL tumor and GTExsamples as control from colon sigmoid and colon
transverse, discovering 612 and 689 GADs, respectively.
Of these, 480 genes overlapped among all three unmatchedanalyses passing all criteria with 152 overlapping with the
previously discovered GADs indicating that our methodol-
ogy can detect regulatory drivers. Many of these havealready been implicated in various cancers. Current work is
validating our approach using prostate adenocarcinoma
samples and other cancers and exploring the understudiednon-coding regulatory drivers.
N.M.R. Lykoskou ﬁs:None. H. Ongen: None. E.T.
Dermitzakis: None.P12.024A
Exome sequencing identi ﬁed potential causative
candidate genes for serrated polyposis syndrome
S. Peters
1, C. Trueck1, C. Perne1,2, R. Adam1,3,
J. Altmueller4,5, H. Thiele4, I. Spier1,2, S. Aretz1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,2Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Center for
Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,4Cologne
Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,5Institute of Human Genetics, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is a poorly de ﬁned
colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome characterized bymultiple and/or large serrated lesions throughout the colon.
To date, only few molecular signatures have been described
and the etiology of the syndrome has not been identi ﬁed in
the vast majority of patients.
To uncover causative variants, the exomes of 49 SPS
patients have been sequenced (Illumina HiSeq) using leu-kocyte DNA. For data analysis, the GATK- and the
Varbank2-software were used. The germline variants were
ﬁltered for rare (biallelic: MAF ≤1%, monoallelic: ≤0.1%
according to gnomAD and an in-house-database) loss of
function (LoF) variants. The pLi-score and reactome path-
way analysis were used for further prioritization.
Biallelic LoF variants were found in 3 genes none of
which being recurrently mutated. All in all, 548 genes
harbored heterozygous LoF variants. 25 genes were recur-rently mutated. 31/551 genes were extremely LoF intolerant
indicated by pLi-score ≥0.9. 10/551 genes are involved in
DNA repair, 12 in cell cycle checkpoint control, and onegene in programmed cell death. Most interestingly, different
variants in two patients were found in one gene functioning
in the canonical wnt signalling pathway, as does RNF43, inwhich pathogenic variants have been shown to be causal
for SPS.
Exome sequencing identi ﬁes potentially causative germ-
line variants underlying the susceptibility to SPS. The cur-
rent work-up consists of screening of additional SPS
patients for the most interesting genes, and the inclusion ofmissense variants as well as CNVs. Additionally, a rare
variant analysis and burden tests will be conducted.
S. Peters: None. C. Trueck: None. C. Perne: None. R.
Adam: None. J. Altmueller: None. H. Thiele: None. I.
Spier: None. S. Aretz: None.1546P12.025B
The prognostic landscape of alternative transcript
isoforms across human cancers
K. M. Vincent1, S. D. Findlay2, L. Postovit3
1University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada,
2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
United States,3University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada
Introduction: Through alternative start site usage and
alternative splicing, individual genes commonly produce
multiple mRNA isoforms that can code for proteins with
similar, distinct, or even opposing functions. Most cancerexpression studies evaluate expression at a gene-level, not
accounting for the impact of multiple transcript isoforms
arising from the same genetic locus.
Materials and Methods: Herein, we used clinical and
RNA-sequencing data from 5642 tumours from 14 different
cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas to investigateassociations between gene expression, at both the gene and
isoform levels, and patient outcomes using Cox regression
models. In addition, we used SNP and methylation data toanalyze how coordinated genetic and epigenetic events may
regulate these alternative isoform decisions through appli-
cation of the sQTLseekeR algorithm and a methylationcorrelation analysis.
Results: We have found that many genes have alternative
isoforms that associate with survival in opposite directions,unveiling a new molecular level with strong associations
with patient outcomes. Isoform-level data, when compared
to gene-level data, revealed an additional 6605 genes withisoforms signi ﬁcantly associated with survival in the 14
different cancers studied (|meta Z score| Q<0.001). Addi-
tionally, we have identi ﬁed potential genetic (SNP) and
epigenetic (methylation) mechanisms for these alternative
isoform decisions.
Conclusions: We have shown that approaching gene
expression as an isoform-level phenomenon provides a
more sensitive approach to identifying signatures associated
with patient outcomes. Moreover, the genetic and epigeneticregulation of these events reveals speci ﬁc molecular biology
that may contribute to individual differences in disease
outcome, and should be further explored.
K.M. Vincent: None. S.D. Findlay: None. L.
Postovit: None.
P12.026C
Identifying sequence variants contributing to hereditary
breast/ovarian cancer in patients with no identi ﬁed
BRCA1 orBRCA2 variantsE. Jarhelle
1, H. F. R. Stensland1, G. Å. M. Hansen1,
S. Skarsfjord1, C. Jonsrud1, M. Ingebrigtsen1,
N. Strømsvik1, M. Van Ghelue1,2
1University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway,
2The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
Introduction: Patients with hereditary breast and ovarian
cancer (HBOC) are diagnostically tested for pathogenicvariants (PVs) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 . However, in most
HBOC families no PVs are detected. Currently, several
additional genes were shown to be involved in increasingthe cancer risk in HBOC patients. Accordingly, we
investigated a Norwegian HBOC cohort in order to identify
genetic risk factors for cancer in these patients.
Material and Methods: Hundred and one HBOC
patients negative for pathogenic variants in BRCA1/BRCA2
were screened for PVs in 94 genes using next-generationsequencing. We used Illumina TruSight rapid capture
technology to prepare the Illumina TruSight Cancer targeted
sequencing libraries, which were sequenced using an Illu-mina MiSeq System. The sequencing data were analyzed
using Illumina MiSeq Reporter, and detected variants were
annotated and ﬁltered in Cartagenia Bench Lab NGS soft-
ware using different criteria. The detected variants were
scrutinized for their pathogenicity using Alamut Visual
(Interactive Biosoftware).
Results: Nine different deleterious germline PV/likely
pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in seven genes in 12
patients: three in ATM , and one in CHEK2, ERCC5 ,
FANCM ,RAD51C ,TP53 andWRN . Six of the 12 patients
were carriers of a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUSs)
in other genes. Several different VUSs were identi ﬁed
requiring further characterization.
Conclusion: In order to improve the clinical follow-up,
more knowledge is needed regarding the diversity ofgenetic risk factors possibly involved in cancer develop-
ment. Currently, for carriers of PV/LPV in many of these
genes, there are no clinical management programs inNorway.
E. Jarhelle: None. H.F.R. Stensland: None. G.Å.M.
Hansen: None. S. Skarsfjord: None. C. Jonsrud: None.
M. Ingebrigtsen: None. N. Strømsvik: None. M. Van
Ghelue: None.
P12.027D
Molecular characterization of tumour DNA from
patients with non-small cell lung cancer
S. Kyriakou
1, A. Eliades1, C. Loizides1, K. Tsangaras1,
A. Achilleos1, E. Kypri1, I. Drejeriene2,3,
J. Kasnauskiene2, M. Ioannides1, G. Koumbaris1,
P. C. Patsalis1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15471NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,2Klaipeda University
Hospital, Klaipeda, Lithuania,3Vilnius University, Vilnius,
Lithuania
Introduction: Cancer is often characterized as an evolu-
tionary process driven by sequential acquisition of somaticmutations and clonal selection. Therefore, genomic analysis
of cancer cells has greatly enhanced our ability to identify
genetic alterations associated with various cancer types.Taking this in mind, cancer diagnosis and treatment is
undergoing a fundamental shift from a histopathologically
deﬁned tumour treated with chemotherapy towards mole-
cular characterisation of the tumour and use of targeted
therapies. The challenge of clinical centres is to meet the
needs for molecular testing using reliable methods andprocesses to ensure the patient receives accurate results in a
timely manner. This study is focusing on the identi ﬁcation
of actionable mutations in non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC) patients that could inform the clinician in regards
to diagnosis, prognosis and therapy decision.
Materials and Methods: Formalin- ﬁxed, paraf ﬁn-
embedded (FFPE) tumour DNA from 57 patients diag-
nosed with NSCLC were subjected to NIPD Genetics pro-
prietary targeted capture enrichment technology followedby NGS. Sequencing data were validated by an independent
laboratory using Ion Torrent platform and Ampliseq colon
and lung cancer panel from Thermo ﬁsher.
Results: The most frequent mutations were identi ﬁed in
TP53 (46.81%), KRAS (14.89%), EGFR (10.64%) and
PIK3CA (10.64%). Results were validated with IonTorrent-NGS for 26 patients for which there was adequate DNA
material from the same tissue sections with a 97.3% con-
cordance between the two methods.
Conclusion: These results highlight the clinical utility of
our assay as a companion diagnostics tool that can inform
cancer diagnosis, prognosis and guide therapy.
S. Kyriakou: None. A. Eliades: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. C. Loizides: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics.
K. Tsangaras: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. A. Achilleos: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. Kypri: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics.
I. Drejeriene: None. J. Kasnauskiene: None. M. Ioan-
nides: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD
Genetics. G. Koumbaris: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P.C. Patsalis: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIPD Genetics.
P12.028A
Interventions in a Specialist Drug Development Unit toimprove family history documentation and onwardreferral of patients with advanced cancer to Cancer
Genetics Services
C. Moss, S. Ward, E. Cojocaru, W. Xu, J. Hanwell,
M. van Zyl, L. O'Leary, J. de Bono, U. Banerji, S. Kaye,
A. Minchom, A. George, J. Lopez, T. McVeigh
The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom
Molecular aberrations in cancer may represent therapeutic
targets, and, if arising from the germline, impact further
cancer risk management in patients and their blood
relatives. Annually, 600-700 patients are referred for
consideration of experimental drug trials in the Drug
Development Unit (DDU) in our institution. A proportionof patients may merit germline genetic testing because of
suspicious personal/family history or ﬁndings of tumour-
based testing. We aimed to assess the impact of differentmulti-disciplinary interventions on family history taking in
and referral rates from DDU to Cancer Genetics
Unit (CGU).
Methods:
Over 42 months, three interventions were undertaken at
different intervals;
1. Embedding a genetics provider in DDU review clinic
2.“Trafﬁc light ”system ﬂagging cancers with heritable
component
3. Virtual multi-disciplinary meeting (MDM).
Comparative analyses between intervals were undertaken,
including referral rates to CGU, investigations and patient
outcomes. Family history-taking in a sample of 20 patientsmanaged in each interval was assessed by retrospective
chart review.
Results: Frequency of family history taking, and referral
to CGU, increased with each intervention, particularly, the
virtual MDM (40%-v- 85%). Referral rates increased over
the study period, from 0.1 referral/week (5/year, 0.36% totalreferrals) to 1.2/week (projected 63/year (3.81%). Forty-
four (52%) patients referred required germline testing, in
three of whom variants were identi ﬁed. Non-attendance
rates were low (6, 7%).
Conclusion: Patients in the DDU are unique, with long
cancer histories and short estimated life expectancy. Mul-tidisciplinary working between CGU and DDU facilitates
germline testing of those patients that may otherwise miss
the opportunity.
C. Moss: None. S. Ward: None. E. Cojocaru: None. W.
Xu: None. J. Hanwell: None. M. van Zyl: None. L.
O'Leary: None. J. de Bono: None. U. Banerji: None. S.
Kaye: None. A. Minchom: None. A. George: None. J.
Lopez: None. T. McVeigh: None.1548P12.029B
Alterations of DNA Damage Response Pathway in
Lithuanian Patients with Castration-Resistant Prostate
Cancer
R. Sabaliauskaite1, I. Trockaja1, A. Sestokaite1,2,A .U l y s1,
F. Jankevicius1,3, S. Jarmalaite1,2
1National Cancer Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of
Biosciences, Life Sciences Center, Vilniu University,
Vilnius, Lithuania,3Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania
Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is a heterogeneous and
dynamic disease, which usually progresses to castrationresistant PCa (CRPC) - the highly lethal form. Recent data
suggest that CRPC may carry the germline or sporadic
mutations in DNA damage response (DDR) pathway genesand this cancer is commonly identi ﬁed in families with a
high predisposition to the breast and ovarian cancer. Next
generation sequencing based-studies can uncover thecomplex genomic landscape of CRPC and identify novel
targets for ef ﬁcient anticancer therapies. The aim of our
study was the assessment of DDR pathway alterations inLithuanian cohort of CRPC cases using qPCR and NGS
targeted gene panel.
Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from leu-
kocytes of 143 CRPC patients that enrolled the study during
2016-2018. Dominant germline gene mutations in periph-
eral blood leukocytes were analyzed by custom madeTaqMan assays and by NGS using custom made panel.
Results: DNA mutation in at least one of the ﬁve DDR
genes was detected in 23 of 143 (16%) CRPC cases: inBRCA1 ,BRCA2 ,CHEK2 ,NBN andATM were detected 2
(1,4%), 3 (2,1%), 12 (8,4%), 1 (0,7%) and 5 (3,5%),
respectively. The most predominant mutation of the DDRpathway was the CHEK2 c.470T>C mutation.
Conclusions: Germline or sporadic mutations of DDR
pathway genes were detected in 16% of CRPC casesshowing signi ﬁcant involvement of this molecular pathway
in progression of PCa to the most aggressive form of the
disease. In the future, speci ﬁc treatment regimens should be
considered for this subgroup of CRPC cases.
R. Sabaliauskaite: None. I. Trockaja: None. A. Sesto-
kaite: None. A. Ulys: None. F. Jankevicius: None. S.
Jarmalaite: None.
P12.030C
Expression of CD24 in plasma, exosome and ovarian
tissue samples of serous ovarian cancer patients
B. Soltesz
1, J. Lukács2, E. Szilágyi1, É. Márton1,
M. Szilágyi Bónizs1, A. Penyige1, R. Póka2, B. Nagy11Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,2Institute of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
CD24 is a small molecular weight cell-surface protein and
an independent marker for poor prognosis in the different
type of cancers. Determination of CD24 expression in
plasma, exosomes and ovarian tissue samples of serousovarian cancer patients was our aim.
Ovarian tissue and blood samples from 21 cases of serous
ovarian cancer and eight healthy controls were collected.After RNA isolation, the cDNA was synthesized, and then
quantitative real-time PCR was performed using beta-globin
as a housekeeping gene for the normalization of the data.Protein-protein and miRNA network analysis were per-
formed using Biogrid and miRTargetLink databases.
Signi ﬁcant difference in the expression of CD24 in
ovarian tissue between controls and patients (0.1595
±0.3213 vs. 44.97±68.06 p =0.0068) was observed, while
CD24 expression was detected in exosomes in 38.1% ofpatients, mainly with FIGO III, and in plasma 9.5% of
cases. Correlation in the expression of CD24 and FIGO
stages was determined between controls and patients. Ournetwork analysis shows LYN, SELP, FGR, and NPM1
proteins are interacting with CD24.
Our research work demonstrated higher expression of
CD24 in ovarian cancer patients ’tissue samples, and there
was an association with FIGO classi ﬁcation. However,
CD24 expression was detected only in some cell-freeplasma and exosome samples.
B. Soltesz: None. J. Lukács: None. E. Szilágyi: None.
É. Márton: None. M. Szilágyi Bónizs: None. A. Penyige:
None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None.
P12.031D
CDH1 pathogenic variants in patients who do not ful ﬁll
testing criteria are not necessarily incidental ﬁndings
K. Strojnik
1, M. Krajc1, M. Banjac1, V. Stegel2, P. Skerl2,
V. Setrajcic Dragos2, G. Klancar2, S. Novakovic2,
A. Blatnik1
1Cancer Genetic Clinic, Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute
of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Multigene panel testing may identify carriers
of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants (PV/LPV) in the
CDH1 gene without a personal and/or family history of
diffuse gastric and/or lobular breast cancer. Clinicalinterpretation of such cases can be dif ﬁcult.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1549Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of all
identi ﬁed cases of germline PV/LPV in CDH1 since the
introduction of the Illumina ’s TruSight Cancer sequencing
panel at our Institute.
Results: Multigene panel testing was performed in 2448
cases of suspected hereditary cancer predisposition. Het-erozygous PV/LPV in the CDH1 gene were identi ﬁed in 8
unrelated probands. 4/8 cases ful ﬁlled the International
Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium (IGCLC) 2015 criteria,one only after revision of the gastric tumor specimen. The
remaining 4/8 cases failed to ful ﬁll IGCLC criteria. In two
of these, there was a veri ﬁed family history of mucinous and
mixed-cell gastric cancers unavailable for revision. In the
two other cases, the probands were screened for hereditary
breast-ovarian cancer with a panel which included CDH1 .
Of these, there was limited data regarding family history in
one case, and an unveri ﬁable family history of second-
degree relatives with gastric cancer in the other. In ourcohort, we identi ﬁed 22 carriers of variants of uncertain
signiﬁcance (VUS) in CHD1 , most with a low likelihood of
pathogenicity.
Conclusions: Testing for CDH1 variants in patients who
do not ful ﬁll the IGCLC criteria resulted in a small number
of identi ﬁed PV/LPV carriers. Due to incomplete family
histories, these cannot be regarded as true incidental ﬁnd-
ings. The VUS detection rate was low.
K. Strojnik: None. M. Krajc: None. M. Banjac: None.
V. Stegel: None. P. Skerl: None. V. Setrajcic Dragos:
None. G. Klancar: None. S. Novakovic: None. A.
Blatnik: None.
P12.032A
Evidence for the association of the c.146T>C variant inCDKN2A with hereditary pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and melanoma syndrome in the Latino
population
S. Ryan, L. Mohler
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States
Germline mutations in the CDKN2A gene cause a hereditary
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and melanoma
syndrome. The presence of a CDKN2A pathogenic variant
has a signi ﬁcant impact in determining appropriate screen-
ings in carriers. Thus, accurate variant interpretation for
CDKN2A gene alterations is of utmost importance. There
are con ﬂ
icting reports of pathogenicity for a speci ﬁc variant
(c.146T>C) in this gene. This variant has been classi ﬁed as
a non-actionable variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance by four
laboratories while one laboratory has classi ﬁed it as likely
pathogenic and thus clinically actionable. Of interest, this
variant is present in the ExAC database at a high frequencyin the Latino population and, based on clinical data
provided to laboratories, an association with this variant
and PDAC in this population is postulated. We present four
pedigrees with Latino ancestry and the CDKN2A c.146T>C
variant. The pedigrees are consistent with a hereditary
PDAC and melanoma syndrome. In two families, themutation was documented in probands with a personal and
family history of PDAC. The third proband has a personal
history of melanoma and four ﬁrst-degree relatives and two
second-degree relatives with PDAC. The fourth proband is
unaffected with a second-degree relative with PDAC. These
clinical histories will assist with de ﬁning the pathogenicity
of this variant. It is documented that surveillance is more
successful at detecting PDAC at a resectable stage in
CDKN2A mutation carriers and thus accurate classi ﬁcation
of likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants plays an
important role in determining appropriate surveillance in
mutation carriers.
S. Ryan: None. L. Mohler: None.
P12.033B
A large intergenic deletion upstream of CDKN2A
predisposes melanoma
P. A. Johansson
1, V. Nathan1, M. Howlie1, J. Symmons1,
H. Hamilton1, M. H. Law1, E. A. Holland2,3, J. Palmer1,
G. J. Mann2,3, N. K. Hayward1, A. L. Pritchard1,4
1QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia,2Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney,
Australia,3The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,
4Genetics and Immunology, An Lòchran, University of the
Highlands and Island, Inverness, United Kingdom
Introduction: Mutations in the CDKN2A gene that affect
function of the p16INK4a transcript are the most commoncause of familial melanoma. With the advent of next-
generation sequencing a few more susceptibility genes have
been identi ﬁed over the last decade. Yet, approximately
50% of familial melanoma cases have no known attributed
genetic cause, despite suggested autosomal dominant
inheritance of disease.
Materials and Method: Whole genome (WGS) or
exome (WES) sequencing was performed on DNA samples
from 529 individuals in 267 high-risk families with cuta-neous or uveal melanoma.
Results: WGS identi ﬁed a 234 kb deletion approximately
200 kb upstream of the CDKN2A gene in 20/23 affected
individuals from a large cutaneous melanoma family. In the
neighbouring gene DMRTA1 , we identi ﬁed a haplotype-
linked rare (gnomAD variant allele frequency =8x1 0
-5)
coding variant. Screening of melanoma families worldwide
identi ﬁed a further eight families harbouring this deletion.1550Genetic ancestry analysis in combination with detailed
examination of records revealed a shared ancestor for three
of these families, though likely all originated from a com-
mon founder. Functional assessment of how this deletion
modiﬁes risk of cutaneous melanoma is on-going.
Conclusions: The deletion upstream of CDKN2A is the
most common mutation to have been found in cutaneous
melanoma families. This ﬁnding is of further signi ﬁcance
due to the distance of the deletion from CDKN2A and that it
would not be detected using traditional exome screening.
P.A. Johansson: None. V. Nathan: None. M. Howlie:
None. J. Symmons: None. H. Hamilton: None. M.H.
Law: None. E.A. Holland: None. J. Palmer: None. G.J.
Mann: None. N.K. Hayward: None. A.L.
Pritchard: None.
P12.034C
EGFR mutation testing in cf-DNA from NSCLCpatients using Cobas ®EGFR mutation test v2
A. A. Saetta, I. Giannopoulou, M. Michelli, A. Zougros,
E. Roupou, I. Chatziandreou
1st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
Introduction: EGFR mutation analysis in circulating cell-free
tumor DNA (cf-DNA) from plasma constitutes a less invasive
alternative method in cases without adequate tumor material
for molecular analysis and for monitoring disease progression.
Materials and Methods: 275 blood samples from
NSCLC patients (73 with matched paraf ﬁn-embedded
tumor tissues) were examined for EGFR mutations. Circu-lating cell- free tumor DNA (cf-DNA) isolation from
plasma and detection of EGFR mutations was performed
using Cobas ®EGFR mutation test v2.
Results: EGFR mutations in cf-DNA were found in 22%
of the samples. The most common EGFR mutations were
exon 19 deletions (65%), followed by exon 21 pointmutations (30%). The presence of mutations in primary
NSCLC reached 12% whereas the rate of mutations was
33% for NSCLC patients during follow up. A resistancemutation, p.Thr790Met was displayed in 27% of the mutant
cases. The analysis of 73 plasma cf-DNA samples versus
matched tumor DNA showed 82% concordance with 62%sensitivity, 100% speci ﬁcity, 100% PPV, 75% NPV, for the
detection of EGFR mutations.
Conclusions: We observed a very high Positive Pre-
dictive Value of cf-DNA testing using Cobas ®EGFR
mutation test v2 indicating that EGFR mutations could be
reported with certainty, whereas for patients with an EGFRmutation-negative cfDNA test, a biopsy should be obtained
in order to ascertain an accurate result, according to currentguidelines. In addition, as the resistance mutation p.
Cys797Ser can not be evaluated by this method further
testing is needed in this regard.
A.A. Saetta: None. I. Giannopoulou: None. M.
Michelli: None. A. Zougros: None. E. Roupou:
None. I.
Chatziandreou: None.
P12.035D
Screening for germline CHEK2 mutations in Spanish
families with hereditary cancer suspicion
J. del Valle1,2,3, G. Vargas —Parra1,2,3, P. Rofes1,2,3,
M. Gausachs1,2, A. Stradella1,2,4, E. Montes1,2,3,
E. Darder5, L. Feliubadaló1,2,3, J. Brunet1,5,6,
C. Lázaro1,2,3
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of
Oncology, IDIBELL., L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,
2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental
Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain,3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain,4Medical
Oncology Department, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,5Hereditary
Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGI,
Girona, Spain,6Medical Sciences Department, School of
Medicine, University of Girona, Girona, Spain
Introduction: CHEK2 pathogenic variants have been
associated with increased risk of different types of cancer,mainly breast cancer. The aim of this work was to study
CHEK2 mutations in hereditary cancer patients from Spain.
In aﬁrst step, we analyzed the three most prevalent CHEK2
mutations in a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer cohort
(HBOC). Next, we extended the analysis to the entire gene
to a larger hereditary cancer cohort.
Patients and Methods: Testing for recurrent CHEK2
mutations was performed by MLPA and CSCE in 432
patients from a retrospective HBOC cohort, negative forBRCA mutations. Targeted NGS was used to screen for
CHEK2 point mutations and large rearrangements in a
prospective cohort consisting in 1926 patients with heredi-tary cancer suspicion.
Results: In total we found 16 different mutations in 24
index cases (~1%); only one recurrent mutation,c.1100delC, was found in one case. Seventeen of these
patients (71%) had breast cancer while the remaining seven
were affected by other cancers (kidney, colorectal, ovarian,pancreatic and testicular cancers). Two of them were car-
riers of biallelic mutations, showing a severe phenotype.
Conclusions: Most of the CHEK2 identi ﬁed mutations
are not the common european recurrent mutations and are
present in patients outside the classical HBOC syndrome.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1551Further multicentric studies are needed to truly assess the
role of this gene in the pathogenesis of the different her-
editary cancer syndromes as well as to establish the asso-
ciated risks and clinical management of the patients and
their relatives.
J. del Valle: None. G. Vargas —Parra: None. P. Rofes:
None. M. Gausachs: None. A. Stradella: None. E. Mon-
tes: None. E. Darder: None. L. Feliubadaló: None. J.
Brunet: None. C. Lázaro: None.
P12.036A
Chromosomal changes in chordomas - pilot study
I. Urbanovska1,2, Z. Senkova2, B. Skugarevska2,
R. Lipina3, T. Geryk4, J. Simova1, J. Zmolikova1,
M. Uvirova1,2, J. Dvorackova1,2
1CGB Laboratory Inc., Ostrava - Vitkovice, Czech
Republic,2Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic,3Faculty Hospital Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic,4The Fingerland department of
Pathology, Faculty Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec
Kralove, Czech Republic
Introduction: Chordomas are very rare and slowly growing
malignant bone tumors originating from remnants of the
notochord. Although the morphology and immunologicalproﬁle of the chordoma cells are well described the
molecular and genetic mechanisms responsible for the
chordomas development have not been suf ﬁciently
elucidated yet.
Material and Methods: Total 45 FFPE chordoma sam-
ples from 20 patients from 2004-2017 were included in theproject. DNA isolation and Whole Genome Ampli ﬁcation
(WGA) using RepliG (QIAGEN) and Picoplex (Rubicon
Genomics) were performed (in every sample). Determina-tion of chromosomal changes was performed using micro-
array technology (Sure Print G3 Unrestricted CGH
(8x60K), Agilent) and massive parallel sequencing (Ver-iSeq, lllumina).
Results: DNA samples were of low quality and con-
centration. Even after RepliG WGA, hybridization on chipwas not successful. After Picoplex WGA, chromosomal
changes were successfully determined using the VeriSeq kit
in only 26 samples (from 17 patients). Recurrently foundchanges were 1p loss, 1q gain, chromosome 7 gain, chro-
mosome 14 and 18 losses. The found changes were con-
ﬁrmed using FISH. The resulting pro ﬁles did not change
during the patients` disease progress.
Conclusions: Our pilot study revealed that microarray is
inappropriate method for studying chromosomal changes inFFPE chordoma samples. The chromosomal changes were
detected in 85% of patients tested by VeriSeq kit. Ourﬁndings corellate with published results, but clinical utility
of these ﬁndings has to be evaluated.
Supported by project LF OU SGS17/LF/2017-2018
I. Urbanovska: None. Z. Senkova: None. B. Skugar-
evska: None. R. Lipina: None. T. Geryk: None. J.
Simova: None. J. Zmolikova: None. M. Uvirova: None.
J. Dvorackova: None.
P12.037B
Homozygosity for the CHEK2 p.Gly167Arg variant
results in a unique cancer syndrome with multiple
complex chromosomal translocations in peripheralblood karyotype
T. Paperna
1, N. Sharon-Shwartzman1, A. Kurolap1,2,
Y. Goldberg3, N. Moustafa1, Y. Carasso4, M. Feinstein-
Linial3, A. Mory1, G. Reznick-Levi1, C. Gonzaga-
Jauregui5, A. R. Shuldiner5, L. Basel-Salmon3,6,7,8,
Y. Ofran4,2, E. E. Half9,2, H. Baris Feldman1,2
1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus,
Haifa, Israel,2The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion –Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel,3Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical
Center - Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel,
4Department of Haematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa,Israel,
5Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, United
States,6Pediatric Genetics Clinic, Schneider Children's
Medical Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel,7Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Avib, Israel,
8Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical
Center, Petach Tikva, Israel,9Department of
Gastroenterology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa,
Israel
Introduction: Chromosomal instability is a well-
established cancer characteristic, which is rarely observed
in healthy tissues. Mutations in DNA repair genes disruptproper cell maintenance, causing structural or copy-number
aberrations that lead to cancer susceptibility. Here we
describe two reportedly unrelated patients that presentedwith unique cancer syndromes and an abnormal karyotype
in peripheral blood lymphocytes, caused by homozygosity
for the p.Gly167Arg mutation in CHEK2 .
Materials and Methods: Patient 1 was genetically
diagnosed by the TruSight One (TSO) panel and whole-
exome sequencing (WES); Patient 2 was diagnosed byFoundationOne ®Heme genomic analysis. Candidate
variant con ﬁrmation and segregation analyses were done
with Sanger sequencing. Karyotype analysis was per-formed on peripheral blood, bone marrow and other
available tissues.1552Results: Patient 1 presented with multi-organ tumor-
ogenesis, while Patient 2 had early-onset acute myeloid
leukemia. Both patients were found homozygous for the
CHEK2 c.499G>A; p.Gly167Arg variant. Karyotype ana-
lysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed 30-60%
multiple different chromosomal translocations. This kar-yotype was not observed in other tested tissues, including
bone marrow, nor in another cancer patient with a different
homozygous missense mutation in CHEK2 (p.Ser428Phe).
Conclusions: CHEK2 is a tumor suppressor gene,
encoding the serine-threonine kinase CHK2. Our ﬁndings
support the role of CHK2 in DNA-repair, as highlighted bythe multiple chromosomal translocations observed in lym-
phocytes from both patients. We suggest that homozygosity
for p.Gly167Arg impairs the correction of DNA breaks,leading to increased susceptibility to multiple tumorigenesis
or early-onset disease.
T. Paperna: None. N. Sharon-Shwartzman: None. A.
Kurolap: None. Y. Goldberg: None. N. Moustafa: None.
Y. Carasso: None. M. Feinstein-Linial: None. A. Mory:
None. G. Reznick-Levi: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals Inc. A.R. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc..
L. Basel-Salmon: None. Y. Ofran: None. E.E. Half:
None. H. Baris Feldman: None.
P12.038C
Functional validation and characterization of non-
coding regulatory drivers in Chronic LymphocyticLeukemia
A. Réal
1,2, H. Ongen1, N. Lykoskou ﬁs1, C. Borel1, G. Puga
Yung1,2, J. Seebach2,1, E. Dermitzakis1,3,4
1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,2University
Hospitals Geneva (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland,3iGE3
Institute of Genetics and Genomics, Geneva, Switzerland,
4Health 2030 Genome Center, Geneva, Switzerland
The role of coding mutations in cancer development has
been extensively studied. However, the identi ﬁcation of the
non-coding regulatory regions and the genes mediating their
effects, remains poorly understood. In a previous study
(BioRxiv 174219), we identi ﬁed 16 local modules of
coordinated non ‐coding regulatory elements of the genome
(cis regulatory domains or CRDs, FDR 5%) that accumu-
lated an excess of somatic mutations in 150 patients withchronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a cancer affecting B-
cells. Of those regions, 15 were associated to 44 genes,
candidates drivers of tumorigenesis.
In this work, we present the development of an in vitro
cancer-like model in which transformed B-cells areevaluated for their ability to reproduce cancer phenotypes
such as cell migration, proliferation and apoptosis. For 21
genes with increased expression due to hypermutated
CRDs, we setup a transfection assay to overexpress the
genes and evaluate the phenotypic changes. For 14 genes
with observed decreased expression, a microRNA inter-ference approach was designed to express arti ﬁcial miRNAs
with high target cleavage.
Challenges and limitations of this approach are the low
percentage of B-cells in blood and subject to donor-
dependent variability (3-15% of total PBMCs), and the
difﬁculty of B-cell transfection and culture.
The identi ﬁcation of changes in transformed B-cells
towards a cancer-like phenotype due to the expression
changes of candidate genes will provide a functional vali-dation for the computational approach used to identify
hypermutated CRDs and it will potentially identify new
genes driving tumorigenesis in CLL. Experiments are inprocess and ﬁrst results will be presented.
A. Réal: None. H. Ongen: None. N. Lykoskou ﬁs:None.
C. Borel: None. G. Puga Yung: None. J. Seebach: None.
E. Dermitzakis: None.
P12.039D
Identi ﬁcation of novel chronic lymphocytic leukemia
subtypes using pathway mutation scores and consensus
clustering
P. Taus
1, K. Plevová1,2, N. Darzentas1,3, K. Pál1,Š.
Pospí šilová1,2
1Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic,2Department of Internal
Medicine –Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital
Brno and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic,3Department of Internal Medicine II
-Hematology and Oncology of the University Medical
Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany
Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the
most common adult leukemia with variable clinical course
underlain by striking genetic heterogeneity. CLL features ahandful of putative driver genes and, more interestingly, a
large number of non-recurrently mutated genes with elusive
clinical implications. The aim of this study was to unravelthe prognostic impact of pathway somatic mutation patterns
in CLL.
Materials and Methods: We focused on a cohort of 316
CLL patients de ﬁned by mutated IGHV with somatic
mutation data gathered by International Cancer Genome
Consortium. In this cohort we collected 4739 genes affectedby nonsynonymous point and/or frameshift mutations. We
performed gene set enrichment analysis to identify affectedAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1553biological pathways, applied set theory to reduce redun-
dancy in enriched gene sets, calculated pathway mutation
scores for each patient and performed consensus clustering.
Finally, we evaluated the difference in time to therapy
(TTT) between identi ﬁed CLL clusters.
Results: We identi ﬁed eight clusters differing in TTT
(p<0.0001); seven of these were characterized by distinct
affected biological processes: namely, cell adhesion (21/23
mutated cases in the cluster), membrane depolarization (27/32), synapse organization (18/22), glycosylation (19/25),
Rho protein signal transduction (27/37), oxytocin signalling
and/or renin secretion (26/40), and transport through ABCtransporters (11/20; patients with the earliest need for
therapy).
Conclusion: Among CLL patients with mutated IGHV
we identi ﬁed distinct subgroups with non-recurrently
mutated genes involved in a limited number of biological
pathways. Our ﬁndings have far-reaching implications for
CLL diagnostics. Supported by AZV-MZCR 16-34272A,
16-29447A, CEITEC2020 LQ1601, MZCR-RVO
65269705, MUNI/A/1105/2018.
P. Taus: None. K. Plevová: None. N. Darzentas: None.
K. Pál: None. Š. Pospí šilová: None.
P12.041B
The results of the search for markers of the TKI
efﬁciency in patients with newly diagnosed CML using
molecular genetic methods
E. P. Adilgereeva
1, S. A. Smirnikhina1, A. V. Lavrov1,2,
A. G. Nikitin3, E. Y. Chelysheva4, O. A. Shukhov4,
A. G. Turkina4, S. I. Kutsev1,2
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Russian National Research Medical
University Named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, RussianFederation,
3Research Institute for Pulmonology, Moscow,
Russian Federation,4National Research Center for
Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative
disease characterized by pathogenic activity of the chimerictyrosine-kinase BCR/ABL which stimulates uncontrolled
cell proliferation. Primary resistance to the targeted
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKI) is registered in up to 20%of patients. The aim of the work is to search for possible
markers of the ef ﬁcacy of TKI therapy. We sequenced 60
exomes of patients with CML with different response totreatment on the platform NextSeq ™550, Illumina. The
microRNA expression pro ﬁle (n=6 with the optimal
response, n =6 with failure of therapy) was examined using
Nanostring technology and nCountermiRNA Expression
Assay. On an average, we found 280000 variants, which arecurrently under analysis. GWAS analysis using Hail did not
reveal polymorphisms associated with the response to
therapy. Based on the results of the expression analysis of
17 microRNAs with differential expression in two groups
were selected (p <0.05). The greatest difference in
expression is shown for hsa-miR-4286. Analysis of thefunctional role of microRNA revealed 40 pathways
enriched with genes regulated by 17 microRNAs. The most
important pathway is Pathways in cancer (hsa05200, p =
9.5 * 10
-14). The pathways Chronic myeloid leukemia
(hsa05220, p =0.00018), and Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(hsa05221; p =0.04) are also enriched. Deeper data
analysis will help to ﬁnd the possible predictors of the
response to therapy, as well as allow us to study the
mechanisms of disease progression, and microRNAs maybe prognostic markers of a response to targeted CML
therapy.
E.P. Adilgereeva: None. S.A. Smirnikhina: None. A.V.
Lavrov: None. A.G. Nikitin: None. E.Y. Chelysheva:
None. O.A. Shukhov: None. A.G. Turkina: None. S.I.
Kutsev: None.
P12.042C
Noninvasive detection of cancer speci ﬁc genomic
changes in patients with colorectal cancer
G. Minarik
1,2, S. Hermannova1, B. Vanova3, M. Hyblova2,
M. Kucharik2, L. Plank3
1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia,2Medirex Inc., Bratislava,
Slovakia,3Comenius University in Bratislava Jessenius
Faculty of Medicine, Martin, Slovakia
Introduction: Genomic analysis of circulating DNA
extracted from plasma of cancer patients has shownpotential to be used as noninvasive biomarker usable in
detection of cancer speci ﬁc genomic changes. Aim of the
study was to test the applicability of combined approachbased on parallel detection of CNVs and SNVs as
noninvasively obtained biomarkers in cohort of patients
with colorectal cancer (CRC).
Material and Methods: Circulating DNA of patients
with clinical diagnosis of CRC extracted from plasma col-
lected before and after surgical removal of primary tumorwere analyzed using low coverage whole genome scan for
detection of CNVs on whole genome level and high cov-
erage targeted resequencing of CRC speci ﬁc gene panel.
For CNVs and SNVs speci ﬁc data analysis homemade and
commercially available bioinformatic tools were used.
Results: Cancer speci ﬁc genomic changes resulting in
decrease of CNVs signal detected over the whole genome
were present in 42% and decrease of allelic ratio of cancer1554speciﬁc SNVs in 30% of CRC patients after primary tumor
surgery. If both types of genomic changes were analyzed in
combination the detection rate raised to 50%. Most fre-
quently mutated genes showing hypothesized SNVs speci ﬁc
signal decrease were TP53 ,APC,PIK3CA ,BRAF and
KRAS .
Conclusions: In half of patients cancer speci ﬁc genomic
changes represented by CNVs and SNVs shown hypothe-
sized decrease after tumor removal. Such results could bepotentially used in development of portfolio of non-
invasively utilizable biomarkers usable in disease monitor-
ing. Acknowledgements: This project was supported bySlovak Research and Development Agency under the code
APVV-14-0273.
G. Minarik: None. S. Hermannova: None. B. Vanova:
None. M. Hyblova: None. M. Kucharik: None. L.
Plank: None.
P12.043D
CMMRD-diagnostics and veri ﬁcation of homozygous
variants in PMS2
M. Morak
1,2, M. Locher2, N. Rahner3, V. Steinke-
Lange2,1, A. Laner2, U. Koehler2, T. Haeussler2,
T. Massdorf2, E. Holinski-Feder2,1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IVI, Campus
Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany,2MGZ Medical Genetics Center, Munich,
Germany,3Medical Faculty, Institute of Human Genetics,
Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany
Background: Constitutional Mismatch Repair De ﬁciency
(CMMRD) is a hereditary cancer predisposition for
hematological, brain, and other tumors starting from
childhood caused by biallelic variants in MLH1, MSH2,
MSH6, PMS2 .
Patients and Methods: We examined three patients (P1,
P2, P3) with clinical indication of CMMRD carryinghomozygous PMS2 variants, whose pathogenicity and
biallelic state should be veri ﬁed, as PMS2 -analysis is error-
prone due to the presence of multiple pseudogenes.
RNA was isolated from blood-lymphocytes cultured for
short-term in absence/presence of puromycin (cDNA-P/ +P)
to investigate transcripts with active/inhibited nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). From cDNA, the complete
PMS2 transcript was ampli ﬁed and sequenced for variants
or isoforms.
Results: A homozyogous exon 12 duplication was
detected in P1. cDNA-analysis for her and her parents
showed, that the duplicated exon was inserted in the tran-script (r.2007_2174dup p.Lys670_Ala725dup). Nowildtype allele was detected in P1, while present in both
parents with 50% intensity indicating a heterozygous state.
The effect of an SINE-VNTR-Alu-insertion in intron 7
upon splicing was tested in P2. In cDNA +P, the insertion
r.803_804insAATGTGCCATGTGAACCACCCCGTCTG
AAAAGTGAGGAGCCCCTCTGCCCGGCAGCCGCCCCGTCTGGGAG p.Tyr268* was present in absence of the
wildtype. In cDNA-P, the ampli ﬁcation failed, indicating
that both mutated transcripts were subjected to NMD.
For P3 with the homozygous variant c.736_741delins
TGTGTGTGAAG p.Pro246Cysfs*3, no cDNA was avail-
able. However, MLPA-analysis including a probe hybri-dizing to this region showed a complete dropout indicating
a homozygous state of the variant in exon 7, for which no
homologous pseudogene regions exist.
Conclusion: We con ﬁrmed the presence of homozygous
pathogenic PMS2 variants in three CMMRD-patients using
cDNA-analysis or MLPA.
M. Morak: None. M. Locher: None. N. Rahner: None.
V. Steinke-Lange: None. A. Laner: None. U. Koehler:
None. T. Haeussler: None. T. Massdorf: None. E. Hol-
inski-Feder: None.
P12.044A
Seven European colorectal cancer predisposing SNPs
are associated with CRC and its prognosis in Turkish
population
O. Cumaogullari
1,2, S. Charyyeva2, E. Abaci2, Z. Bilici2,3,
H. Ozakinci4, O. Ilk5, A. Kuzu6, H. Ozdag2
1Faculty of Medicine, Eastern Mediterranean University,
Famagusta, Cyprus,2Biotechnology Institute, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey,3Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, GYTE, Gebze Technical University,
Kocaeli, Turkey,4Department of Medical Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey,
Ankara, Turkey,5Department of Statistics, Faculty of
Science, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey,Ankara, Turkey,
6Department of General Surgery, Faculty
of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, Ankara,
Turkey
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the
leading causes of cancer-related death in developedcountries. Owing to dif ﬁculty of the low allele frequency
variations detection genetic association pro ﬁle of CRC has
not been entirely identi ﬁed. To show that signi ﬁcance of
these variations may change according to population we
selected 16 SNPs from GWASs (Genome-wide Association
Study) conducted in European CRC population to analyzethem in Turkish population.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1555Material and Methods: Validation of 16 European SNP
was performed using kompetitive allele spesi ﬁc PCR on
1019 sporadic CRC cases and 948 controls. SNPs were
excluded if their minor allele frequency was <5%, if the p-
value of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test was <10-6,o ri f
the linkage disequilibrium r2>0.8. Multiple logistic regres-
sion was used for additive, dominant, and recessive models.
Odds ratios were adjusted for gender and the ﬁrst principal
component for population strati ﬁcation (genomic control
inﬂation factor λ=0.903). Further analysis is covered to
classify the patients by their status of metastasis, cancer
type, stage, grade, and tumor location.
Results and Conclusions: rs6983267, rs10795668,
rs3802842, rs4444235 and rs4939827 were found to be
associated with Turkish CRC patients (p<0.05). Our resultsshowed that these 5 SNPs were also associated with
pathological stage of the disease. Whereas, rs6691170,
rs1321311, rs3802842, showed signi ﬁcant association with
pathological grade. In addition, rs1321311 increases the risk
of mucinous cancer 3,2 times. Our results showed the
importance of population speci ﬁc studies to validate the
results of GWASs. This study is supported by TUBITAK
grant 112S634, Ankara University 14L0415003
O. Cumaogullari: None. S. Charyyeva: None. E.
Abaci: None. Z. Bilici: None. H. Ozakinci: None. O. Ilk:
None. A. Kuzu: None. H. Ozdag: None.
P12.045B
A blood-based gene expression signature for diagnosis
and prognosis of colorectal cancer using integratedgenomic and network analyses
I. H. Kaya
1, O. Al-Harazi2, N. Kaya2, D. Colak2
1AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, SaudiArabia
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
common cancer and second leading cause of cancer-
associated death worldwide. Diagnosing CRC patients
reliably at an early and curable stage is of utmostimportance to reduce the risk of mortality.
Materials and Methods: We identi ﬁed a blood-based
gene signature by performing an integrated genomic ana-lysis of whole-genome gene expression and copy number
alteration of Saudi CRC patients. The identi ﬁed gene sig-
nature was then validated using independent datasets ofgene expression pro ﬁling of CRC patients. In addition, we
validated the gene signature ’s classi ﬁcation performance
and the prognostic potential using TCGA (microarray andRNAseq) datasets with samples from over 800 CRCpatients with detailed clinical data. We also identi ﬁed the
signiﬁcantly altered pathways in CRC.
Results: The results have demonstrated that high
expression of our gene signature is signi ﬁcantly associated
with poor disease outcome. The pathway analysis revealed
alterations in various cancer-related pathways essential forCRC transformation; hence validating our gene signature ’s
diagnostic and prognostic potential using patients ’biologi-
calﬂuids rather than invasive procedures.
Conclusions: Results suggest that integrated genomic
analysis may provide a reliable approach to identify key
biological programs associated with CRC and lead toimproved diagnosis and therapeutic options. Funding: This
study is funded by the KFSHRC Research Grant (2110006
to DC).
I.H. Kaya: None. O. Al-Harazi: None. N. Kaya: None.
D. Colak: None.
P12.046C
The frequency of MLH1 andMSH2 germline mutations
in colorectal cancer patients met the revised BethesdaGuidelines
L. Lyubchenko
1, A. Semyanikhina1, N. Pospekhova1,
D. Golovina1, A. Rasulov2
1N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research Institute of
oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation,2N.A. Lopatkin
Research Institute of Urology and Interventional Radiology,
Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is one of the most
common hereditary cancer syndromes that can be identi ﬁed
in 3%-5% of all colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. To
identify individuals with high risk of LS the Amsterdam
criteria (AC) and the Bethesda Guidelines (BG) have beenproposed. This study aimed to analyze the frequency of
MLH1 andMSH2 germline mutations in CRC patients met
the revised BG.
Materials and Methods: One hundred and seventeen
patients ful ﬁlling the revised BG were initially screened for
LS by Sanger sequencing of the coding regions and splicesites of the MLH1 andMSH2 genes. MSI-diagnostics and
BRAF -genotyping were performed in 95 of 117 tumour
samples. Clinical, anamnestic and morphological char-acteristics were recorded. The accuracy of the AC was
evaluated.
Results: We identi ﬁed 29 patients with germline muta-
tions in the MLH1 andMSH2 genes (17 and 12 patients,
respectively). The detected variants were found throughout
the coding part of the genes. Nine MLH1 -mutations have
been described for the ﬁrst time. The highest accuracy was1556shown for the ACI (85%). High-level MSI and no BRAF -
mutation were found in all analyzed LS-tumours.
Conclusions: The results of our study prove that MSI
approach provides a sensitivity of 100% for identifying LS-
patients. The ACII missed as many as 31% of LS-cases.
Being quite stringent the ACI showed a high rate of spe-ciﬁcity but failed to recognize 41% of LS-patients.
L. Lyubchenko: None. A. Semyanikhina: None. N.
Pospekhova: None. D. Golovina: None. A. Rasulov:
None.
P12.047D
K-ras mutations and MGMT methylation in CRC and
correlation with survival and therapy
M. Ravnik-Glava č, E. Krajnc, S. Hra šovec, D. Glava č
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most
frequent cancers in humans. The disease occurs sporadically
in most of the cases (75%-80%) as a result of the
accumulation of both mutations and epigenetic modi ﬁca-
tions of several genes. Approximately 20-50% of primary
colorectal tumors contain K-ras mutations and it was shown
that MGMT methylation may play a role preceding the
development of CRC.
Materials and Methods: Two hundred and forty-nine
fresh colorectal tumor samples and corresponding normaltissue were collected during surgical colectomy together
with clinical and pathological data. Patients were followed
up for ten years. Direct sequencing was used for detectionofk-ras mutations and methylation-speci ﬁc PCR was per-
formed to assess the methylation status of MGMT .
Results: K-ras mutations were detected in 83/249 (33%)
and hyper-methylated promoter of MGMT in 220/249
(88%) tumors. Survival distribution of patients with and
without K-ras mutation was signi ﬁcantly different
(p=0,01). Patients with metastasis and hyper-methylated
MGMT promoter in their primary CRCs had signi ﬁcantly
worse survival distribution than patients without hyper-methylation (p =0,05), while in non-metastatic cancers this
was not the case. Response to radiation therapy was sig-
niﬁcantly better in tumors with methylated MGMT promoter
(P< 0,001).
Conclusion: No signi ﬁcant correlation was observed
between K-ras mutations and MGMT methylation.
MGMT
promoter methylation might be a good diagnostic marker in
normal-appearing mucosa, both for early detection of and
risk assessment in colon cancer, as well as may predict abetter response to radiation therapy, as we have shown in
this study.M. Ravnik-Glava č:None. E. Krajnc: None. S.
Hrašovec: None. D. Glava č:None.
P12.048A
Variant detection using transcriptome analyses in
hereditary colorectal cancer
F. Eiengård
1,2, A. Rohlin1,2, E. Mårtensson1,
U. Lundstam3, S. Gebre-Medhin4,5, T. Zagoras1,2,
M. Nordling1,2
1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,2Department of Clinical
Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,Gothenburg, Sweden,
3Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska
Academy at University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital/Östra, Gothenburg, Sweden,4Division
of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden,5Department of Clinical
Genetics, Of ﬁce for Medical Services, Division of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund, Sweden
Introduction: High-penetrant pathogenic variants in estab-
lished genes associated with colorectal cancer (CRC)
explain the disease in approximately 5-6% of cases.
However, a genetic component is suspected to contributeto CRC in approximately 20%-30% of all cases. Tran-
scriptome analysis reveals established pathogenic variants
as well as alternative mechanisms affecting transcription incandidate genes.
Material and Methods: Transcriptome analyses, (Illu-
mina paired-end read sequencing (2 x 150 bp)), were per-formed on 50 patients without any causative variant
detected with commonly used techniques. In parallel the
patients were analyzed on a comprehensive panel includinghigh-penetrant susceptibility genes and candidate genes (50
kb upstream and downstream UTR regions, intronic and
exonic regions). The patients in the study were referred tothe Cancer Genetic Counselling Clinic at Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Results: Analysis of alternative splicing, identi ﬁcation
and quanti ﬁcation of transcripts, classi ﬁcation of SNVs and
CNVs were performed and ﬁndings were thoroughly eval-
uated concerning pathogenicity. Expression level compar-isons were executed both pairwise and against positive
controls with known causative variants. The ﬁndings
include identi ﬁcation of previously unreported variants and
putative causative variants in patients with previously
unexplained hereditary CRC.
Conclusion: The combination of high-throughput NGS-
techniques on genome and transcriptome level identi ﬁes aAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1557broader set of pathogenic variants in patients with heredi-
tary CRC, which is crucial for follow up of patients.
The study was supported by grants from the Swedish state
under the agreement between the Swedish government and
the county councils, the ALF-agreement (ALFGBG-
725011) and the Swedish Cancer Society (grant no.18 0357).
F. Eiengård: None. A. Rohlin: None. E. Mårtensson:
None. U. Lundstam: None. S. Gebre-Medhin: None. T.
Zagoras: None. M. Nordling: None.
P12.049B
Exploring the role of CCAT1 andCCAT2 long non-
coding RNA in colorectal carcinoma metastasis
L. Thean
1,H .L i1,M .L o1, M. Wong1, C. Tang1, K. Tan1,
P. Cheah1,2,3
1Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore,
2National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore,
3Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore
Introduction: Dysregulation of long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) has been recently implicated in cancers. Up-regulation of two lncRNAs, CCAT1 andCCAT2 has been
separately associated with more aggressive colorectal
cancer (CRC) and worse prognosis. The ﬁrst GWAS-
identi ﬁed SNP linked to CRC risk, rs6983267, maps to
CCAT2 , and is reported to elevate the expression of c-Myc ,
situated about 300 kb away. Nevertheless, these twolncRNAs have never been studied together with their
oncotarget c-Myc.
Material and Methods: In this study, we measured the
expression of CCAT1 ,CCAT2 andc-Myc in 150 matched
mucosa-tumor samples of early stage microsatellite-stable
Chinese CRC patients with de ﬁnitive metastasis status by
real-time RT-PCR. The expression pro ﬁle is then correlated
to the SNP genotype and the clinical data.
Results: Expression of c-Myc in the tumor is signi ﬁcantly
up-regulated in metastasis-positive CRC patients (T-test,
p=0.0229) and signi ﬁcantly correlated to time to metastasis
by Cox regression analysis [Hazard Ratio =1.47 (1.10,
1.97), p =0.0107]. Upregulation of c-Myc expression is also
signiﬁcantly associated with the risk genotype (GG) of
rs6983267. The expression of c-Myc is signi ﬁcantly
(p<0.0001) correlated to that of CCAT1 and CCAT2
(R
2=0.23 and R2=0.18 respectively) in the tumors. How-
ever, the expression of CCAT1 and CCAT2 is not sig-
niﬁcantly correlated to metastasis status, time to metastasis
or the SNP genotypes.
Conclusions: Expression of c-Myc in the tumors is pre-
dictive of metastasis. The expression of CCAT1 andCCAT2
does not add to the predictive value suggesting that theircontribution to metastasis are probably accounted for via
their effects on c-Myc .
L. Thean: None. H. Li: None. M. Lo: None. M. Wong:
None. C. Tang: None. K. Tan: None. P. Cheah: None.
P12.050C
Ovarian clear cell carcinoma in Cowden Syndrome
K. Yauy1, M. Imbert-Bouteille1, V. Bubien2, C. Lindet-
Bourgeois3, G. Rathat4, H. Perrochia5, G. MacGrogan6,
D. Bessis7, J. Tinat8, S. Baert-Desurmont9, M. Blanluet9,
P. Vande Perre10, K. Baudry1, P. Pujol1, C. Corsini1
1Département de génétique médicale chru Arnaud de
Villeneuve, Montpellier, France,2unité d ’oncogénétique,
institut Bergonié, INSERM U1218, université de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France,3département d ’oncologie médicale, chu
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,4service de gynécologie-
obstétrique, chu Montpellier, Montpellier, France,5service
d’anatomopathologie, chu Montpellier, Montpellier,
France,6unité d'anatomie pathologique, institut Bergonié,
INSERM U1218, Bordeaux, France,7service de
dermatologie, chu Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
8service d ’oncogénétique, hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux,
France,9service d ’oncogénétique, hôpital Charles Nicolle,
Rouen, France,10service de génétique médicale, chu de
Toulouse, Toulouse, France
Purpose: Cowden Syndrome (CS) is an autosomal
dominant disease related to PTEN germline mutations. CS
is characterized by macrocephaly, mucocutaneous lesions
and an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancer. Rare
ovarian cancer cases (mostly embryonic tumours) asso-ciated to PTEN have been described in the literature and
there are no current CS guidelines available for ovarian
cancer risk management.
Clinical Presentation: We report the case of a woman
diagnosed with ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) at age
28. The patient dysplayed macrocephaly, trichilemmomas,oral papillomatosis and acral keratosis. A thyroid follicular
neoplasia was diagnosed synchronously. A family history
of cancers within the PTEN -related tumor spectrum was
identi ﬁed.PTEN sequencing revealed that she carried a
germline inherited pathogenic variant c.388C>T, p.
(Arg130*) (NM_000314). A somatic MMR immunohis-tochemistry analysis showed a normal expression and
BRCA1/2- germline sequencing revealed no mutation. An
ovarian cell immunohistochemistry analysis reported totalloss of PTEN expression, which strongly suggested the
PTEN role in the oncogenesis of this cancer. Hence, a total
thyroid resection was performed instead of thyroid lobect-omy and bilateral mastectomy was discussed. Co-
occurrence of this germline mutation in PTEN in this1558patient, early development OCCC at age 28 and total loss of
PTEN expression in the tumor support the involvement of
PTEN in the cancerogenesis of her ovarian cancer.
Conclusion: We describe a new ovarian cancer case with
an atypical histological type, clear cell carcinoma, in CS.
This observation might be a ﬁrst clue to expand PTEN-
related tumor spectrum with OCCC. The CS diagnosis
changed her management.
K. Yauy: None. M. Imbert-Bouteille: None. V. Bubien:
None. C. Lindet-Bourgeois: None. G. Rathat: None. H.
Perrochia: None. G. MacGrogan: None. D. Bessis: None.
J. Tinat: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. M. Blanluet:
None. P. Vande Perre: None. K. Baudry: None. P. Pujol:
None. C. Corsini: None.
P12.051D
Germline variants in oculocutaneous albinism genes in
familial cutaneous melanoma
V. Nathan1, P. A. Johansson1, J. M. Palmer1, M. Howlie1,
H. R. Hamilton1, K. Wadt2, G. Jönsson3, K. M. Brooks1,
A. L. Pritchard1,4, N. K. Hayward1
1QIMR Berghofer, Herston, Australia,2Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark,3Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
4University of Highlands and Islands, Inverness, Scotland,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a group
of autosomal recessive genetic diseases, resulting inpigmentation defects of the eyes, hair and skin. OCA is
caused by compound heterozygous or homozygous germ-
line variants in one of four genes: TYR, OCA2, TYRP1 and
SLC45A2 . Due to a lack of melanin production, OCA
patients have a heightened sensitivity to ultra-violet
radiation, predisposing them to skin cancers, includingcutaneous melanoma (CM).
Methods: Approximately 5-12% of CM is considered
familial. We sought to investigate the unexplained predis-position in families negative for the known susceptibility
genes using next generation sequencing of affected indivi-
duals. Variants of interest were con ﬁrmed and cosegrega-
tion was assessed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Several heterozygous germline variants in TYR,
OCA2, TYRP1 andSLC45A2 were present in our familial
CM cohort. Of note, are variants classi ﬁed as pathogenic in
association with OCA that were either present in multiple
families or fully cosegregated with CM. The TYR p.T373Kvariant was present in 3 unrelated CM families. In OCA2,
we observed p.V443I in three families and p.N489D in two
families. We also identi ﬁed a novel likely pathogenic
SLC45A2 frameshift variant fully co-segregating in a family
of 4 CM cases.Conclusions: Rare, heterozygous variants in OCA genes
TYR, OCA2, SLC45A2 andTYRP1 occur in some familial
CM cases. Cosegregation analysis showed similar results to
the medium penetrance MITF p.E318K variant, and the
known functional consequence of these albinism gene var-
iants on pigmentation pathways indicates these OCA genesmay increase CM susceptibility in some families.
V. Nathan: None. P.A. Johansson: None. J.M. Palmer:
None. M. Howlie: None. H.R. Hamilton: None. K. Wadt:
None. G. Jönsson: None. K.M. Brooks: None. A.L.
Pritchard: None. N.K. Hayward: None.
P12.052A
Evaluation of tamoxifen ef ﬁcacy and CYP2D6 -
genotyping in women with hormone receptor-positivebreast cancer
T. A. Shendrikova
1, L. N. Lubchenko1, S. M. Portnoy2,
M. G. Filippova1, A. V. Savinkova1, A. V. Semyanikhina1,
A. M. Danishevich1, N. I. Pospekhova1, D. A. Golovina1
1N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research Center of
Oncology, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation,
Moscow, Russian Federation,2Сlinic of plastic surgery and
cosmetology Frau Clinik, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Tamoxifen is one of the most frequent
prescribed drugs to treat patient with estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer (BC). In vivo Tamoxifen is
biotransformed by the CYP2D6 enzyme into endoxifen.The aim of the study was to evaluate the effectiveness of
therapy with Tamoxifen in patients with luminal A and B
primary operable BC by CYP2D6 -genotyping.
Materials and Methods: One hundred and eleven
women with IA-IIB stage-BC receiving tamoxifen were
enrolled in the study. Real-time PCR for detection of allelicvariants CYP2D6*3 (c.2549delA), CYP2D6*4
(c.1846G>A) and CYP2D6*6 (.1707) was performed.
Relapse-free survival (RFS) was estimated depending ontheCYP2D6- genotype.
Results: We revealed 78 patients (70,2%) with wild-type
alleles of the CYP2D6 gene (extensive metabolizers(EM)),
26 women (23,4%) - intensive metabolizers (IM) and 7
patients (6,3%) –poor metabolizers (PM). The average
duration of Tamoxifen-therapy was 2,7 years. We observeddifferences in RFS in patients treated only Tamoxifen in the
adjuvant period. RFS in women with EM-phenotype was
better than in IM, PM-patients (2,6% (2/78) vs 18,2% (6/33)(p=0.02)). We found no differences in RFS in patients
receiving polychemotherapy in combination with hormone
therapy (p>0.05).
Conclusion: Patients with estrogen receptor positive
primary operable BC and reduced CYP2D6-activityAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1559characterize by worse RFS. CYP2D6 -genotyping is one of
the instruments to predict the effectiveness of Tamoxifen-
therapy.
T.A. Shendrikova: None. L.N. Lubchenko: None. S.M.
Portnoy: None. M.G. Filippova: None. A.V. Savinkova:
None. A.V. Semyanikhina: None. A.M. Danishevich:
None. N.I. Pospekhova: None. D.A. Golovina: None.
P12.053B
Correlation of mRNA-TSHR expression with clinical
parameters in thyroid carcinoma patients
T. Makazlieva1, O. Vaskova1, T. Tripunoski1, S. Risteski2,
H. Jovanovic2, Z. Jakovski2, A. Eftimov3
1Institut of pathophysiology and nuclear medicine, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Institut for
forensic medicine, criminology and medical deontology,Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
3Laboratory of molecular pathology, Institut of pathology,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTC)
preserve expression of thyroid stimulating hormone recep-tor (TSHR).
Aim: Objective in our study was to evaluate expression of
mRNA-TSHR in patients with DTC and then to correlatethe expression with clinical features: thyroglobulin (sTg)
value, initial staging, whole body scan (WBS), neck ultra-
sound (US) and received dose of radioiodine.
Material and Methods: Forty patients were subdivided
in groups according response to treatment: patients with
incomplete structural response (TCs), incomplete bio-chemical response (TCb) and excellent responders (TCr).
Total RNA was isolated from peripheral blood and used for
two-step reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rtPCR) with appropriate primers. Relative quanti ﬁcation with
the 2
-ΔΔCtmethod was applied. Thyroglobulin was eval-
uated with immunohistochemical analysis. Initial stageaccording TNM staging system was recorded. Statistical
analysis was performed with Spearman Rank Order
Correlation.
Results: Patients from TCs group expressed mRNA-
TSHR by a 5.37-fold higher level than TCr patients, TCb
expressed TSHR by an 8.88-fold higher level than TCrpatients. Signi ﬁcant negative correlation was detected
between sTg and ΔCt (Ct
TSHR-CtGAPDH ) value (R =-0,475;
p<0,05) and between WBS/US ﬁndings and ΔCt (R=
-0,321; p<0,05). Correlation between initial stage and ΔCt
revealed non-signi ﬁcant negative correlation and non-
signiﬁcant positive correlation between received dose of
radioiodine and ΔCt.Conclusion: Our data revealed higher expression of
mRNA-TSHR in blood of TCs and TCb compared to TCr
group and further analysis revealed signi ﬁcant correlation
between mRNA-TSHR and sTg and US/WBS ﬁndings.
Further studies with absolute quanti ﬁcation are needed for
understanding the real meaning of mRNA-TSHR as bio-marker in DTC.
T. Makazlieva: None. O. Vaskova: None. T. Tripu-
noski: None. S. Risteski: None. H. Jovanovic: None. Z.
Jakovski: None. A. Eftimov: None.
P12.054C
Comparison of genomic pro ﬁles in patients with
primary and recurrent diffuse brain gliomas revealed
acquisition of biologically relevant genomic aberrations
D. Vesela
1, L. Lizcova1, K. Svobodova1, H. Lhotska1,
H. Cechova2, Z. Krejcik2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. Pavlistova1,
S. Izakova1, F. Kramar3, P. Hrabal3, K. Michalova1,
Z. Zemanova1
1Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, General
University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, CharlesUniversity, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Institute of
Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech
Republic,3Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military
Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic
Diffuse gliomas represent heterogeneous group of brain
tumors with highly variable biological behavior. Despite of
radical surgical resection and intensive therapy, recurrenceswith new genetic properties frequently appear. We
compared genomic pro ﬁles of 11 paired primary and
recurrent gliomas to identify aberrations related to tumorrecurrence and/or progression.
Tumor samples obtained during routine surgery were
analyzed with SNP array (Illumina), I-FISH (Abbott,MetaSystems), MLPA (MRC-Holland) to assess copy
number variations and IDH1 mutations and with MS-
MLPA to investigate methylation of MGMT and MLH3
promoters.
In both primary and recurrent lesions, we observed
genomic changes typical for gliomas: loss of chromosome10, gains on chromosome 7, losses on 9p and 13q, 17p
LOH and/or IDH1 mutations. In 7/11 recurrences, the
genetic pro ﬁle showed additional chromosomal imbalances
compared to primary tumor. In 4/11 pairs, the pro ﬁles were
divergent, i.e. the recurrences included additional changes
but missed some of the original ones. Losses of chromo-somal regions 6p21.33, 6q27, 9q21.13, 11p11.2 and
hypermethylation of MGMT and/or MLH3 were repeatedly1560detected in recurrences. The progression to a higher grade
of glioma occurred in 5/11 patients.
We suppose that recurrence of brain gliomas may be
driven by proliferation of cells with additional genomic
imbalances to those detected in primaries or by one or more
subclones presented within the primary tumor besides themajor tumor clone. Our results indicate that recurrences are
often genetically and/or epigenetically different from pri-
mary lesions, therefore the patients with recurrent tumorsmay bene ﬁt from different treatment approaches.
Supported by RVO-VFN64165 and GACR-P302/12/
G157.
D. Vesela: None. L. Lizcova: None. K. Svobodova:
None. H. Lhotska: None. H. Cechova: None. Z. Krejcik:
None. S. Ransdorfova: None. L. Pavlistova: None. S.
Izakova: None. F. Kramar: None. P. Hrabal: None. K.
Michalova: None. Z. Zemanova: None.
P12.055D
Family History Questionnaire System (FHQS): An
innovative patient facing online software applicationstreamlining assessment of genetic susceptibility to
cancer
W. L. Skinner
1,2, B. Coad1,2, A. Marsh1,2, J. McBride3,
K. Kohut1,2, H. Hanson1,2, K. Snape1,2
1South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London,
United Kingdom,2St George's University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,3McBride CQ,
London, United Kingdom
Screening, Prevention and Early Detection (SPED) in
cancer management is cost effective and clinically prefer-
able to other therapeutic interventions. SPED activities
decrease the likelihood of an individual developing cancer,and enable an increased number of cancers to be detected at
a curable stage. Identifying those who have an increased
genetic susceptibility to developing cancer enables targetingof SPED interventions at those at highest risk and is the
most clinically ef ﬁcient and cost effective way of
implementing SPED interventions. However, current meth-ods of identifying genetically “at risk ”individuals through
family history assessment are inequitable, non-standardised,
resource heavy and time consuming. The Cancer GeneticsUnit of the South West Thames Regional Genetics Service
(SWTRGS) at St George ’s Hospital (SGH) has developed
the Family History Questionnaire System (FHQS). This isan online patient-facing cancer family history assessment
software application to enable competent, standardised
cancer family history assessment which is more ef ﬁcient,
cost effective, scalable and equitable than current methods.
We will present data from the initial pilot phase and clinicalimplementation of this innovative app in the SWTRGS
population of 3.4 million people regarding:
●Patient experience and acceptability and improved
access to assessment for cancer patients and their
relatives
●Development and implementation of novel and stream-
lined clinical pathways for assessment, access to SPED
interventions and genetic testing
●Data privacy and regulatory considerations
●Data storage and integration with clinical systems andaccess to research
Our app demonstrates the power of digital innovation to
improve clinical pathways for patients with inherited sus-ceptibility to cancer.
W.L. Skinner: None. B. Coad: None. A. Marsh: None.
J. McBride: None. K. Kohut: None. H. Hanson: None. K.
Snape: None.
P12.056A
Exome sequencing identi ﬁes germline variants in DIS3
in familial multiple myeloma
M. Pertesi
1,2, M. Vallée1, X. Wei3, M. V. Revuelta4,
P. Galia5,6, D. Demangel5,6, J. Oliver1,7, M. Foll1,
S. Chen3, E. Perrial8, Intergroupe Francophone du
Myelome (IFM), IMMEnSE Consortium, B. Nilsson2,
R. J. Klein9, S. M. Lipkin4, J. D. McKay1, C. Dumontet5,6,8
1Genetic Cancer Susceptibility, International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, France,2Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Division of Hematology andTransfusion medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
3Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, United States,4Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United States,
5ProﬁlExpert, Lyon, France,6Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France,7Instituto de Ciencias Básicas y Medicina
Experimental, Instituto Universitario Hospital Italiano,
Buenos Aires, Argentina,8INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286,
CRCL, Lyon, France,9Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences and Icahn Institute for Genomics and
Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, United States
Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell
malignancy. While the mutational landscape of sporadicMM has been extensively investigated, the genetic basis of
familial MM remains largely unknown.
We used exome and targeted sequencing in families with
several cases of MM/MGUS to identify rare germline var-
iants implicated in MM susceptibility.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1561We observed putative loss-of-function (two splicing
(c.1755 +1G>T, c.1883 +1G>C) and one stop-loss
(c.2875T>C, p.*959Glnext*14)) germline variants in
DIS3 , a frequently somatically mutated gene in MM, in 4
out of 154 families (2.6%). We demonstrated that the
c.1755+1G>T allele undergoes Nonsense-Mediated Decay
(NMD), resulting in a marked reduction in DIS3 gene
expression levels, while the p.*959Glnext*14 variant
reduces DIS3 protein levels, consistent with loss-of-function variants. In an independent series of 781 spora-
dic MM patients and 3534 controls from the MMRF
CoMMpass Study we demonstrated that rare, putative likelydeleterious variants in DIS3 were enriched among MM
patients compared to controls (OR =1.92 95%CI:1.25 to
2.96, p=0.001). Transcriptome analysis of MM tumor cells
suggested that, in comparison to non-carriers, carriers of
germline DIS3 likely deleterious variants showed dysregu-
lation of RNA processing pathways, consistent with dis-ruption of DIS3 function.
Our observations are consistent with a role for DIS3 in
genetic susceptibility to MM/MGUS and reinforce its rolein myelomagenesis.
Funding: French National Cancer Institute (INCA);
Fondation Française pour la Recherche contre le Myélomeet les Gammapathies (FFMRG); NCI R01 NCI CA167824;
generous donation from Matthew Bell; Of ﬁce of Research
Infrastructure NIH S10OD018522.
M. Pertesi: None. M. Vallée: None. X. Wei: None. M.
V. Revuelta: None. P. Galia: None. D. Demangel: None.
J. Oliver: None. M. Foll: None. S. Chen: None. E. Per-
rial: None. B. Nilsson: None. R.J. Klein: None. S.M.
Lipkin: None. J.D. McKay: None. C. Dumontet: None.
P12.057B
High-throughput sorting of tumor cell populations
reveals the composite mutational landscape ofoesophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC)
F. Isidori
1, I. Bozzarelli1, M. Lugaresi1, D. Malvi1,
H. Söderström2, J. Räsänen2, C. Bolognesi3, C. Forcato3,
A. D'Errico1, R. Fiocca4, M. Seri1, K. Krishnadath5,
E. Bonora1, S. Mattioli1, EACSGE Esophageal
Adenocarcinoma Study Group Europe
1University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,3Menarini Silicon
Biosystems, Bologna, Italy,4University of Genoa, Genova,
Italy,5Center of experimental and molecular medicine,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is characterized by a
high genetic heterogeneity, which accounts for therapeuticresistance and tumor recurrence. Outcomes of most
genomic studies have important limitations due to the
presence of different cell types within these cancers. Our
study aimed at investigating intra- and intertumor hetero-
geneity by targeted sequencing of sorted cancer subpopula-
tions. Archival material from 38 EACs, classi ﬁed according
to Lauren, was processed using a high-throughput cell
sorting technology. Stromal and tumor cell populations
were sorted by immunolabelling for vimentin/pan-cytoker-atin and DNA content. Targeted sequencing was performed
for 63 cancer-related genes. 31 out of 38 EAC carried at
least one somatic mutation, not present in the correspondingsorted stromal cells. In 25/38 (65.7 %) of cases mutations
were detected in TP53 and in 5/38 (13.2%) of cases in
CDKN2A . Mutations in other genes occurred at lower
frequency, including HNF1A (2/38 cases), not previously
associated with EAC. Most of the mutations were also
identi ﬁed in unsorted cells, however with a lower allele
frequency, whereas in one case the mutation was com-
pletely missed. Interestingly, in some EAC cases, we
isolated different keratin-positive cell populations based onDNA content (hyperdiploid and pseudodiploid clones) with
different mutational loads, con ﬁrming the high intra-tumor
heterogeneity of these cancers. In conclusion, selectivesorting allowed us to identify somatic mutations not
identi ﬁable in the unsorted cells and to isolate different
cancer subpopulations, representative of different cancersubclones. Future studies will reveal the role of these
subpopulations with respect to therapeutic response. FI is
supported an ONCOPENTA fellowship.
F. Isidori: None. I. Bozzarelli: None. M. Lugaresi:
None. D. Malvi: None. H. Söderström: None. J.
Räsänen: None. C. Bolognesi: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Menarini Silicon Biosystems. C.
Forcato: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Menarini Silicon Biosystems. A. D'Errico: None. R.
Fiocca: None. M. Seri: None. K. Krishnadath: None. E.
Bonora: None. S. Mattioli: None.
P12.058C
Germline loss-of-function variants in the BARD1 gene
are associated with early-onset familial breast cancerbut not ovarian cancer
N. Weber-Lassalle
1, J. Borde1, K. Weber-Lassalle1,
J. Horváth2, D. Niederacher3, N. Arnold4, S. Kaulfuß5,
C. Ernst1, V. G. Paul2, E. Honisch3, K. Klaschik1,
A. E. Volk6, C. Kubisch6, S. Rapp7, N. Lichey2,
J. Altmüller8,9, L. Lepkes1, E. Pohl-Rescigno1, H. Thiele8,
P. Nürnberg8,9,10, M. Larsen1, L. Richters1, K. Rhiem1,
B. Wappenschmidt1, C. Engel11,12, A. Meindl13,
R. K. Schmutzler1, E. Hahnen1, J. Hauke115621Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Center
for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne,
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,2Institute for Human Genetics,
University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany,
3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University
Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich-Heine University
Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany,4Institute of Clinical
Molecular Biology, Department of Gynaecology andObstetrics, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel,
Germany,
5Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical
Center, Georg August University, Goettingen, Germany,
6Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,7Preventive
Cardiology and Preventive Medicine, Center for
Cardiology, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany,8Cologne
Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,9Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
10Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses
in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,11Institute for Medical
Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,12LIFE- Leipzig Research
Centre for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig,Leipzig, Germany,
13Department of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics, University of Munich, Campus Großhadern,
Munich, Germany
The role of BARD1 in breast cancer (BC) and ovarian cancer
(OC) predisposition remains elusive, as published case-control investigations have revealed controversial results.
We aimed to assess the role of deleterious BARD1 germline
variants in BC/OC predisposition. A total of 4,469 BRCA1/2 -
negative female index patients with BC, 451 BRCA1/2 -
negative index patients with OC, and 2,767 geographically-
matched female controls were screened for loss-of-function(LoF) mutations and potentially damaging rare missense
variants in BARD1 . All patients met the inclusion criteria of
the German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and OvarianCancer for germline testing and reported at least one relative
with BC or OC. Additional control datasets (ExAC,
FLOSSIES) were included for the calculation of odds ratios(ORs). We identi ﬁed LoF variants in 23 of 4,469 BC index
patients (0.51%) and in 36 of 37,265 controls (0.10%),
resulting in an OR of 5.35 (95% con ﬁdence interval [CI]
=3.17-9.04; P<0.00001). BARD1 -mutated BC index patients
showed a signi ﬁcantly younger mean age at ﬁrst diagnosis
(42.3 years, range: 24-60 years) compared with the overallstudy sample (48.6 years, range: 17-92 years; P =0.00347).
Overall, rare and predicted damaging (SIFT, MutationTaster)BARD1 missense variants were signi ﬁcantly more prevalent
in BC index patients compared with controls (OR =2.15; 95%
CI=1.26-3.67; P =0.00723). Neither LoF variants nor
predicted damaging rare missense variants in BARD1 were
identi ﬁed in 451 familial index patients with OC. Due to the
signiﬁcant association of germline LoF variants in BARD1
with early-onset BC, we suggest that intensi ﬁed surveillance
programs should be considered for women carrying patho-
genic BARD1 gene variants.
N. Weber-Lassalle: None. J. Borde: None. K. Weber-
Lassalle: None. J. Horváth: None. D. Niederacher: None.
N. Arnold: None. S. Kaulfuß: None. C. Ernst: None. V.
G. Paul: None. E. Honisch: None. K. Klaschik: None. A.
E. Volk: None. C. Kubisch: None.
S. Rapp: None. N.
Lichey: None. J. Altmüller: None. L. Lepkes: None. E.
Pohl-Rescigno: None. H. Thiele: None. P. Nürnberg:
None. M. Larsen: None. L. Richters: None. K. Rhiem:
None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. C. Engel: None. A.
Meindl: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. E. Hahnen:
None. J. Hauke: None.
P12.059D
Evaluating the frequencies of EGFR ,ALK/EML4 , and
ROS1 alterations in lung cancer: A single-center
experience
B. Durak Aras1, O. Cilingir1, S. Isik1, S. Arslan1,
E. Dundar2,G .A k3, M. A. Temena1, E. Erzurumluoglu1,
G. Gunden1, S. Artan1
1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics, Esk ısehır, Turkey,
2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, Esk ısehır, Turkey,3Eskisehir
Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pulmonary Diseases, Esk ısehır, Turkey
Mutations in EGFR and rearrangements of ALK andROS-1
affecting Ras/Raf/MAPK signal transduction pathwayprovides prognostic importance since treatment strategies
with a variety of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in lung cancer
have been developed. Based on latest targetable drugtherapies regarding these three genes, this study aimed at
determining the mutation frequencies of them between 2015
and 2019. For EGFR mutations, tissue samples from 967
patients were analyzed by pyro-sequencing and Real-Time
PCR while ALK rearrangements of 780 samples and ROS1
of 437 samples were examined by FISH. However, 104 of780 tissue samples could not be analyzed by FISH and
detailed results are given in Table. In total, 17,27% of
967 samples showed mutation-positive pro ﬁle for EGFR
and 3,85% of 676 samples were determined as ALK-positive
while 0,6% of 333 were ROS1 -positive. In addition, T790MAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1563mutation known to induce secondary resistance was
calculated as 6,5% of total EGFR mutations. Five of 26
ALK-positive patients show 5 ’deletion while four of 26 was
determined as EML4 -negative and the two others were also
detected as having EGFR mutation L816Q. Moreover,
ALK-negative and EML4 -positive rearrangement was deter-
mined in a case. To conclude, both ALK andEML4 positive
cases should be assuredly examined together with respect to
EGFR mutations like in our two cases because they are
together known to cause decrease in ef ﬁcacy of EGFR-TKIs
in adenocarcinomas.
Table. Mutation frequency distributions over tissue
samples.
B. Durak Aras: None. O. Cilingir: None. S. Isik: None.
S. Arslan: None. E. Dundar: None. G. Ak: None. M.A.
Temena: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. G. Gunden:
None. S. Artan: None.
P12.062C
Multigene panel testing in breast/ovarian cancerpatients reveals high prevalence of FANCM truncating
variants and suggests an oligogenic disease course in the
carriers
M. Jakimovska
1, K. Kubelka-Sabit2, M. Karagjozov2,
E. Lazarova3, S. Smichkoska3, D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska1
1RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The FormerYugoslav Republic of,
2Clinical Hospital Acibadem Sistina,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
3University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Medical
Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius ”, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Recently, FANCM gene emerged as a novel
moderate-risk gene for breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC).
Several studies have shown that FANCM truncating variants
are particularly associated with ER- and triple negative (TN)
BC. However, additional high, moderate and low-risk
cancer genes in FANCM carriers have not been well
studied. Here, we present the clinical and genetic data of
BC/OC patients carrying truncating FANCM variants.Material and Methods: We have sequenced 94 cancer-
associated genes in 344 (331 BC, 10 OC and 3 BC/OC)patients using Illumina TruSight Cancer kit on a MiSeq
platform.
Results: As expected, the highest prevalence of patho-
genic variants was found in BRCA1 (26 patients, 7.6%) and
BRCA2 (32 patients, 9.3%) genes. CHEK2 and FANCM
were the next most frequently mutated genes (5/344, 1.5%each). Four different truncating FANCM variants
[c.1972C>T, p.(Arg658Ter), c.2953delG, p.(Glu958fs),
c.5048_5022del, p.(Lys1683fs) and c.5791C>T, p.(Arg1931Ter)] were identi ﬁed in three BC, one OC and one
BC/OC patient. Interestingly, four (80%) of the FANCM
carriers had co-inherited pathogenic variant in BRCA2
(n=2),BRCA1 (n=1) and FANCE (n=1) genes. These
ﬁndings suggest that the penetrance of FANCM pathogenic
variants depends on the co-inheritance of pathogenic var-iants in other cancer genes. The two FANCM/BRCA2 car-
riers had ER +BC, while FANCM/FANCE and only-
FANCM BC carriers had TN BC, suggesting that the pre-
sence of BRCA2 mutations modi ﬁes the BC ER expression
inFANCM carriers.
Conclusion: Our study supports the ﬁnding of FANCM
as a novel BC/OC susceptibility gene, and further suggests
an oligogenic disease course in FANCM mutation carriers.
M. Jakimovska: None. K. Kubelka-Sabit: None. M.
Karagjozov: None. E. Lazarova: None. S. Smichkoska:
None. D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska: None.
P12.063D
Intermediate risk variant in brca1 expands the clinical
spectrum of fanconi anemia and sheds new light onvariant classi ﬁcation criteria
K. Keupp
1, S. Hampp2, A. Huebbel1, S. Kostezka2,
M. Maringa1, K. Rhiem1, A. Waha1, B. Wappenschmidt1,
R. Pujol3, J. Surrallés3, R. K. Schmutzler1,
L. Wiesmueller2, E. Hahnen1
1Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Center
for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne,Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,
2Department of Obstetrics andGene Name EGFR (n=967) ALK/EML4 (n=676) ROS1 (n=333)
Mutations Positive (17,27 %) Negative Positive
3,85 %
(n=26)Negative Positive Negative
E19 L858R G719X L861Q S768I T790M 82,73 %
(n=800)ALK
+/EML4+5’del ALK
+ALK
+/EML4-ALK-/
EML4+96,15 %
(n=650)0,6 %
(n=2)99,4 %
(n=331)
Number (n) &
Frequency in %4,75 % 3,41 % 3,21 % 2,38 % 2,38 % 1,14 % n =16 n =5n =4n =11564Gynecology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany,3Department
of Genetics and Biomedical Research Institute, Hospital de
Sant Pau; Department of Genetics and Microbiology,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona; Center for Biomedical
Network Research on Rare Diseases, Barcelona, Spain
Heterozygous BRCA1 mutations confer high life-time risks
for breast and ovarian cancer, whereas biallelic BRCA1
mutations lead either to embryonic lethality or Fanconianemia (FA), a severe congenital syndrome mainly
characterized by bone marrow failure, developmental
abnormalities and solid tumors. By multigene panelanalysis, we identi ﬁed two compound heterozygous patho-
genic BRCA1 mutations, p.(Cys61Gly) and p.
(Arg1699Gln), in a female index with breast cancer at theage of 30 years. The p.Cys61Gly mutation confers high
cancer risk, while the hypomorphic p.Arg1699Gln mutation
is associated with an intermediate cancer risk. A cytodiag-nostic test for FA was negative in patient`s PBLs. Clinical
investigations revealed mild FA-like features, i.e. low
height (150 cm), mild microcephaly (52 cm circumference),café au lait macules, and severe chemotherapy-induced
hematotoxicity. Functional analyses of the hypomorphic p.
Arg1699Gln mutation revealed impaired BRCA1 function-ality in DNA repair and replication forks stabilization.
However, the residual activity of the hypomorphic p.
Arg1699Gln allele likely prevents the severe FA phenotype.Our data expand the clinical spectrum associated with
biallelic BRCA1 mutations. Furthermore, these data may
have implications for BRCA1 variant classi ﬁcation using the
co-occurrence model which is based on the assumption that
pathogenic biallelic BRCA1 mutations are lethal or cause
severe FA.
K. Keupp: None. S. Hampp: None. A. Huebbel: None.
S. Kostezka: None. M. Maringa: None. K. Rhiem: None.
A. Waha: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. R. Pujol:
None. J. Surrallés: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. L.
Wiesmueller: None. E. Hahnen: None.
P12.064A
Functional analysis of driver mutations in the FGFR3
expanding with paternal age
I. Hartl, Y. Striedner, R. Salazar, A. Yasari, I. Tiemann-
Boege
Institute of Biophysics, JKU, Linz, Austria
Introduction: Certain point mutations in the FGFR3 gene
have a very high mutation frequency in sperm compared to
the genome average that increases with age. Studiesproposed this effect to be linked with single nucleotide
substitutions causing the expansion of spermatogonial stemcells following a germline selection model. As a tyrosine
receptor kinase (RTK) family member, FGFR3 is involved
in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. Therefore, severe phenotypes are associated with
aberrant receptor signaling caused by these mutations,
which have also been detected in numerous human cancers.
Materials and Methods: We are currently screening de
novo mutations in the FGFR3 occurring at increased levels
(>10
-5) in human sperm with duplex sequencing. In this
study, we are testing the functional changes associated with
the discovered mutations in a structure-function-analysis.
Speci ﬁcally, we are determining potentially altered signal-
ing of different mutated FGFR3 in comparison to the wild-
type receptor at three different levels: 1) Analysis of tyr-
osine phosphorylation in the kinase region of the receptorvia phospho-speci ﬁc Western blotting; 2) Measuring the
dynamics of receptor stoichiometry on the cell surface using
single molecule microscopy (TOCCSL); 3) Evaluation ofintracellular calcium kinetics by ratiometric analysis of
Fura-2 loaded cells.
Conclusions: In this study we are functionally char-
acterizing newly described rare mutations arising in the
male germline using highly quantitative biophysical meth-
ods. This study will provide new insights in the processesunderlying increased signaling of mutated RTKs coupled
with aberrant signaling in mutant cells.
Project funded by the Doctoral College "NanoCell"
(W1250).
I. Hartl: None. Y. Striedner: None. R. Salazar: None.
A. Yasari: None. I. Tiemann-Boege: None.
P12.065B
Molecular characterisation of various fusion transcriptsin different histologic types of cancers
T. Van ěček
1, N. Ptáková1,2, P. Martínek1, V. Hájková1,
P. Steiner1
1Molecular Genetics Department, Biopticka Laborator s.r.
o., Pilsen, Czech Republic,2Second Faculty of Medicine,
Prague, Czech Republic
Targeted next-generation sequencing is gradually being
used in routine molecular pathology. Detection of gene
fusions is useful for prognostics, and differential andpredictive diagnostics. Here we review the results of fusion
detection analyses in clinical routine samples including
some retrospective studies collected over a two-year period.We present overall statistics and evaluate the suitability of
the NGS approach compared to traditional methods and
discuss the bene ﬁts and limitations of the analyses. Several
Fusion Plex panels were employed focused on fusions
found in solid tumors, sarcomas, lymphomas, and thyroidAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1565and lung cancer. The kits use anchored multiplex PCR, an
assay that targets only one partner of the fusion pair and
allows to detect unknown fusion partners. Of 2505 analyzed
samples, 348 were positive for some fusion transcript, 133
of those were unique fusion gene pairs, and out of that 58
were novel. Of the remaining 1771 samples were negative,386 samples were not analyzable, mostly due to insuf ﬁcient
quality of input RNA. Novel fusion transcripts were
conﬁrmed either by FISH break-apart or fusion FISH probe
or custom designed RT-PCR. The NGS method proved to
be very ef ﬁcient in detecting a large variety of fusion
transcripts, the only notable limitation is the quality ofsource material.
T. Vaněček:None. N. Ptáková: None. P. Martínek:
None. V. Hájková: None. P. Steiner: None.
P12.066C
Genetic predisposition of familial Hdgkin lymphoma
E. Khoury
1, M. Veiga da Cunha1, A. Mendola1,
S. Choquet2,3, J. Landman-Parker4, C. Besson5,6,
N. Limaye1, H. A. POIREL7
1de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium,2Service
d’Hématologie, CHU La Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France,
3French registry of familial lymphoid neoplasms, Paris,
France,4Service d'Hématologie et d'Oncologie
Pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,
5Unité d'Hémato-Oncologie, Centre Hospitalier de
Versailles, Le Chesnay, France,6Centre for Research in
Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP) INSERM Unit
1018, Villejuif, France,7Belgian Cancer Registry, Brussels,
Belgium
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a B-cell lymphoproliferative
neoplasms that affects 2.7 individuals per 100,000/yr. Riskfactors include EBV infection, especially in the context of
acquired or innate immunode ﬁciency. Despite evidence that
genetic predisposition plays an important role in a subset ofHL, there is a dearth of functionally validated disease-
causative genes. We aim to identify germline genetic
“drivers ”of HL by applying Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES) to rare, familial HL samples, followed by functional
validation of prioritized candidate genes with rare, poten-
tially pathogenic variants that co-segregate with diseasewithin families.
A pilot study on 20 affected individuals from 10 families
identi ﬁed between 24 and 96 such altered genes per family,
23 of which were identi ﬁed in more than one. Intriguingly,
they include several proteins that regulate mitosis and
mitotic checkpoints, suggesting this may be an importantpathway in disease. Variants in the top two of these can-
didate genes -(i) one involved in the ﬁrst step of glycolysis(the 2 identi ﬁed variants result in decreased function) and
(ii) the other a cell-cycle regulated E3-ubiquitin ligase- are
currently being tested for their effects on protein function.
We are further expanding the WES on an additional series
of 18 families to con ﬁrm the recurrence of altered genes in
familial HL and to look for somatic-second hit locallyeliminating the wild-type allele, according to the classical
paradigm for tumor-suppressor gene.
(Nisha Limaye and Hélène A. Poirel: Equal contribution)E. Khoury: None. M. Veiga da Cunha: None. A.
Mendola: None. S. Choquet: None. J. Landman-Parker:
None. C. Besson: None. N. Limaye: None. H.A.
Poirel: None.
P12.067D
Temozolomide and AZD3463 have synergistic
anticancer effect on T98G glioblastoma multiforme cells
B. Goker Bagca, N. Ozates Ay, A. Asik, C. Gunduz,
C. Biray Avci
Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Ege
University, Izmir, Turkey
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) comprises most malignant
phenotype of central nervous system tumors which are
deﬁned as grade IV. Temozolomide is an alkylating agent
which is used for GBM treatment. Although temozolomide
has a remarkable effect, the high application dose reveals
the necessity of combination with other agents in thetreatment of GBM. AZD3463 is a novel ALK tyrosine
kinase receptor inhibitor which is over-expressed in GBM.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether theinhibition of ALK positively affects the activity of
temozolomide in GBM. Temozolomide and AZD3463
were dissolved in DMSO. T98G GBM cell line obtainedfrom ATCC was cultured via EMEM. The cytotoxic effects
of temozolomide, AZD3463 and their combination were
determined in time and dose dependent manner by usingWST8 (Biointersect) assay. IC50 values and the combina-
tion index (CI) were calculated by CalcuSyn (Biosoft).
Effects of the agents on apoptosis and cell cycle status weredetermined by BD accuri C6 ﬂow cytometry and Annexin
V (BD Biosciences) and Cycletest plus DNA (BD
Biosciences) assays, respectively. IC50 values of temozo-lomide and AZD3463 were determined as 1.54mM and
529nM on 48th hours, respectively. CI value was found
0.45 and the combination was evaluated as synergistic(ED75 value: 1.4mM temozolomide, 1.4μM AZD3463).
Temozolomide, AZD3463 and the combination induced
apoptosis 2.76, 1.17, and 3.31 folds, respectively. Temo-zolomide, AZD3463 and the combination arrested cell cycle
G1/S at different ratios. Our results suggested that1566AZD3463 combination may be an alternative approach to
dose reduction of TMZ for GBM cells.
B. Goker Bagca: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. A. Asik:
None. C. Gunduz: None. C. Biray Avci: None.
P12.068A
Combination of AZD3463 and salinomycin can induce
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest on glioblastoma
multiform cells
A. Asik, N. Ozates Ay, B. Goker Bagca, C. Kayabasi,
B. Ozmen Yelken, R. Gasimli, S. Yilmaz Susluer, C. BirayAvci, C. Gunduz
Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey
Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most
common malignant and aggressive brain tumor with limited
efﬁcient treatment options. AZD3463 is a potent ALK/
IGF1R inhibitor designed to overcome the acquiredresistance to crizotinib, while Salinomycin, an ionophore
antibiotic, has been identi ﬁed as a novel alternative to
traditional anticancer drugs and a potential Wnt/ β-catenin
pathway inhibitor. In this study, we aimed to investigate the
combinational effects of AZD3463 and salinomycin on
T98G GBM cell line.
Materials and Methods: The cytotoxicity of AZD3463
and salinomycin on T98G cells were determined with WST-
8 assay. The effects of the combination of AZD3463 andsalinomycin on apoptosis and cell cycle were determined by
AnnexinV-FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit and BD Cycletest
Plus DNA Reagent Kit, respectively.
Results: IC
50doses of AZD3463 and salinomycin were
found as 529 nM and 7.3 μM for 48h, respectively. Com-
bination doses of AZD3463 and salinomycin were found as3.3 μM and 333 nM with 0.673 combination index,
respectively. While IC
50doses of AZD3463 and salino-
mycin induced apoptosis 1.2 and 1.4-fold, as the combi-nation dose induced apoptosis 3.2-fold, compared to
control. While IC
50dose of salinomycin did not affect,
AZD3463 and the combination dose arrested the cell cycleat G1 phase.
Conclusions: We suggest that the combination of
AZD3463 and salinomycin via concurrently regulatingsignal pathways ALK and Wnt, may be a novel alternative
approach in the treatment of GBM.
A. Asik: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. B. Goker Bagca:
None. C. Kayabasi: None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. R.
Gasimli: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci:
None. C. Gunduz: None.P12.069B
ETV1 oncogene fused to novel gene partner PTPRZ1 in
a case of pilocytic astrocytoma
A. Matja šič
1, D. Kolenc2
1Laboratory of Molecular genetics, Institute of Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Gliomas are highly aggressive brain tumours, exhibiting
extreme genetic and clinical heterogeneity. It is these
variabilities that represent a great challenge in their
diagnosis and treatment, and are major causes of highmortality. Development and advances of high-throughput
sequencing techniques identi ﬁed several new single-
nucleotide variants and gene rearrangements. Characteriza-tion of gene fusions and how they affect cellular processes
in glioma oncogenesis will help us extend our knowledge of
tumour biology and contribute to more personalized andtargeted treatment of the disease.
Routine NGS analysis of the FFPE tissue sample of
pilocytic astrocytoma in a 7-year old boy revealed a fusionbetween the ETV1 oncogene and the PTPRZ1 gene. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no mention of the PTPRZ1-
ETV1 (PE) fusion in glioma or any other type of cancer todate. In order to validate the PE-fusion, we used PE-fusion-
speciﬁc primers for RT-PCR and subsequent Sanger
sequencing.
Both ETV1 and PTPRZ1 genes are thought to act as
oncogenes. ETV1 is a member of ETS family of transcrip-
tion factors, known tumour-promoting factors of Ewingsarcoma and prostate tumours. PTPRZ1 is considered as a
tumour growth-promoting oncogene in glioma. In 8-15% of
glioma, PTPRZ1 is fused to the MET oncogene - a ZM-
fusion, which is associated with poorer prognosis but also
represents a positive predictive biomarker for treatment with
kinase inhibitors. Regarding all, PTPRZ1-ETV1 fusionpresents a novel possible target for glioma treatment;
however, functional studies are needed to determine the
impact of the fusion in pathogenesis of glioma.
A. Matja šič:None. D. Kolenc: None.
P12.070C
FOCAD is associated with survival in IDH-mutant
astrocytic gliomas, localizes to centrosomes, and impacts
microtubules
F. Brand
1, A. Förster1, A. Kosfeld1, M. Bucher1,
C. Thomé2, M. S. Raab3, M. Westphal4, T. Pietsch5, A. von
Deimling6,7, G. Reifenberger8,9, P. Claus10,
B. Hentschel11, M. Weller12, R. G. Weber1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15671Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Neurology Clinic and
National Center for Tumor Diseases, Clinical Cooperation
Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany,3Department of Internal
Medicine V, Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology,University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,
4Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,5Department of
Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn,
Germany,6Department of Neuropathology, Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,Germany,
7Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology,
German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research
(DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),Heidelberg, Germany,
8Department of Neuropathology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany,9German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site Essen/Düsseldorfand German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany,
10Department of Neuroanatomy and Cell
Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,
11Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and
Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,
12Department of Neurology, University Hospital and
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
In search of novel genes associated with glioma tumorigen-
esis, we have previously shown that KIAA1797/FOCAD is
frequently deleted in gliomas and that the encoded
focadhesin functions as a tumor suppressor impactingproliferation and migration of glioma cells in vitro and
in vivo . Here, we examine an association of FOCAD loss
with overall survival of glioma patients, and address themolecular mechanisms that govern the suppressive effect of
focadhesin on glioma tumorigenesis. We found FOCAD
loss to be associated with profoundly inferior outcome inpatients with isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-mutant WHO
grade II to IV astrocytic gliomas. Multivariable analysis of
WHO grade II to IV astrocytic gliomas con ﬁrmed FOCAD
loss as an independent prognostic factor for overall survival.
Subsequently, using a yeast two-hybrid screen and pull-
down assays, we identi ﬁed tubulin beta-6 and other
members of the tubulin family as novel focadhesin-
interacting partners. We demonstrate that tubulins and
focadhesin co-localize at the centrosome, and that focadhe-sin is enriched in proximity to centrioles. Focadhesin also
localizes to microtubules via its interaction partner SLAIN
motif family member 2, and reduces microtubule growthvelocity, possibly explaining why focadhesin decreases cell
migration. During the cell cycle, focadhesin levels peak
prior to mitosis and in ﬂuence time-dependent mitotic
progression, providing a possible explanation for
focadhesin-dependent cell growth reduction. We concludethat FOCAD loss is associated with decreased overall
survival in subsets of glioma patients, a prognostic effect
that may be linked to our ﬁndings that focadhesin physically
interacts with tubulin family members, impacts microtubule
assembly and mitotic progression.
F. Brand: None. A. Förster: None. A. Kosfeld: None.
M. Bucher: None. C. Thomé: None. M.S. Raab: None.
M. Westphal: None. T. Pietsch: None. A. von Deimling:
None. G. Reifenberger: None. P. Claus: None. B. Hent-
schel: None. M. Weller: None. R.G. Weber: None.
P12.071D
Study of SEZ6L molecular alterations in solid tumors
A. Martel-Martel
1,2,3, C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero1,4,5,
S. Vallejo-Fuente2,5, A. Casado-García5, S. Almaraz-
Postigo2,5, E. Sánchez Tapia2,1,5, T. Martín-Gómez1,3,
M. Gomes Ferreira1,6, M. Sancho-de Salas7, R. González-
Sarmiento1,2,5
1Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca
(IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain,2Unidad de Medicina
Molecular. Departamento de Medicina. Universidad de
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,3Servicio de Oncología
Médica. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain,4Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Departamento de
Medicina. Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, España,Salamanca, Spain,
5Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular del Cáncer (IBMCC), Universidad de Salamanca-
CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,6Servicio de Ginecología y
Obstetricia. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca,
Salamanca, Spain,7Servicio de Anatomía Patológica.
Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
Introduction: The SEZ6L gene has been recently described
to be altered in lung tumors. We set out to test if this is truefor other types of tumors as well.
Materials and Methods: We studied SEZ6L by quanti-
tative Polymerase-Chain Reaction (qPCR) on tumor-derived DNA samples. In total, we studied: 55 female and
18 male breast tumors, 30 grade II-III and 30 grade I
endometrial tumors 38 ovarian tumors.
Results: We identi ﬁed SEZ6L ampli ﬁcations in 1 (1.7%)
of female breast cancers, 3 (16.7%) of male breast cancers,
1 (3.0%) of grade II-III and 2 (6.6%) of grade I endometrialcancers and 3 (7.9%) of ovarian cancers. We found SEZ6L
heterozygous deletions in 23 (39.7 %) of female breast
cancers, 4 (22.2%) of male breast cancers, 10 (33.3%) ofgrade II-III and 3 (10.0%) of grade I endometrial cancers
and 19 (50.0%) of ovarian cancers We described SEZ6L
homozygous deletions in 22 (37.9%) of female breastcancers, 6 (33.33%) of male breast cancers, 5 (16.6%) of1568grade II-III and 5 (16.6%) of grade I endometrial cancers
and 4 (10.5%) of ovarian cancers.
Conclusions: Though SEZ6L had, until now, only been
shown to be altered in lung cancer, we show that a great
percentage of gynecological tumors present alterations,
thus, potentially linking SEZ6L with these types of tumors.
This work was supported by a grant from Instituto de
Salud Carlos III (Ministry of Economy and Competitive-
ness) (ISC IIII-FEDER: PI16/01920)
A. Martel-Martel: None. C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero:
None. S. Vallejo-Fuente: None. A. Casado-García: None.
S. Almaraz-Postigo: None. E. Sánchez Tapia: None. T.
Martín-Gómez: None. M. Gomes Ferreira: None. M.
Sancho-de Salas: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.073B
The identi ﬁcation of pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2
negative, high risk, hereditary breast and/or ovariancancer patients
J. L. van Luttikhuizen
1, S. Schubert1, B. Auber1,
G. Schmidt1, W. Hofmann1, J. Penkert1, C. F. Davenport2,
U. Hille-Betz3, L. Wendeburg1, J. Bublitz1, M. Tauscher1,
K. Hackmann4,5,6,7, E. Schröck4,6,7, C. Scholz1,
H. Wallaschek1, B. Schlegelberger1, T. Illig1,
D. Steinemann1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Research Core Unit
Genomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,
3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany,4Institute for Clinical
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, TUDresden, Dresden, Germany,
5German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany,6German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany,7National Center
for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Partner Site Dresden, Dresden,
Germany
Introduction: In the majority of hereditary breast and /or
ovarian cancer (HBOC) patients the genetic predisposition
is unknown. Currently extensive research focusses on theidenti ﬁcation of pathogenic variants causative for the
development of the disease.
Materials and Methods: NGS-based multiple gene panel
resequencing in combination with a high resolution CGH-
array was used to identify genetic risk factors for HBOC in
237 high risk patients who were previously tested negativefor pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants.
Results: We identi ﬁed 32 pathogenic variants in 14 dif-
ferent genes ( ATM, BLM, BRCA1, CDH1, CHEK2,
FANCG, FANCM, FH, HRAS, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN,
RAD51C andNBN ) in 30 patients (12.7%). Two pathogenicBRCA1 variants that were previously undetected due to less
comprehensive and sensitive methods were found. Five
pathogenic variants are novel, three of which occur in genes
yet unrelated to hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer
(FANCG, FH andHRAS ). In our cohort we discovered a
remarkably high frequency of truncating variants inFANCM (2.1%), which has recently been suggested as a
susceptibility gene for hereditary breast cancer. Two
patients of our cohort carried two different pathogenicvariants each and 10 other patients in whom a pathogenic
variant was con ﬁrmed also harbored a variant of unknown
signiﬁcance in a breast and ovarian cancer
susceptibility gene.
Conclusions: With our screening strategy, we were able
to identify pathogenic variants predisposing for tumor for-mation in 12.3% of BRCA1/2 -negative breast and/or ovarian
cancer patients.
Grant: Claudia von Schilling Stiftung to B.S. and D.S.J.L. van Luttikhuizen: None. S. Schubert: None. B.
Auber: None. G. Schmidt: None. W. Hofmann: None. J.
Penkert: None. C.F. Davenport: None. U. Hille-Betz:
None. L. Wendeburg: None. J. Bublitz: None. M. Tau-
scher: None. K. Hackmann: None. E. Schröck: None. C.
Scholz: None. H. Wallaschek: None. B. Schlegelberger:
None. T. Illig: None. D. Steinemann: None.
P12.074C
Prevalence of genetic susceptibility for breast and
ovarian cancer in a non-cancer related study
population: secondary germline ﬁndings from a Swiss
single center cohort
D. Kraemer1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, K. Steindl1,
P. Boonsawat1, M. Zweier1, K. J. Dedes2, P. Joset1,
D. Fink2, A. Rauch1
1Institute of Medical Genetics (IMG), University of Zurich,
8952 Schlieren-Zürich, Switzerland,2Department of
Gynecology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zürich,Switzerland
Objective: For the ﬁrst time, in a retrospective non-cancer
related cohort of a single Swiss genetic center, we
systematically assessed the prevalence of secondary ﬁnd-
ings in 19 susceptibility genes for hereditary breast andovarian cancer (HBOC).
Design: A total of n=400 non-cancer related individuals
undergoing whole-exome sequencing were included afterquality assessment (mean age of 43 years). The majority of
the cohort were Caucasian (n =336, 84.0%), for n=170
individuals (42.5%) of which an autochthonous Swissdescent was assumed. Each rare variant (MAF ≤0.65%) was
manually evaluated according to the ACMG-AMPAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1569standards including "hypomorphic" as additional distinct
pathogenicity class.
Results: Overall, 526 rare secondary variants were
encountered with the BRCA1/2 genes accounting for 27.2%
of the total variant yield. If strati ﬁed for variant patho-
genicity, for BRCA1/2 , three pathogenic variants were
found in three females of Italian ancestry (carrier frequency
of 0.8%). In the 17 non- BRCA genes, ﬁve carriers of (likely)
pathogenic variants (1.3%) were identi ﬁed with two Swiss
individuals harboring the CHEK2 Arg160Gly variant being
known as recurrent among Caucasians. Hence, the overall
carrier rate of a (likely) pathogenic variant summed up to2.0%. Additionally, seven various hypomorphic alleles
were detected in 22 individuals (5.4%).
Conclusion: Herein, we provide ﬁrst evidence for a high
prevalence of HBOC-related cancer susceptibility in the
heterogeneous Swiss general population and relevant sub-
populations, particularly in individuals of Italian descent.These pioneer data may further substantiate considerations
about population-based HBOC screenings. This study was
funded by a von Sick CardioOnco grant.
D. Kraemer: None. S. Azzarello-Burri: None. K.
Steindl: None. P. Boonsawat: None. M. Zweier: None. K.
J. Dedes: None. P. Joset: None. D. Fink: None. A.
Rauch: None.
P12.075D
Multiple genetic tumor syndromes: when to suspect
them?
F. Brugnoletti
1, E. Lucci-Cordisco1,2, A. Vaisfeld1,3,
A. Pan ﬁli1, S. Amenta1, R. Pietrobono1,2, M. Pomponi2,
M. Genuardi1,2
1Catholic University, Rome, Italy,2Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italy,3Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy
The use of multigene panels allowed the identi ﬁcation of
carriers of pathogenic variants (PVs) in 2 or more cancer
predisposing genes (CPGs). The condition has been named
Multiple Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome (MINAS):here we present 6 new cases and discuss the implications.
The NF1 gene was involved in two cases, associated with
RET andMSH2 PVs, respectively. Both patients presented
clinical NF1 in addition to positive family history (known
familial RET PV) and personal and family history of early-
onset colon cancer, respectively. The latter patient alsodeveloped three independent soft tissue sarcomas, that are
uncommon in both NF1 and Lynch syndrome. The other
cases involved BRCA1 and/orBRCA2: 1) early-onset breast
cancer, ovarian cancer ( BRCA1 +BRCA2 ); 2) macroce-
phaly, skin lesions, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer in theproband, whose father had breast cancer ( BRCA2 +PTEN );
3) early-onset breast cancer and renal cancer with lung cysts
in 2 siblings ( BRCA1 +FLCN ); 4) bilateral breast cancer,
pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid cancer ( BRCA1
+RET). Overall, in 5 patients we actively searched for a
second PV whereas the diagnosis was incidental in onecase. Our data indicate that the phenotypes of patients with
Multiple Genetic Tumor Syndromes (MGTS) can be the
sum of the different syndromes or driven by one of the twogenes or they might represent a multiplicative effect. MGTS
should be actively searched in all patients with complex/
atypical phenotypes or a suggestive family history, thatcannot solely be explained by defects in a single CPG.
F. Brugnoletti: None. E. Lucci-Cordisco: None. A.
Vaisfeld: None. A. Pan ﬁli:None. S. Amenta: None. R.
Pietrobono: None. M. Pomponi: None. M. Genuardi:
None.
P12.076A
Exome sequencing in familial cancer patients; yield,
advantages and disadvantages of implementation in theclinical practice
S. Moghadasi
1, M. Collee2, M. Cooks1, C. Tops1,
A. Wagner2, M. Nielsen1, A. van den Ouweland2,
C. J. VAN ASPEREN1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands,2Erasmus University
Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics,Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: For many patients from families with strong
suspicion for hereditary cancer no pathogenic variant can be
found using single gene or small gene panel sequencing
methods.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the yield of exome
sequencing in patients in whom standard diagnostics did not
lead to a molecular diagnosis. Furthermore, we discussadvantages and disadvantages of implementation of exome
sequencing in clinical practice.
Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was per-
formed in 130 patients with a strong suspicion for heredi-
tary cancer who had tested negative in previous genetic tests
for germline variants. A panel of 209 genes proven to becausal for cancer or associated with cancer was analyzed.
Results: We identi ﬁed 10 pathogenic variants in 130
patients (7.7%) which are (partially) causative of the phe-notypes in the families. These ten pathogenic variants were
found in ATM (3 times), LZTR1 ,PALB2 ,PMS2 (2 times),
MUTYH ,SUFU ,TGFBR1 . Additionally, 22 pathogenic/
deleterious variants were identi ﬁed which did not match the
family ’s cancer phenotype. Furthermore, we selected some1570variants with high prior probability of pathogenicity based
on the function of the gene, in silico data and frequency of
the variant in control cohorts for further research.
Conclusions: Our study shows that exome sequencing,
also after standard tests, is valuable in identifying the cau-
sative pathogenic variants. However, given the associatedcosts and workload for clinical molecular geneticists at this
moment, it should only be offered to speci ﬁc families when
targeted analysis of the most relevant genes is negative.
S. Moghadasi: None. M. Collee: None. M. Cooks:
None. C. Tops: None. A. Wagner: None. M. Nielsen:
None. A. van den Ouweland: None. C.J. Van
asperen: None.
P12.077B
Germline mutations in POLE andPOLD1 associated
with hereditary cancer
P. Mur
1,2,3, S. García Mulero4, J. del Valle1,2,3, A. Vidal5,
M. Pineda1,2,3, G. Cinnirella1,6, E. Martín-Ramos7,
A. López-Doriga4,8, S. Belhadj1,2, P. M. Muñoz-Torres1,2,
M. Navarro1,2,3, J. Balmaña9, J. Brunet10,2,3,
V. Moreno4,8,11, J. Piulats12,3, X. Matías-Guiu5, R. Sanz-
Pamplona4,8, R. Aligué7, G. Capellá1,2,3, C. Lázaro1,2,3,
L. Valle1,2,3
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of
Oncology (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona),
Spain,2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and
Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL,Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,
3Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC),
Madrid, Spain,4Unit of Biomarkers and Susceptibility,
Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Catalan Institute
of Oncology (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat
(Barcelona), Spain,5Department of Pathology, Bellvitge
University Hospital (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat
(Barcelona), Spain,6PhD Program in Translational
Biomedicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy,
7Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Barcelona (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain,
8Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Epidemiologia y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid,
Spain,9Medical Oncology Department, Vall d'Hebron
University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology(VHIO), Barcelona, Spain,
10Hereditary Cancer Program,
Catalan Institute of Oncology (IDIBGi), Girona, Spain,
11Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,12Department of
Medical Oncology, Catalan Institute of Oncology
(IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), SpainIntroduction: Germline mutations in the exonuclease
domains of polymerases POLE andPOLD1 , which affect
their proofreading capabilities, predispose to adenomatous
polyps, colorectal cancer, endometrial tumors and other
extracolonic malignancies. Tumors and polyps with exonu-
clease domain mutations exhibit an increased mutation rate(hypermutation) and a speci ﬁc associated mutational
signature. We aim at de ﬁning the tumor spectrum of the
syndrome, assess the prevalence of POLE/D1 pathogenic
mutations in hereditary cancer, and evaluate the challenge
of variant classi ﬁcation for these genes.
Materials and Methods: We studied a total of 1,525
unrelated probands referred for genetic counseling: a pro-
spective cohort of 1,021 hereditary cancer patients sub-
jected to a multi-gene hereditary cancer panel, whichincluded the whole sequence of POLE andPOLD1 ; and 504
patients without mutations in known cancer-predisposing
genes, selected according to their phenotypic character-istics, where POLE/D1 exonuclease domains were directly
sequenced. Co-segregation analyses, case-control allele
frequencies, yeast-based assays and tumor mutational ana-lyses (mutation burden and mutational signatures) were
performed for variant interpretation.
Results: We identi ﬁed 8 missense variants within the
exonuclease domain, 4 loss-of-function and 5 missense
predicted deleterious variants outside the exonuclease
domain; all of them with population allelic frequencies<1%. Pending interpretation of the clinical impact of loss-
of-function and non-exonuclease domain mutations, our
results, implemented in the ACMG/AMP guidelines forvariant classi ﬁcation, allowed us classify 2 variants as
pathogenic, 2 as benign, and 4 as variants of unknown
signiﬁcance.
Conclusions: Our study reveals relevant challenges for
the classi ﬁcation of POLE/POLD1 variants, which need to
be considered for routine genetic diagnostics.
P. Mur: None. S. García Mulero: None. J. del Valle:
None. A. Vidal: None. M. Pineda: None. G. Cinnirella:
None. E. Martín-Ramos: None. A. López-Doriga: None.
S. Belhadj: None. P. M. Muñoz-Torres: None. M.
Navarro: None. J. Balmaña: None. J. Brunet: None. V.
Moreno: None. J. Piulats: None. X. Matías-Guiu: None.
R. Sanz-Pamplona: None.
R. Aligué: None. G. Capellá:
None. C. Lázaro: None. L. Valle: None.
P12.079D
HTRA4 could be involved in early-onset breast and
ovarian cancer
S. Almaraz-Postigo1,2, N. Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, E. M. Sánchez
Tapia1,2,3, T. Martín-Gómez3,4, A. Pascual-Rodríguez3,
M. Sancho-de Salas5, E. Bueno-Martínez1,
J. L. García1,2,3, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15711Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC),
University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,
3Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL),
Salamanca, Spain,4Medical Oncology Service, University
Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,5Pathological
Anatomy Service, University Hospital of Salamanca,
Salamanca, Spain
Introduction: Early-onset breast cancer shows clinical and
molecular differences when compared with other types ofbreast cancer and, as such, could be considered a breast
cancer subtype. Our aim was to ﬁnd gene regions that were
altered in early-onset breast cancer and, within thoseregions, study candidate genes.
Materials and Methods: Early-onset breast cancer
samples were studied by comparative genomic hybridiza-tion (CGH) arrays and candidate gene was studied by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in 22 early-
onset breast and 15 ovarian cancer samples. Also, we ana-lysed the same candidate gene by qPCR in nine breast
cancer cell lines: HCC1569, MDAMB415, MDAMB231,
Bt474, Bt549, MCF7, AU565, HBL100 and SUM149.
Results: The CGH arrays showed deletion of 8p11.22 in
22% of samples. However, HTRA4 (a gene located in this
locus) qPCR studies showed abnormal ampli ﬁcation in
81.8% of breast cancer samples and in 80% of the ovarian
cancer ones. Moreover, this gene was ampli ﬁed in three of
the nine cell lines studied and deleted in other ﬁve cases.
Conclusions: Our results show for the ﬁrst time that
HTRA4, a gene involved in trophoblast implantation and
deregulated in eclampsia, could also be involved in early-onset breast and ovarian cancer.
This project was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920.
S. Almaraz-Postigo: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. E.
M. Sánchez Tapia: None. T. Martín-Gómez: None. A.
Pascual-Rodríguez: None. M. Sancho-de Salas: None. E.
Bueno-Martínez: None. J.L. García: None. R. González-
Sarmiento: None.
P12.080A
Studying the Immunological synapse in GBM - The
expression of checkpoint genes and transcription factors
involved in immunological synapse formation in GBMin adults
P. Dobosz
1,2, P. A. Stempor3,4, D. Rogachevsky1,2,
R. Shai1,2
1Cancer Research Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba
Medical Centre Hospital, Tel Hashomer, 52621 Ramat
Gan, Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel,2Tel Aviv University, OncologyDepartment, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, 6997801 Tel
Aviv, Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel,3The Wellcome Trust/CRUK
Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court
Rd, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,4Department of Genetics, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EH, UK,Cambridge, United Kingdom
The complex immunological synapse between T lympho-
cytes and cancer cells contains checkpoint proteins that
modulate the signal transmitted to T lymphocytes. Not all
patients respond to the checkpoint inhibitors treatment,especially in glioblastoma multiformae (GBM). The
expression of checkpoint genes is variable and prone to
the regulation of yet unrevealed mechanisms. Our study isaimed at evaluating the transcriptional and post-
transcriptional regulation of checkpoint mRNAs. We
analysed the expression of mRNAs from 617 adult GBMsamples from the TCGA, as well as from 4 cell lines by RT-
PCR. Of 22 mRNAs suggested in the literature to be
expressed on the 'cancer side' of the immunologicalsynapse, only a small fraction seem to be expressed in
GBM, using a pre-de ﬁned expression cutoff, some of which
were not mentioned in GBM literature so far. Theexpression of several genes is upregulated, eg.PD-L2,
compared with normal tissue data, and seem to be co-
expressed together. Other genes are signi ﬁcantly down-
regulated or not expressed at all eg.CD80, suggesting the
possible reason for many failures of checkpoint inhibitors
immunotherapy in GBM. Our results may suggest that mostof the genes involved in the formation of immunological
synapse are signi ﬁcantly down-regulated or not expressed at
all in GBM, providing the potential explanation for manyfailures of checkpoint inhibitors immunotherapy in GBM.
Studying the crosstalk between checkpoint genes and their
regulation might be crucial for improving immunotherapy.Revealing novel interconnections may aid in the develop-
ment of new diagnostic tools, outcome predictors, immu-
notherapeutic drugs or combinations.
P. Dobosz: None. P.A. Stempor: None. D. Roga-
chevsky: None. R. Shai: None.
P12.081B
Incidental ﬁndings in oncogenetics: results and impact
on patients
S. Nambot
1, V. Goussot2, J. Albuisson2, V. Derangère2,
R. Boidot3, C. Sawka1, A. Baurand1, G. Bertolone1,
M. Robert1, E. Cosset1, C. Coutant4, C. Loustalot3,
C. Thauvin1, F. Ghiringhelli3, A. Lançon3, C. Populaire5,
A. Damette5, M. Collonge Rame5, N. Meunier-Beillard1,
C. Lejeune1, L. Faivre115721Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France,2Centre
Georges-François Leclerc, Dijon, France,3Centre Georges
François Leclerc, Dijon, France,4Centre Georges François
Leclerc,, Dijon, France,5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire,
Besançon, France
Introduction: With next generation sequencing, physicians
are confronted to more complex and uncertain data,
including incidental ﬁndings (IF). Several recommendations
about the return of IF have been published. Some
professional societies encouraged the use of panels to avoid
IF detection. Little is known about the impact of suchresults on the patients in the context of diagnostic panel
testing in oncogenetics.
Material and Methods: From June 2014 to July 2018,
2500 patients with an indication of search for genetic pre-
disposition to cancer bene ﬁted from a 25 to 47 cancer genes
panel. A semi-structured questionnaire was proposed topatients in which an IF was detected at distance of the
results to assess the understanding of the result, the change
in medical care, the communication of IF to the family, thepsychological impact at time of diagnosis and at distance.
This interview was conducted by phone by a physician/
genetic counsellor.
Results: Twelve adult patients had the return of an IF in a
cancer predisposition gene ( RAD51C, PMS2, SDHC, RET,
BRCA2, CHEK2, CDKN2A, CDH1, SUFU ). To date, phone
interviews have been conducted for 7 patients. Most of
them had been surprised by the result, but not anxious. They
all began the recommended follow-up and did not regret theprocedure. Transmission of the information to their off-
spring was systematic but more dif ﬁcult to siblings or
second-degree relatives.
Conclusion: IF will be inherent to the development of
new technologies. It is important to increase our knowledge
on the impact of such results in different contexts.
S. Nambot: None. V. Goussot: None. J. Albuisson:
None. V. Derangère: None. R. Boidot: None. C. Sawka:
None. A. Baurand: None. G. Bertolone: None. M.
Robert: None. E. Cosset: None. C. Coutant: None. C.
Loustalot: None. C. Thauvin: None. F. Ghiringhelli:
None. A. Lançon: None. C. Populaire: None. A. Damette:
None. M. Collonge Rame: None. N. Meunier-Beillard:
None. C. Lejeune: None. L. Faivre: None.
P12.082C
JAK2 V617F mutation, cytogenetic abnormalities and
endogenous erythroid colony formation in patients withpolycythaemia vera
M. Strnad
1, B. Todori ćŽivanovi ć1, O. Tarabar2,M .E l e z2,
D. Stamatovi ć21Institute of Pathology, Military Medical Academy,
Beograd, Serbia,2Clinic of Hematology, Military Medical
Academy, Beograd, Serbia
Introduction: Polycitemia vera (PV) is a chronic myelo-
proliferative neoplasm characterized by increased red bloodcellc. The most frequent genetic abnormality is the somatic
mutation of Janus kinase 2 gene (JAK2 V617F) and it
occurs in more than 90% of patients with PV.The aim ofthis study was to investigate the frequency of JAK2 V617F
gene mutation in patients with PV and to compare results
with presence of cytogenetic abnormalities and endogenouserythroid colony (EEC) formation.
Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood and bone
marrow samples of 65 patients with PV were analyzed. Thediagnosis of PV was established according to the bone
marrow criteria of the World Health Organization. Mutation
of JAK2 V617F was determined by allele speci ﬁc pcr
analysis. For detection of EEC formation we used assays of
human clonogenic heamatopoietic progenitor cells with
agar-leukocyte conditioned medium without recombinanthuman erythropoietin. Cytogenetic analysis was done
according to standard procedures.
Results: Mutation of JAK2 V617F was found in the
samples of the peripheral blood in 61/65 (93.8%) PV
patients. Cytogenetic abnormalities, trisomy 9 and del
(20q), was detected in 2/65 (3 %) patients. EEC formationwas obtained in the sample of bone marrow in 59/65
(9O,8%) PV patients. In 57/65 (87,7%) patients we detected
presence of EEC formation and mutation of JAK2 V617F atthe same time.
Conclusions: Presence of JAK2 V617F mutation and
EEC are essential characteristics of PV. Considering theseresults, we concluded that the EEC formation observed in
PV could be partially due to the JAK2-dependent activation
signaling pathway.
M. Strnad: None. B. Todori ćŽivanović:None. O.
Tarabar: None. M. Elez: None. D. Stamatovi ć:None.
P12.083D
Laryngeal metastasis and relapse development
predicted by a (epi)genomic signature
I. M. Carreira
1,2, I. P. Ribeiro1,2, F. Caramelo3,
M. Ribeiro1, J. Miguéis4, F. Marques2,5, J. B. Melo1,2
1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
2iCBR-CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment
Genetics and Oncobiology - Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,3Laboratory of
Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, iCBR- Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15734Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck
Surgery, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC,
EPE, Coimbra, Portugal,5Department of Dentistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal
Introduction: The survival of laryngeal cancer patients and
the target therapies available remain poor. So, the
identi ﬁcation of early diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers
and the development of molecular models to distinguish
patients that will recur and/or develop metastasis after
treatment as well as to bene ﬁt with target therapies is of
utmost importance to decrease mortality, improve survival
rates and quality of life. This study aimed to develop a
model of recurrence and metastasis prediction using agenomic and epigenetic characterization of laryngeal cancer
samples.
Material and Methods: The genomic and epigenetic
characterization of 21 tumor samples from laryngeal cancer
patients was performed using array comparative genomic
hybridization technique, Agilent 4x180K and methylation-speciﬁc multiplex ligation dependent probe ampli ﬁcation
technique. The most common ampli ﬁcation and deletion
chromosomal regions and the respective altered genes wereidenti ﬁed. A genomic and epigenetic signature that distin-
guishes between patients with metastasis/recurrence from
those without, was determined using a logistic regressionclassi ﬁer with balanced training and test sets.
Results: Several chromosomal regions and genes were
observed with copy number alterations and methylation.The developed predictive genomic and epigenetic model
comprises the 3p chromosomal region and WT1,VHL and
THBS1 genes, highlighting a molecular signature with
clinical applicability.
Conclusion: This model for recurrence and metastasis
development may help in a more practical and individua-lized laryngeal cancer patient management, contributing to a
more targeted drug design and, ultimately, improving
patients' quality of life.
I.M. Carreira: None. I.P. Ribeiro: None. F. Caramelo:
None. M. Ribeiro: None. J. Miguéis: None. F. Marques:
None. J.B. Melo: None.
P12.084A
Investigation the expression of hypoxia inducible factorsand embryonic stem cell genes in patients with laryngeal
carcinoma
N. S. Ilgaz
1, D. Alptekin1, O. Surmelioglu1, M. B. Yilmaz1,
L. Ozpak1, H. Oksuz1, N. Keser2, H. U. Luleyap11Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Adana, Turkey,
2Eastern Mediterranean Agricultural Research Institute,
Adana, Turkey
Introduction: Laryngeal cancer accounts for about 25% of
head and neck cancers and is usually seen in men of middleor older age. More than 90% of laryngeal cancers are
squamous-cell cancers. One of the most common features of
solid tumors and one of the major environmental stresses ishypoxia. The reduction of the oxygen concentration below
the physiological level, promotes maintenance and self-
renewal of the human embryonic stem cells, and reducesspontaneous differentiation in vitro. Similarities between
stem cell and cancer cells suggest that both groups may use
common pathways in the regulation of gene expression. Inthis study, we aimed to determine the expression levels of
hypoxia-induced factors HIF-1 αand HIF-2 αand embryonic
stem cell genes SOX2, OCT4, NANOG and ESRRA inlaryngeal cancer patients.
Material and Methods: Twenty six patients with squa-
mous cell laryngeal carcinoma were included in this study.Real Time PCR was performed to compare the expression
levels of hypoxia inducible factors and embryonic stem cell
genes in tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues.
Results: It was determined that the expression of HIF-1 α,
OCT4 and NANOG genes were increased signi ﬁcantly in
tumor tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. HIF-2 α,
SOX2 and ESRRA gene expressions did not show sig-
niﬁcant differences between tumor and adjacent normal
tissues.
Conclusion: Our results show that there may be a rela-
tionship between the clinopathologic features of the disease
and hypoxia inducible factors and embryonic stem cellgenes in the pathophysiology of the laryngeal cancer.
N.S. Ilgaz: None. D. Alptekin: None. O. Surmelioglu:
None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. L. Ozpak: None. H. Oksuz:
None. N. Keser: None. H.U. Luleyap: None.
P12.087D
Comprehensive Detection of Germline and Somatic
Structural Mutation in Cancer Genomes by Bionano
Genomics Optical Mapping
A. Pang, J. Lee, K. Hong, T. Anantharaman, E. T. Lam,
Y. Delpu, S. Bocklandt, S. Marin, A. R. Hastie,M. Borodkin
Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United StatesIntroduction: The ability to identify structural variants
(SVs) is crucial in cancer genetics. Karyotype andcytogenetics are manually intensive. Microarrays and
sequencing cannot detect calls in segmental duplications1574and repeats, and miss balanced variants and low-frequency
mutations.
Materials and Methods: We describe the Bionano
Genomics ’s Saphyr platform to identify SVs in cancer
genomes. DNA >100 kbp is extracted, labelled at speci ﬁc
motifs, and linearized through NanoChannel arrays. Mole-cule images are digitized and de novo assembled, creating
chromosomal-arm scale genome maps. Cancer mutations
>500 bp are detected by aligning the molecules or thegenome maps to the public reference.
Results: Over the past 12 months, the power of Biona-
no’s cancer work ﬂow has been demonstrated on nearly 50
various cancers, including leukemia, breast, ovarian, pros-
tate, pancreatic, among others. While the number of SVs
varies among samples, we typically observe >5500 calls pergenome. Among leukemia samples, we captured the BCR-
ABL1 translocation as well as deletions impacting tumor
suppressor genes such as PTPN14 and ESRRG. Weresolved the structure of large duplications (790 kbp) dis-
rupting BRCA1 in early-onset breast cancers, found the
ampli ﬁcation of MYC in lung cancers.
Conclusions: In conclusion, with one platform, Saphyr
can discover a broad range of traditionally refractory but
relevant SVs, and improves our understanding of cancer.
A. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics. J. Lee: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. K. Hong: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. T. Anantharaman: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. E.T. Lam: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. Y. Delpu: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. S. Bocklandt: None. S.
Marin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics. A.R. Hastie: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M. Borodkin:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics.
P12.088A
Development of Cancer Surveillance Guidelines for
TP53 carriers: Recommendations from the UK Cancer
Genetics Group Consensus Meeting
H. Hanson, UK Cancer Genetics Group, LFS
Surveillance Consensus Day attendees
St Georges Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Tooting,
United Kingdom
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare inherited condition
caused by pathogenic variants in TP53 . Individuals withLFS have signi ﬁcantly increased risks of cancer; 41% by
age 18 and approaching 100% by 70.
To date, in the UK the only national surveillance
recommendation for LFS is for breast MRI. However, thereis increasing evidence for more comprehensive surveillance,
including whole body MRI (WB-MRI) with increasedcancer detection and survival.
International recommendations were published by Kratz
et al. (2017). However, these have not yet translated into
NHS practice.
The UK CGG therefore convened a National Consensus
Group meeting on 6
thJuly 2018 to agree a consistent
national approach to surveillance.
A pre-meeting survey was sent to 24 Regional Genetics
centres (UK and Ireland). The survey results and therecommendations made by the International Group were
discussed in depth at the meeting by 43 Clinical Geneticists,
Genetic Counsellors, Oncologists, Radiologists and Patientrepresentatives.
Prior to the Consensus meeting, less than 50% of centres
agreed with the International recommendations, with only25% of centres agreeing with annual WB-MRI. However,
the group recognised that due to the rarity of LFS, there is a
limited evidence base to support screening in terms of earlydetection and cancer mortality. On the day, consensus was
reached to follow the international recommendations, with
the exception of gastrointestinal surveillance. A surveillanceprotocol for children and adults with LFS and best practice
guidelines for WB-MRI in the UK were established.
The survey results, recommendations and the clinical
implementation will be presented.
H. Hanson: None.
P12.089B
Genetic modeling of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in Xenopus
tropicalis
D. Dimitrakopoulou, T. Naert, D. Tulkens, K. Vleminckx
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing
generates unique opportunities in human disease modeling.
It is now possible to create functional gene knockouts in a
number of model organisms. Xenopus tropicalis is an
aquatic organism favorable for modeling human disease due
to its diploid genome,, high progeny numbers and fast
embryonic external development. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome(LFS) is a disorder, that predisposes for several malig-
nancies like sarcomas and lymphomas. Our aim is to
examine whether a tp53 mutant X.tropicalis line could
mimic LFS linked af ﬂictions.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1575Materials and Methods: Atp53 mutant X.tropicalis line
was generated by injecting tp53 sgRNA precomplexed with
Cas9 protein. Injected embryos were raised until sexual
maturity and tp53 heterozygous and homozygous mutant
progenies were raised. Animals were closely monitored for
external signs of disease. Animals that were lethargic orexhibited decreased body weight or enlarged abdomen were
euthanized and histologically processed.
Results: Homozygous tp53 mutant animals showed rapid
morbidity compared to their heterozygous counterparts. In
75% (n =8) of tp53
-/-animals, disturbed architecture of the
spleen was determined by CD3 and PCNA immunohisto-logical analysis, implying the presence of hematologic
malignancies. Furthermore, ﬂow cytometric analysis of
blood in one out of six non-moribund mutants showedenrichment of CD3/CD8-positive cells, indicative of T-cell
leukemia. Besides hematological malignancies, animals
demonstrated liposarcoma and high grade undifferentiatedspindle and round cell sarcoma.
Conclusions: Our tp53 mutant line recapitulates several
LFS-p53 related malignancies. Our model could offer aplatform for identi ﬁcation of modi ﬁer genes and provide a
sensitized background for screening for novel cancer
drivers.
D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. T. Naert: None. D. Tulk-
ens: None. K. Vleminckx: None.
P12.090C
Whole-body MRI for cancer screening in patients with
germline TP53 pathogenic variants - a presentation of
the Swedish surveillance program including two case
reports
M. Omran
1, L. Blomqvist1, Y. Brandberg1, N. Pal1,
P. Kogner1, A. Kinhult Ståhlbom2, E. Tham1, S. Bajalica
Lagercrantz1
1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Current guidelines in Sweden regarding individuals with a
pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline TP53 variant
recommend patients to take part of the national Swedish
P53 Study (SWEP53). All known adult eligible carriers,
regardless of age, are offered to take part in a surveillanceprogram, offering yearly whole-body, breast, brain MRIs
and breast ultrasound. A special surveillance program for
individuals <18 years old with a 50% risk of being amutation carrier or with a veri ﬁedTP53 variation, includes
ultrasound of the abdomen and urine corticosteroid pro ﬁles.
Further clinically motivated examinations are performedwhen needed. In a submitted publication, we present the
surveillance program within the SWEP53 including furtherwork-up by describing two case reports - one patient with
prior malignancies and a healthy carrier with a common
benign ﬁnding. So far, 25 adults and 9 children have been
included in SWEP53 and 24 adults have performed their
baseline MRI. In seven of the 24 adults (29%), imaging
ﬁndings needing further work-up were identi ﬁed on whole-
body MRI at baseline. In Europe, there are surveillance
programs within studies such as SIGNIFY (UK) and
LIFSCREEN (France), but the SWEP53 is the ﬁrst
structured surveillance program including radiological and
clinical routines for TP53 mutation carriers in the
Scandinavian setting.
M. Omran: None. L. Blomqvist: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Collective Minds Radiology AB. Y. Brand-
berg: None. N. Pal: None. P. Kogner: None. A. Kinhult
Ståhlbom: None. E. Tham: None. S. Bajalica
Lagercrantz: None.
P12.091D
Long non coding RNA UCA1 as noninvasive tumourmarker for bladder cancer
E. M. Borkowska
1, M. Traczyk-Borszynska1, P. Kutwin2,
P. Kutwin3, T. Konecki2, Z. Jablonowski2, M. Borowiec1
1Medical University of Lód źDepartment of Clinical
Genetics, Łódź, Poland,2Medical University of Lód źI
Clinic of Urology, Łódź, Poland,3Medical University of
Lód ź,Łódź, Poland
Introduction: Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most
common cancers of the urinary tract. Despite improvementsin clinical treatment more than 50% of patients are relapsed
within the next ﬁve years. Therefore we are still looking for
the most sensitive and speci ﬁc marker that would enable
quick and precise diagnosis and monitoring of the disease.
Long noncoding RNA UCA1 (lncRNA) plays a special role
in the regulation of tumor cell proliferation, differentiationand apoptosis.
Methods: The presence of the UCA1 was con ﬁrmed by
the real-time qPCR (quantitative polymerase chain reaction)method in 172 samples (tissue and serum) from patients
diagnosed with BC. Analysis of relative gene expression
levels was performed using the formula 2
-dCtwith dCt =Ct
(target gene)-Ct (control). The tata box binding protein
(TBP) was used as a hausekeeping gene.
Results: Statistical analyzes were performed using U
Mann-Whitney test and ANOVA Kruskal-Wallis test to
determine the correlation between clinical and histopatho-
logical parameters and primary or recurrent tumor. Wefound that the lncRNA UCA1 was signi ﬁcantly higher in
both tissue and serum samples of BC patients than in1576control group and in primary BC than in recurrent tumor.
The increased expression was also associated with high
grade and progression. In conclusion, our results indicated
that lncRNA UCA1 could be useful diagnostic and prog-
nostic marker for BC, however further studies with larger
cohorts are necessary to evaluate it. One of the limitationsof our research is low number of tissue samples from
control group.
E.M. Borkowska: None. M. Traczyk-Borszynska:
None. P. Kutwin: None. P. Kutwin: None. T. Konecki:
None. Z. Jablonowski: None. M. Borowiec: None.
P12.092A
Genome-wide survival analysis of surgically-treated
lung adenocarcinoma patients
D. Maspero
1, G. Pintarelli1, S. Noci1, A. Pettinicchio1,
M. Incarbone2, D. Tosi3, L. Santambrogio3,
T. A. Dragani1, F. Colombo1
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy,2Ospedale San Giuseppe - Multimedica, Milan, Italy,
3Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy
Background: Lung cancer patients with the same patho-
logical stage and same treatments often show differentsurvival patterns for unknown reasons. We hypothesized
that these differences are due to individual germline
polymorphisms modulating still unknown genetic mechan-isms affecting cancer growth and metastasis.
Methods: To test the role of genetic constitution in
individual risk of poor prognosis, we carried out an overallsurvival genome-wide association study in 584 surgically-
treated lung adenocarcinoma patients, genotyping >2-mil-
lion single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). For232 samples, we had also available transcriptome data from
the non-involved lung tissue, that we used to test expression
quantitative locus (eQTL) activity of SNPs associated withsurvival.
Results: From the analysis of 1,415,218 SNPs passing
quality control steps, we found four SNPs (rs75767414,rs11074720, rs147882561, and rs79851088) associated
with overall survival at nominal P< 1.0 x 10
-6. A multi-
variable Cox ’s model including all the four associated
SNPs, together with clinical covariates, including patholo-
gical stage, showed that each of the four SNPs acts as an
independent risk factor for overall survival. None ofthe candidate SNPs acted as a cis-eQTL, whereas three
SNPs modulated expression of target genes in trans ( P<
1.0 x 10
−4).
Conclusion: Overall survival of surgically-treated lung
cancer patients is modulated by individual geneticconstitution. We are now applying random forest models to
investigate complex interactions between SNPs that could
explain the observed variability in patient survival. Under-
standing the mechanisms underlying individual risk of poor
prognosis may help discovering new tools to improve sur-
vival of lung cancer patients.
D. Maspero: None. G. Pintarelli: None. S. Noci: None.
A. Pettinicchio: None. M. Incarbone: None. D. Tosi:
None. L. Santambrogio: None. T.A. Dragani: None. F.
Colombo: None.
P12.094C
Preliminary results from a prospective study of germline
alterations in early onset lung cancer patients
(EOLUNG study)
M. Gausachs1,2, M. Jove3, J. Bosch-Barrera4,
E. Carcereny5, A. Teulé1, A. Izquierdo6, M. Navarro1,
R. Palmero3, N. Vilariño3, J. Ruf ﬁnelli3, E. Sais4,
T. Moran5, A. Estival5, C. Fina4, S. González1,2,
J. Brunet1,4,6, G. Capellá1,2,7, C. Lázaro1,2,7, E. Nadal3
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of
Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,
2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental
Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain,3Medical Oncology Department, Catalan
Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Spain,4Medical Sciences Department, School of Medicine,
Hospital Universitari Doctor Trueta, University of Girona,Girona, Spain,
5Department of Medical Oncology, Catalan
Institute of Oncology Badalona, Hospital Germans Trias i
Pujol, Badalona, Spain,6Hereditary Cancer Program,
Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGI, Girona, Spain,
7Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer
(CIBERONC), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain
Introduction: Non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) is a rare
disease among young adults. Germline DNA mutationshave not been systematically studied in this population.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) could be useful to
determine the proportion of young patients with NSCLCharboring germline mutations.
Patients and Methods: This multicentre prospective
study aims to assess whether NSCLC patients aged <51years at diagnosis harbor germline mutations using a cus-
tom NGS panel (I2HCP) developed in our center. This
panel covers 136 genes related with hereditary cancer. Theenrolment begun on June 2018 and a total of 43 patients
have been recruited.
Results: Here, we present an initial analysis based on the
ﬁrst 26 recruited patients. First, a restricted analysis focus-
ing on 26 genes involved in germline NSCLC yielded aAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1577total of 40 variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) and 2
putative pathogenic mutations (PPat) in BLM and NBN .
Next, an analysis of the whole 136-gene panel was per-
formed and 5 additional PPat mutations were detected in
FANCA, MUTYH, NTHL1, RIT1 and SBDS . In total, 7
putative PPat mutations were identi ﬁed in 6 patients (23%
of patients from this initial cohort of 26 NSCLC patients).
All variants are still being evaluated at clinical level. The
ﬁnal results will be presented at the Congress.
Conclusions: Based on these preliminary results, the
I2HCP gene panel is useful to identify young patients with
NSCLC harboring cancer hereditary predisposition. Furthervalidation in a larger cohort of NSCLC young adults is
warranted.
Grant Contract: Spanish Lung Cancer Group grant.
M. Gausachs: None. M. Jove: D. Speakers Bureau/
Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Boehringer. J. Bosch-Barrera: None. E. Car-
cereny: None. A. Teulé: None. A. Izquierdo: None. M.
Navarro: None. R. Palmero: None. N. Vilariño: None. J.
Rufﬁnelli: None. E. Sais: None. T. Moran: None. A.
Estival: None. C. Fina: None. S. González: None. J.
Brunet: None. G. Capellá: None. C. Lázaro: None. E.
Nadal: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Roche. C. Other Research
Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; P ﬁzer. D. Speakers Bureau/Honor-
aria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; BMS, MSD, Roche, Astra Zeneca, BoerhringerIngelheim, Takeda, Lilly, P ﬁzer.
P12.095D
Induced genotoxicity produced by ﬂavonoids and novel
Cu(II)- ﬂavonoid complexes in human lymphocytes
D. Chronopoulos
1, E. Halevas2, A. Hatzidimitriou3,
A. Pantazaki4, G. Litsardakis5, M. Sagnou2,
M. Pelecanou2, T. Lialiaris1
1Lab. of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Dimokrition
University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece,2Institute of
Biosciences & Applications, National Centre for Scienti ﬁc
Research “Demokritos ”, Athens, Greece,3Laboratory of
Inorganic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, AristotleUniversity of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece,
4Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece,
5Laboratory of Materials for Electrotechnics, Department
of Electrical Engineering, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki Genetics, Thessaloniki, GreeceFlavonoids (FL) are potent antioxidants, free radical
scavengers, metal chelators, and lipid peroxidation inhibi-
tors exhibiting several bene ﬁcial biological activities [1].
Theﬂavonoid chrysin is a ﬂavone found in honey and
propolis, and actively investigated for its potential biologi-
cal effects against Parkinson ’s disease and the proliferation
of cancer cells, as well as on the regulation of multiple cell
signaling pathways [2]. Research on the pivotal role of
stable Cu(II)-complexes (CuCo) with physiological sub-strates such as FL, in cell physiology as catalytic cofactors
in the redox chemistry of mitochondrial respiration, iron
absorption, free radical scavenging, and elastin cross-linking have provided new insights in the ﬁeld of copper
homeostasis and in particular into the understanding of
intracellular traf ﬁcking and distribution of copper at
molecular levels [3]. In this work two novel hybrid Cu
(II)-chrysin complexes were synthesized, isolated and
physico-chemically characterized through single crystal X-ray diffraction, FT-IR, UV-Vis, ﬂuorescence, TGA, and
ESI-MS measurements. Genotoxicity estimated by the
frequency of Sister Chromatid Exchanges (SCEs), cytosta-ticity based on the Proliferating Rate Indices (PRIs) and
cytotoxicity based on the Mitotic Indices (MIs) at human
peripheral lymphocyte cultures, were all signi ﬁcantly higher
both in the case of FL and CuCo. Irinotecan (CPT) was also
utilized as standard genotoxic agent and the combination of
FL or CuCo plus CPT provided a mechanism by which therate of genetic damage can be induced. The novel hybrid
materials exhibit enhanced solubility and bioavailability,
and increased anti-cancer activity compared with freechrysin and probably gives rise to fruitful bioapplications
and perspectives.
D. Chronopoulos: None. E. Halevas: None. A. Hatzi-
dimitriou: None. A. Pantazaki: None. G. Litsardakis:
None. M. Sagnou: None. M. Pelecanou: None. T.
Lialiaris: None.
P12.096A
Pitfalls in Lynch syndrome genetic testing: a case of apolymorphic variant in primer-annealing sequence
leading to the wildtype allele dropout in MLH1 gene
E. Damaso
1, R. Ferrer-Avargues1, A. Castillejo1,
M. Castillejo1, A. Sánchez-Heras1, C. Guillén-Ponce2,
J. Soto1
1Elche University Hospital / FISABIO, Elche, Spain,
2Ramon y Cajal Hospital, Madrid, Spain
PCR-based screening techniques, like Sanger sequencing
and NGS are considered gold standard methods fordetection of pathogenic variants in hereditary cancer
syndromes. Polymorphic variants represent a risk for1578misdiagnosis in genetic testing, since the presence of these
variants in primer-annealing sites may cause allele-dropout.
We present a Lynch syndrome family ful ﬁlling Amsterdam
II criteria. The proband was diagnosed of endometrial
cancer at age 39. Genetic diagnosis of Lynch syndrome was
performed by Sanger sequencing. A pathogenic variant wasdetected in exon-19 of MLH1: c.2150_2153dupAACA,
with a clear homozygous pattern. Predictive genetic testing
was performed in eight relatives. Unexpected results werefound. Proband´s mother presented the same homozygous
pattern for the pathogenic variant, while the proband´s
father was homozygous wildtype. Furthermore, proband´sbrother had also a homozygous pattern for the pathogenic
variant, while his son was homozygous wildtype. We
considered the possibility of allele-dropout of the wildtypeallele due to a polymorphism in the primer-annealing sites.
Proband was reanalyzed by NGS with hybridization/capture
target enrichment. We evidenced a heterozygous indelpolymorphism in the annealing sequence of the reverse
primer: c.*35_*37delCTT. Adequate external primers for
MLH1 -exon-19 were designed. The proband and her
relatives were re-tested by Sanger sequencing. We con-
ﬁrmed that pathogenic and indel variants are in trans phase.
Consequently, the patients previously considered homo-zygous for the pathogenic variant were indeed heterozy-
gous. We would like to remark the importance of be aware
of, and try to minimize, the limitations of genetic testingand consider to investigate deeper when unexpected
ﬁndings are detected.
E. Damaso: None. R. Ferrer-Avargues: None. A.
Castillejo: None. M. Castillejo: None. A. Sánchez-Heras:
None. C. Guillén-Ponce: None. J. Soto: None.
P12.097B
An unusual presentation of Lynch Syndrome in
teenagers
I. M. Barnes-Kedar
1,2, A. Jakobson-Setton1,3, R. Eitan1,3,
D. Zoref1, Z. Levy1, S. Ash1,4, A. Yanir1,4, Y. Goldberg1,2
1Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,2Recanati
Genetics Institute, Petach Tikva, Israel,3Helen Schneider
Women's Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel,4Schneider's
Childrens Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel
Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in the mismatch
repair (MMR) genes cause Lynch syndrome. Phenotype and
age of at cancer diagnosis differs among the various genes,however mean age of cancer onset is 44-61 years and
surveillance is recommended from age 20-25 or 2-5 years
prior to the earliest family reported malignancy (NCCNguidelines V1.2018). Bi-allelic MMR mutations cause
CMMRD characterized by childhood malignancies andNF1 features. We present two patients, both with early age
onset malignancies, diagnosed with Lynch syndrome but
with no evidence of CMMRD.
Patient 1was diagnosed at age 15 with poorly differ-
entiated endometrial endometriod carcinoma of mullerian
origin. A clonal loss of MSH6 was found in the tumor. Thisresult was suggestive of a biallelic somatic mutation, typi-
cally present with a driver POLE mutation. Multi-cancer
NGS testing revealed a heterozygous c.2906A>G mutationinMSH6 .N o POLE germline mutation was found. The
mutation was inherited from the patient's mother.
Patient 2 was diagnosed with aggressive T cell lymphoma
at age 16. NGS cancer panel testing revealed a heterozygous
mutation c.1865C>T in MSH2 , inherited from his father. He
had no other pathogenic variants.
Discussion: Malignancies associated with Lynch syn-
drome usually develop after age 25. MSH6 associated
Lynch syndrome manifests even later. Both patients werediagnosed with cancer before age 20 and had no evidence of
CMMRD. Cancer diagnosis in the second decade is rare
among Lynch carriers. Such cases should be reported andfurther explored.
I.M. Barnes-Kedar: None. A. Jakobson-Setton: None.
R. Eitan: None. D. Zoref: None. Z. Levy: None. S. Ash:
None. A. Yanir: None. Y. Goldberg: None.
P12.098C
Reduced PMS2 expression decreases signi ﬁcantly
mismatch repair ef ﬁciency
M. Kasela
1,2, M. Nyström1, M. Kansikas2
1University of Helsinki, Faculty of Biological and
Environmental Sciences, Helsinki, Finland,2LS
CancerDiag Ltd., Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: Inherited mutations affecting DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) genes MLH1 ,MSH2 ,MSH6 andPMS2 cause
Lynch syndrome (LS). Yet, the cancer susceptibilityassociated with PMS2 mutations differ from the typical
LS. The relatively small number of LS families found to
segregate PMS2 mutations and the associated low disease
penetrance suggest that PMS2 may not be an important
susceptibility gene. The effect of decreased PMS2 mRNA
expression on MMR capability was determined by in vitro
MMR assay.
Materials and Methods: Human ﬁbroblasts were trans-
fected with four different PMS2 -speci ﬁc shRNA targets to
create knockdown (KD) cell lines with varying levels of
PMS2 mRNA expression. A shRNA vector, with no known
target speci ﬁcity in the human genome, was used as a
control. Quantitative PCR was carried out using Taqman ®
assays for PMS2 with GAPDH ,HPRT1 and ACTB asAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1579reference genes. The repair ef ﬁciencies of the selected KD
protein extracts were measured by the in vitro MMR assay.
Results: KD cell lines retaining 19%, 33% and 53% of
PMS2 expression demonstrated signi ﬁcantly reduced MMR
efﬁciency compared to their control cells. Surprisingly, cells
retaining 53% of PMS2 expression indicated the most
severe problem in the repair capability.
Conclusions: Signi ﬁcant decrease in MMR ef ﬁciency
due to reduced PMS2 mRNA expression con ﬁrms that
PMS2 is an equally important susceptibility gene among
MLH1 ,MSH2 andMSH6 genes and that the reduction is
efﬁciently detectable by functional in vitro MMR assay.
Contract grant sponsors: Jane and Aatos Erkko
Foundation
M. Kasela: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
LS CancerDiag Ltd. M. Nyström: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; LS CancerDiag Ltd. M. Kansikas: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; LS
CancerDiag Ltd.
P12.099D
Age- and sex-speci ﬁc cumulative risks of colorectal
cancer in Han Chinese patients with Lynch syndrome
A. Kamiza1, W. Wang2, J. You3,4, R. Tang3,4, H. Chien5,
C. Lai5, L. Chiu5,6,T .L o7, K. Hung7, C. Hsiung7,
C. Yeh1,8
1School of Public Health, College of Public Health, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan,2The Ph.D. Program
for Translational Medicine, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan,
3Colorectal Section, Department of Surgery, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan,4School of Medicine,
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,5Department of
Public Health, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,6Department of Nutrition and
Health Sciences, Chang Gung University of Science andTechnology, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
7Institute of Population
Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli, Taiwan,8Department of Public Health, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Introduction: Patients with Lynch syndrome have a high
risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study, we estimated
the penetrance of CRC in Chinese patients with Lynch
syndrome.
Materials and Methods: One hundred and thirty-three
families comprising 1009 members were collected. Each
family was ascertained through a proband with a diagnosedCRC. Of these subjects, 300 were carriers of germline
mutations in MLH1 orMSH2 , whereas 709 were non-mutation carriers of these mutations. Penetrance of CRC
were calculated using modi ﬁed segregation analysis
implemented by Mendel.
Results: The median age at CRC diagnosis were younger
in patients with Lynch syndrome than in non-mutation
carriers (44.3 vs. 50.4 years, P=0.0001). The cumulative
risk (penetrance) of CRC at the age of 70 years were 36.5%
(95% CI =27.7% –46.9%), 34.8% (95% CI =
26.1% –45.5%), and 42.7% (95% CI =30.1% –57.8%) in
the male carriers of MLH1 orMSH2 ,MLH1 , and MSH2
germline mutations, respectively. The penetrance of CRC in
the female carriers of MLH1 orMSH2 ,MLH1 , and MSH2
germline mutations were 25.8% (95% CI =18.6% –35.2%),
24.5% (95% CI =17.4% –33.6%) and 32.2% (95% CI =
26.3% –39.1%), respectively.
Conclusions: Penetrance of CRC in Chinese patients
with Lynch syndrome is 34.8% –42.7% in men and
24.5% –32.2% in women.
This study was supported by the National Science
Council, Executive Yuan, Taiwan (NSC 101-2314-B-038-
057), the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan(MOST 104-2314-B-038-009 and MOST 106-2314-B-038-
052-MY3), and the Health and Welfare Surcharge of
Tobacco Products (MOHW107-TDU-B-212-114020).
A. Kamiza: None. W. Wang: None. J. You: None. R.
Tang: None. H. Chien: None. C. Lai: None. L. Chiu:
None.
T. Lo: None. K. Hung: None. C. Hsiung: None. C.
Yeh: None.
P12.100A
Variant analyses of PMS2 by single-molecule long-read
sequencing
K. Neveling, A. Mensenkamp, L. de Bruijn, E. Askar,
S. van der Heuvel, E. Hoenselaar, R. Derks, M. van der
Vorst, M. Nelen, L. Vissers, M. Ligtenberg, R. M. de Voer
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Introduction: Germline mutations in the mismatch repair
gene PMS2 are a cause of Lynch syndrome. The detection
ofPMS2 mutations is challenged by the presence of
numerous pseudogenes and frequent gene conversion
events. Long-range PCR (LR-PCR) in combination with
single-molecule long-read sequencing may overcome theuse of multiple DNA- and RNA-based assays for the
detection of PMS2 mutations.
Materials and Methods: We ampli ﬁedPMS2 using three
LR-PCR amplicons, covering the complete gene with
overlapping segments. In order to allow circular consensus
sequencing, a method that increases the accuracy of long-reads from 85% to >99%, we limited the size of amplicons
to 16kb. Subsequently, twenty cases that showed loss of1580PMS2 expression by immunohistochemical staining of their
tumor tissue were characterized for the presence of patho-
genic variants.
Results: Long-read sequencing is able to detect single
nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions/deletions, exon
deletions >1kb in size and accurate breakpoint mapping. Inthe rare case a deletion is missed, potentially due to allelic
drop-out of deletions spanning the primer binding sites,
absence of heterozygosity for SNVs in one of the three LR-PCR amplicons can be used to preselect cases for deletion
screening by multiplex-ligation probe ampli ﬁcation
(MLPA).
Conclusions: Long-range sequencing is an attractive
alternative strategy to accurately detect pathogenic variants
and exon deletions in PMS2 , limiting the use of multiple
assays in diagnostics. Furthermore, long-range sequencing
has the potential to identify novel pathogenic variants, like
intragenic inversions, in cases suspected of PMS2 -related
Lynch syndrome, which thus far have remained without a
molecular diagnosis.
K. Neveling: None. A. Mensenkamp: None. L. de
Bruijn: None. E. Askar: None. S. van der Heuvel: None.
E. Hoenselaar: None. R. Derks: None. M. van der Vorst:
None. M. Nelen: None. L. Vissers: None. M. Ligtenberg:
None. R.M. de Voer: None.
P12.101B
New multidisciplinary tasks in ﬁnding all Lynch
Syndrome among patients with colorectal cancer below
age 70
J. R. Vos
1, I. E. Fakkert1, L. Spruijt1, R. W. Willems2,
S. Langenveld3, A. R. Mensenkamp1, E. M. Leter3,
I. D. Nagtegaal2, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1,2,
N. Hoogerbrugge1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university
medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of
Pathology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen,Netherlands,
3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands
Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common
cause of hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC). Only ~30% of
CRC patients with an increased risk for LS based on ageand family history is referred for genetic testing. This may
be improved by universal mismatch repair de ﬁciency
(dMMR) testing in newly diagnosed CRC below age 70(CRC<70) followed by germline and somatic testing of
MMR genes in those CRC patients with dMMR without
MLH1 hypermethylation (U-MMR work ﬂow).
Methods: The new U-MMR work ﬂow was actively
implemented in daily practice of pathologists, surgeons andgastroenterologists in 19 hospitals and 13 pathology
laboratories. The feasibility (uptake dMMR-testing, referral
rates for genetic testing, testing outcome) and appreciation
of patients and clinicians were evaluated.
Results: Pathologists implemented dMMR-testing in
84% (3,025 of 3,602) of CRC<70. Gastroenterologists andsurgeons referred 69% of those with dMMR without
hypermethylation for genetic testing. Participating clin-
icians and patients were overwhelmingly positive about theworkﬂow. Among CRC patients with dMMR and without
hypermethylation 55% had LS, 43% somatic bi-allelic
pathogenic MMR variants (non-hereditary) and for 1% theresult was ambiguous. The prevalence of LS was 18% in
CRC<40 and 1% in CRC40-70.
Conclusions: Pathologist very well adopted the U-MMR
workﬂow and gastroenterologists and surgeons increased
the referral rate of CRC<70 at high risk for LS, although
especially in this step the work ﬂow needs improvement. U-
MMR work ﬂow in all new CRC<70 is feasible and highly
appreciated by patients and clinicians. The project was
supported by the Dutch Digestive Foundation with fundingfrom the ‘Vriendenloterij ’.
J.R. Vos: None. I.E. Fakkert: None. L. Spruijt: None.
R.W. Willems: None. S. Langenveld: None. A.R. Men-
senkamp: None. E.M. Leter: None. I.D. Nagtegaal:
None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. N. Hoogerbrugge:
None.
P12.103D
Metastatic colorectal cancer chemotherapeutic drugsalter the expression of TGF βsignaling-related miR-17-
5p, miR-21-5p and miR-93-5p in vitro
J. Despotovic, A. Nikolic
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: The backbone of metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) treatment consists of 5- ﬂuorouracil combined with
oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) or irinotecan (FOLFIRI). Approxi-
mately half of the mCRC patients respond to therapy, so amajor challenge remains to identify predictive biomarkers
for treatment response. Recent studies revealed an interplay
between TGF βsignaling and miRNAs and their role in
chemoresistance. The aim of this study was to identify
TGFβsignaling-related miRNAs and test their potential as
predictive biomarkers.
Materials and Methods: By
in silico analysis we iden-
tiﬁed miR-17-5p, miR-21-5p and miR-93-5p which regulate
most TGF βsignaling members and show altered expression
in CRC. To investigate the effects of anticancer drugs on
selected miRNAs expression, SW620 cells were treatedAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1581with 5- ﬂuorouracil, oxaliplatin, irinotecan or their combi-
nations for 72h.
Results: MiR-21-5p expression was upregulated while
the levels of miR-17-5p and miR-93-5p were down-
regulated in all treatments. To determine whether this
modulatory effect is transient or stable, the miRNAexpression was measured on the 1
st,3rdand 6thday after the
treatment with drugs combinations. Expression of miR-17-
5p and miR-93-5p had a decreasing trend from 1stto 6thday
after the treatments, while miR-21-5p expression was
upregulated on the 3rdday but was restored close to initial
level on the 6thday.
Conclusions: Although tested chemotherapeutic drugs
alter expression of all tested miRNAs, only miR-17-5p and
miR-93-5p represent potential predictive biomarkers can-didates due to their lasting downregulation.
Funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (OI173008)
J. Despotovic: None. A. Nikolic: None.
P12.104A
Investigation of the synergistic effect of metformin and
FX11 agents on cell proliferation in PANC-1 cell line
D. Turgut, E. Duman, A. N. Tekkok, M. Bayindir Bilgic,
N. Ekimci Gurcan, A. C ınar Kuskucu, O. F. Bayrak
Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Metformin, an insulin-lowering agent, has
been associated with decreased cancer risk in epidemiologic
studies in diabetic patients. Interest of metformin in cancertreatment and prevention re ﬂects the recent convergence of
several areas of research. Preclinical studies have shown
that metformin can inhibit the cancer cells proliferation.Cancer cells take up glucose and after than transform it to
lactate even under aerobic conditions, called as the Warburg
effect. Suf ﬁcient amounts of products of glucose metabo-
lism are required for cancer cell division and rapid growth.
Studies showed that, some glycolytic cell types have shown
susceptibility to FX11-based lactate dehydrogenase-Ainhibition. So, we investigated that effect of metformin
and FX11 combination treatment on pancreatic cancer.
Materials and Methods: In this study, sole exposure to
metformin or FX11, and their combinations in different are
investigated on PANC-1 cell line for determine the effect on
cancer growth and progression. MTS assay was performedat 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours to measure time-dependent
change of metformin and FX11.
Results: Increased concentrations of metformin and
FX11 alone reduced cellular metabolic activity of PANC-1.
Interestingly, the combination of metformin and FX11created a synergistic effect and signi ﬁcantly reduced cell
proliferation in vitro.
Conclusions: We found that combination of metformin
and FX11 which effect on glucose metabolism reduced the
metabolic activity and cancer cell growth. This combination
treatment could be change both energetic and apoptoticpathways. Furthermore, ﬁve candidate genes for qPCR were
identi ﬁed and three candidate proteins were selected for
westernblot.
D. Turgut: None. E. Duman: None. A.N. Tekkok:
None. M. Bayindir Bilgic: None. N. Ekimci Gurcan:
None. A. C ınar Kuskucu: None. O.F. Bayrak: None.
P12.105B
Causal variants that underlie miReQTLs in prostatecancer
S. Farashi
1, P. Gharahkhani2,T .O ’Mara2, J. Batra1
1Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia,
2QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia
The microRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that
are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression in multicellular organisms. Alterations in the
expression of miRNA genes contribute to the pathogenesisof human malignancies incuding prostate cancer. In
particular, the expression of miRNAs themselves could be
affected by germline variants known as expressionquantitative trait loci (eQTLs). These eQTLs exert the
allele speci ﬁc effects on miRNA gene expression (miR-
eQTLs), thereby participating in a regulatory role in canceraetiology. To identify miR-eQTLs in prostate cancer,
genome-wide germline genotype data (Affymetrix 6.0)
were obtained for prostate cancer cases from The CancerGenome Atlas (TCGA). Following genotyping quality
control, imputation of non-genotyped variants, we further
obtained tumour tissue miRNA-sequencing data from thesame set of prostate cancer patients. We performed miRNA
alignment and expression quanti ﬁcation adding recently
reported novel miRNAs data to the analysis. Linearregression models were used to identify potential miR-
eQTLs using the MatrixEQTL R package. We observed
several recently reported novel miRNA genes whoseexpression was signi ﬁcantly associated (P < 0.05, false
discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1) as well as known miRNAs with
germline variants in primary tumour samples. Moreover, theresults demonstrated miR-eQTLs for isoforms of known/
novel miRNAs in addition to miR-eQTLs regulating the
known/novel miRNAs that carry one mismatch. The resultshave highlighted the potential of exploiting miR-eQTLs as a
tool to map new key miRNA genes involved in prostate1582cancer, which ultimately could lead us to discover networks
of dysregulated miRNAs contributing to prostate
tumourigenesis.
S. Farashi: None. P. Gharahkhani: None. T. O ’Mara:
None. J. Batra: None.
P12.106C
Variant pro ﬁling of colorectal adenomas from patients
with MSH3 -related adenomatous polyposis
C. Perne1,2, S. Peters1, I. Spier1,2, S. Hurpaopan3,
C. Grimm4, J. Altmüller5,6, A. Hillmer7, H. Thiele5,
G. Möslein8, M. Odenthal7, R. Adam9, J. Kirfel10,
M. Peifer11, M. Schweiger4,5, S. Aretz1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany,
2Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University
Hospital Bonn, Germany,3Naresuan University,
Phitsanulok, Thailand,4Translational Epigenetics and
Tumor Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany,
5Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Germany,6Institute of Human Genetics, University of
Cologne, Germany,7Institute of Pathology, University of
Cologne, Germany,8HELIOS Klinikum Wuppertal,
University of Witten/Herdecke, Germany,9Center for
Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center Amsterdam, Netherlands,10Institute of Pathology,
University of Luebeck, Germany,11Department of
Translational Genomics, University of Cologne, Germany
Aim: Biallelic MSH3 germline mutations cause a rare
subtype of adenomatous polyposis. In the present study we
comprehensively analyzed the variant spectrum of color-ectal adenomas from patients with biallelic MSH3 germline
mutations to identify potential driver genes and pathways of
MSH3 related tumorigenesis.
Material and Methods: We performed whole exome
sequencing (WES) and array-based copy number variant
(CNV) analysis of 2-3 adenomas and matched normal tissuein three patients with biallelic MSH3 mutations.
Results: The amount of all somatic variants in the MSH3
adenomas (36-120) and the pattern of single nucleotidevariants (SNVs) seem to be similar to sporadic adenomas,
whereas the fraction (16-40%) of small insertions/deletions
(Indels) is higher. Interestingly, pathogenic somatic APC
mutations were found in all adenomas, and the vast majority
(6 of 7) are Indels, which seem to occur more often (4 of 6)
in short nucleotide tandem repeats compared to publishedsomatic and germline APC Indels. On average, 26 large
deletions were found in each of three fresh-frozen adenomas
per patient. Besides APC,ﬁve more genes harbor truncating
mutations, missense variants, or deletions in more than onepolyp, including the suggested tumor suppressor gene
ELF3 . A second hit was only found in APC.
Conclusions: Our preliminary data demonstrate that
MSH3-related carcinogenesis seem to follow mainly the
classical APC-driven pathway. We found similar mutation
patterns of SNVs in MSH3-de ﬁcient polyps compared to
sporadic adenomas, however, in line with the speci ﬁc
function of MSH3 in the mismatch repair system, we
observed a high proportion of Indels.
C. Perne: None. S. Peters: None. I. Spier: None. S.
Hurpaopan: None. C. Grimm: None. J. Altmüller: None.
A. Hillmer: None. H. Thiele: None. G. Möslein: None. M.
Odenthal: None. R. Adam: None. J. Kirfel: None. M.
Peifer: None. M. Schweiger: None. S. Aretz: None.
P12.108A
Ruxolitinib regulates mechanisms of apoptosis and
autophagy in multiple myeloma cells
A. Kusoglu, B. Goker Bagca, N. Ozates Ay, C. Biray Avci,
C. Gunduz, G. Saydam
Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey
Multiple myeloma is distinguished by the aggregation of
differentiated plasma cells primarily in the bone marrow. In
this study, we investigated the genetic basis of apoptosisand autophagy co-regulation upon ruxolitinib treatment in
multiple myeloma cells ARH-77 and healthy B lymphocyte
NCI-BL2171 as a control group. Cell lines were incubatedand cultured with optimal growth conditions. Ruxolitinib
dissolved in DMSO. The cytotoxic activity was determined
using the WST1 cell proliferation test. IC
50doses were
calculated in a time and dose-dependent manner. The
Annexin V-FITC detection kit and Premo autophagy Tb/
GFP TR-FRET LC3B expression kit were used forapoptosis and autophagy analyses, respectively. Gene
expression changes were determined using real-time PCR
method and analyzed by 2
−ΔΔCtmethod. IC 50doses of
ruxolitinib in ARH77 and NCI-BL2171 for 72 hr incubation
period was found as 20,03 uM and 23,6 uM, respectively.
Ruxolitinib treatment induced apoptosis in NCI-BL2171and ARH-77 cell lines by 6.5 and 2 fold, respectively. The
agent increased the autophagic ﬂux by 1.7 and 3.45 fold in
NCI-BL2171 and ARH-77 cell lines, respectively. Theexpression levels of APAF1, BIK, CASP6, TRAF2 genes
which regulate mechanisms of apoptosis and autophagy
were upregulated 12.07, 4.06, 2.81, 2.77 folds, respectively.Our results indicate that JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib regulates
apoptosis and autophagy pathways simultaneously in
multiple myeloma cell line, ARH77. This regulation isfurther con ﬁrmed by analysis of critical gene expressions
which paves the potential of the agent as a therapeutic forAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1583multiple myeloma. Our study is supported by Ege
University Scienti ﬁc Research Projects Coordination.
A. Kusoglu: None. B. Goker Bagca: None. N. Ozates
Ay: None. C. Biray Avci: None. C. Gunduz: None. G.
Saydam: None.
P12.109B
Mutation Pattern in Periampullary Carcinoma in
Indian Patients
S. K. Mishra, N. Kumari, N. Krishnani, R. K. Singh,
S. Mohindra
Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences
Lucknow, Lucknow, India
Introduction: Periampullary carcinoma (PAC) is a hetero-
geneous group of cancer and genetic abnormality is one ofthe major risk factor associated with prognosis and survival
of patients with this cancer. There are no studies on
mutation pro ﬁle from India in PAC. We present mutation
proﬁle of 60 PAC in Indian patients.
Materials and Methods: Sixty cases of PAC were
reviewed histologically. DNA was extracted from paraf ﬁn
tissues and ultra deep sequencing was done using Ampliseq
cancer hotspot panel v2 in tumour and normal tissue sam-
ples. The results were analysed on ion-reporter softwareversion 5.10.
Results: 30/60 (50%) cases of PAC showed high grade
tumor histology (moderate/poor differentiation). KRAS,CTNNB1, STK11, RET, HRAS, EGFR, ATM, NOTCH1
and AKT1 gene mutations were found in 43%, 20%, 16%,
16%, 10%, 10%, 10%, 6.6% in high grade tumor, whereasmutation of these gene in low grade tumorwas26%, 10%,
6.6%, 6.6%, 6.6%, 6.6%, 3.3%, 3.3% respectively. Three
different actionable mutations were found in CTNNB1mutant cases.PIK3CA mutation frequency was seen in 30%
of low grade tumor and 13.3% high grade tumor.
Conclusion: KRAS, CTNNB1, STK11, RET, HRAS,
EGFR, ATM, NOTCH1 AKT1 and PIK3CA that are
involved in different signalling pathways were found to be
frequently mutated in PAC indicating their role in diseasedevelopment and progression. Actionable mutation KRAS,
PIK3CA, CTNNB1, EGFR, NRAS and TP53, were found
in 36/60 (67%) cases which may bene ﬁted in future through
targeted therapy.
Funding: Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi, India
S.K. Mishra: None. N. Kumari: None. N. Krishnani:
None. R.K. Singh: None. S. Mohindra: None.
P12.110C
Genetic analysis of neuroblastoma in African-American
childrenA. Testori
1,2, Z. Vaksman2, S. Diskin2,3, J. Maris2,3,
M. Devoto2,3,4
1University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy,2Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United
States,4University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy
Neuroblastoma (NB), a pediatric cancer with a high degree
of clinical heterogeneity, is rarer in African-American (AA)
children compared to children of European descent. AA
children with NB, however, more frequently develop thehigh-risk form of the disease and have associated lower
overall survival. We have identi ﬁed several loci associated
to NB by GWAS performed in children of Europeandescent. In this study, we have genotyped 674 AA NB cases
and 3113 AA controls to investigate genetic susceptibility
to NB in this population. Following high density genome-wide imputation, we were able to con ﬁrm one susceptibility
gene (BARD1), which reached genome-wide signi ﬁcance in
the subset of high-risk cases. Polygenic score analysis basedon signi ﬁcance and estimates of SNP effect sizes from the
European-American (EA) GWAS, detected a highly
signiﬁcant association (p =2.3x10
-14) with a score which
included all SNPs with p < 5.5x10-7, and explained ~3% of
NB risk variance in AAs. However, the signi ﬁcance of the
polygenic score dropped rapidly with inclusion of addi-tional SNPs, suggesting either limited sharing of NB genetic
risk factors between EAs and AAs, or a genetic architecture
of NB with limited contribution from common SNPs. Othergenetic analyses (including admixture mapping and haplo-
type association analysis) are in progress to test whether
other NB susceptibility variants are located in regions of thegenome that show different genetic ancestry in AA cases
versus controls. These in particular may help explain
susceptibility to developing the high-risk form of NB thatdisproportionately affects AA children with NB.
A. Testori: None. Z. Vaksman: None. S. Diskin: None.
J. Maris: None. M. Devoto: None.
P12.111D
Constitutional mismatch repair de ﬁciency as a
differential diagnosis of neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1:
consensus guidelines for testing a child without
malignancy
M. Suerink
1, T. Ripperger2, L. Messiaen3, F. Menko4,
F. Bourdeaut5, C. Colas6, M. Jongmans7, Y. Goldberg8,
M. Nielsen1, M. Muleris9, M. van Kouwen10, I. Slavc11,
C. Kratz12, H. Vasen13, L. Brugi ѐres14, E. Legius15,
K. Wimmer16158411. Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,2Department of
Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany,3Department of Genetics, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States,44. Family
Cancer Clinic, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital and TheNetherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
55.
Département d'Oncologie Pédiatrique et d'Adolescents
Jeunes Adultes, Institut Curie, Paris, France,66.
Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris Sciences
Lettres Research Universit, Paris, France,7Princess
Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht,Netherlands,
810. Recanati Genetics Institute, Beilinson
Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel,97.
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM,CNRS, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine (CRSA),
F75012, Paris, France,
1011. Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Radboud UniversityMedical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
11Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria,1213. Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,
13Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,14Children
and Adolescent Oncology Department, Gustave Roussy
Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France,15Department of Human
Genetics, University Hospital Leuven and KU Leuven,Leuven, Belgium,
16Division Human Genetics, Medical
University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
Introduction: Constitutional mismatch repair de ﬁciency
(CMMRD) is a rare childhood cancer predisposition
syndrome caused by bi-allelic germline mutations in oneof four mismatch-repair genes. Besides very high tumour
risks, CMMRD phenotypes are often characterized by the
presence of signs reminiscent of neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1). Because NF1 signs may be present prior to tumour
onset, CMMRD is a legitimate differential diagnosis in an
otherwise healthy, suspected NF1/Legius syndrome childwithout a detectable underlying NF1/SPRED1 germline
mutation. However, no guidelines indicate when to counsel
and test for CMMRD in this setting.
Methods: At an interdisciplinary workshop, we discussed
estimations of the frequency of CMMRD as a differential
diagnosis of NF1 and potential bene ﬁts and harms of
CMMRD counselling and testing in a healthy child with no
malignancy. Assuming that CMMRD is rare in these
patients and that expected bene ﬁts of identifying CMMRD
prior to tumour onset should outweigh potential harms
associated with CMMRD counselling and testing in this
setting, we elaborated a strategy to pre-select, among sus-pected NF1/Legius syndrome children without a causative
NF1/SPRED1 mutation and no overt malignancy, thosechildren who have a higher probability of having CMMRD.
Pre-selection criteria and strategies for counselling and
testing were developed and reviewed in two rounds of cri-
tical revisions.
Results and Conclusions: Existing diagnostic CMMRD
criteria were adapted to serve as a guideline as to when toconsider CMMRD as differential diagnosis of NF1/Legius
syndrome. In addition, the guidelines include counselling
and testing strategies that are suggested to minimizepotential harms.
M. Suerink: None. T. Ripperger: None. L. Messiaen:
None. F. Menko: None. F. Bourdeaut: None. C. Colas:
None. M. Jongmans: None. Y. Goldberg: None. M.
Nielsen: None. M. Muleris: None. M. van Kouwen:
None. I. Slavc: None. C. Kratz: None. H. Vasen: None. L.
Brugie ̀res: None. E. Legius: None. K. Wimmer: None.
P12.112A
Validation and utilization of NGS based
HEMEaccuTest
TMpanel and analysis software for
Hematological malignancies
H. Choi, I. Lee, J. Im, K. Jung, K. Lee, Y. Moon, K. Kim
NGeneBio Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea, Republic of
Hematological malignancies are forms of cancer originated
in blood-forming tissue or in the immune cells and can be
classi ﬁed as leukemias, lymphomas, multiple myeloma,
myelodysplastic syndromes, and myeloproliferative neo-plasms. Detecting genetic alterations in hematological
malignancies is important because of diverse variants
associated with classi ﬁcation and subtype diagnosis, and
prognostic and therapeutic prediction. NGS is an advanced
technology to simultaneously analyze multiple genes to
identify clinically well-described variants, as well as rarevariants related to hematological malignancies for clinical
diagnostics. HEMEaccuTest
TMis a targeted NGS panel for
hematologic malignancies and NGeneAnalySysTMis auto-
matic analysis software for estimating the relative patho-
genicity of detected variants. HEMEaccuTestTMcovers
entire exon regions of 108 genes putatively known forassociations with the diseases according to the WHO,
NCCN and ELN guidelines. The diagnostic utility of the
panel and software were validated using genotype-knownreferences and clinical specimens. The results showed that
pathogenic variants were effectively detected with an
average coverage depth of 600x and a minimum coveragedepth of 100x. It demonstrated an excellent limit of
detection, with 100% sensitivity for SNVs at 2% VAF
and for indel at 4% VAF. In addition, the analyticalsensitivity and speci ﬁcity of the panel were high in a
comparison to conventional methods such as SangerAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1585sequencing. Noticeably, the approximately 300-bp-size
insertions of FLT3-ITD was detected by a simulating
algorithm of NGeneAnalySysTM. Thus, this analytical
validation demonstrated that HEMEaccuTestTMand NGe-
neAnalySysTMcan be an excellent tool for disease
deﬁnition and therapeutic strategy in hematological
malignancies.
H. Choi: None. I. Lee: None. J. Im: None. K. Jung:
None. K. Lee: None. Y. Moon: None. K. Kim: None.
P12.113B
Clinical applicability of NGS panel in hereditary cancer
S. Chvojka, F. Lhota, F. Zembol, L. Cerna, M. Sekowska,
B. Honysova, M. Famfulikova, M. Koudova,A. Puchmajerova, M. Bittoova, D. Stejskal
Gennet s.r.o, Prague, Czech RepublicIntroduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows to
concurrently analyze germline variants of multiple genesassociated with hereditary cancer syndromes.
Methods: 3118 DNA samples of oncologic patients
(2177) and healthy relatives (941) from families with cancerhistory ful ﬁlling clinical criteria were analyzed using NGS
panel CZECANCA (CZEch CAncer paNel for Clinical
Application) [1]. The most common types of the patients´cancer were: breast (62.6%), ovarian (12.6%), colorectal
(9.2%). This panel targets 226 genes based on the genetic
variability of Czech cancer patients. We evaluate 78 clini-cally relevant genes. For CNV (copy number variation)
detection we use sequencing coverage analysis.
Results: In total samples 18,6% a deleterious variants
(class 4-5) were detected- in 20 % of patients with breast
cancer, in 21,9 % of patients with ovarian cancer and in
21,4 % of patients with colorectal cancer. In case ofreporting only variants in genes recommended by clinical
guidelines or genes covered by commercially available
oncopanels the detection rate would decrease to 13%.Within CNV validation, we tested 90 ﬁndings in 1175
individuals by MLPA. 29 (32.22%) were true positive (TP),
the remaining 61 samples (67.78%) were false positive(FP). Costs in this settings dropped by 3/4 in comparison
with MLPA testing only.
Conclusion: These results are consistent with the pub-
lished ﬁndings and highlight the importance of extending
the examination to other susceptibility genes which brings
more information to the patients. This allows more precisegenetic testing and genetic counselling in families followed
by preventive care.
[1] Soukupova et al., 2018, https://doi.org/10.1371/journa
l.pone.0195761S. Chvojka: None. F. Lhota: None. F. Zembol: None.
L. Cerna: None. M. Sekowska: None. B. Honysova:
None. M. Famfulikova: None. M. Koudova: None. A.
Puchmajerova: None. M. Bittoova: None. D.
Stejskal: None.
P12.114C
Transmembrane nodal complex is abnormal in NOMO-
1 deleted colon cancer
N. Gestoso-Uzal
1,2,3, J. Pérez1,2,3, M. Arriba4, P. García-
Vallés1,3, M. Á. Pérez-Nieto1,2, J. J. Tellería1,2,
J. L. García1,2,3, J. Perea5,4, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3
1Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Biomedical
Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain,4Digestive Cancer Research Group, 12
de Octubre Research Institute, Madrid, Spain,5Surgery
Department, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid,
Spain
Introduction: NOMO-1 (located in 16p13.1) somatic
deletion has been proven in recent studies to occur in most
cases of early-onset, non-hereditary, microsatellite-stablecolorectal cancer. However, the role of this alteration in
carcinogenesis is unknown. Thus, the main aims of this
study are to generate a stable colorectal cancer cell line thatdoes not express this gene and to analyse the nodal pathway
in this line.
Materials and Methods: CRISPR-Cas9 technology was
used to generate a NOMO-1 knockout from the colorectal
cancer-derived cell line HT29. The ef ﬁcacy of its design
was tested by Sanger sequencing, quantitative polymerasechain reaction (qPCR) and western blot. To study off-target
effects, chromosomal differences were measured by
CytoScan genomic microarrays platform. Changes in Nodalpathway protein expression were analyzed by western blot.
Results: The NOMO-1 knockout cell line ’s design ef ﬁ-
cacy was proven. However, the genomic microarraysshowed a complete deletion of chromosome 16. Nodal
pathway protein expression remained unchanged except for
severe downregulation of TMEM147 and Nicalin. Bothproteins are part of a transmembrane complex with NOMO.
Conclusions: NOMO transmembrane complex has been
reported to be an antagonist of the nodal pathway. Ourresults show that NOMO transmembrane complex is absent
inNOMO-1 knockout cancer cells. However, downstream
proteins remain unaltered in these cells, suggesting thatNOMO could regulate another signaling pathway in adult
cancer cells. Further studies would be required for1586completing the functional characterization of NOMO-1
deletion in early-onset colorectal cancer.
This study was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920.
N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J. Pérez: None. M. Arriba:
None. P. García-Vallés: None. M.Á. Pérez-Nieto: None.
J.J. Tellería: None. J.L. García: None. J. Perea: None. R.
González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.115D
Genetic study of the Nodal signaling pathway genes in
colorectal cancer
A. Martel-Martel1,2,3, J. Pérez1,4, P. García-Vallés1,
M. García-Bengoa1, R. Vidal3, M. Arriba5,
J. L. García1,2,4, J. Perea5,6, M. Urioste7, R. González-
Sarmiento1,2,4
1Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Biomedical
Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain,3Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,4Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of
Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,5Digestive Cancer
Research Group, 12 de Octubre Research Institute, Madrid,
Spain,6Surgery Department, University Hospital 12 de
Octubre, Madrid, Spain,7Familial Cancer Clinical Unit,
Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Recent studies show the carcinogenic impact
of the Nodal pathway, which is upregulated in certain types
of tumors and has been linked to tumorigenesis and
metastasis in melanoma, breast, colon, ovarian, prostate,endometrial and pancreatic cancers. Its inhibition decreases
tumorigenesis. We performed a genetic study of the genes
relevant to this pathway, as well as their potential inhibitorsin colorectal cancer (CRC).
Materials and Methods: A speci ﬁc Illumina panel was
designed by our group to study the Nodal pathway genesand inhibitors. This panel includes the following genes:
ALK4 (ACVR1B), ACTRII, SMAD3, NCNL, SMAD4,
NOMO1, SMAD2, TEMEM147, LEFTY, GPR78, TDGF1 .
A total of 36 CRC were studied via sequencing in a MiSeq.
The results were analyzed with VariantStudio (Illumina)
and IGV 2.4 software.
Results: A total of 20 pathogenic nonsense mutations
were identi ﬁed in 19 of the 36 analyzed tumors; 9 of which
(45%) were found in the NOMO1 gene generating a trun-
cated protein. Additionally, 4 pathogenic mutations were
found in SMAD3 ,3i n SMAD2 ,2i n SMAD4 and only one
mutation was found in NCLN andALK4 .
Conclusions: A high percentage of CRC show mutations
in one of the Nodal pathway genes. Due to the high numberof mutations found, the NOMO-mediated signaling could
be implicated in the tumorigenesis of CRC. This work was
supported by a grant from Instituto de Salud Carlos III
(Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness) (ISC III-
FEDER: PI16/01920).
A. Martel-Martel: None. J. Pérez: None. P. García-
Vallés: None. M. García-Bengoa: None. R. Vidal: None.
M. Arriba: None. J.L. García: None. J. Perea: None. M.
Urioste: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.116A
Discovery of human mir-1839: a miRNA derived from asnoRNA/scaRNA
M. Martinez-Saucedo, Y. Bárcenas-Gómez, P. Baeza,
J. Granados-Riverón, G. Aquino-Jarquin
Hospital Infantil De México Federico Gómez, México,
Mexico
Small nucleolar RNAs are a class of small non-coding
RNAs involved in the pseudouridylation and methylation of
ribosomal RNAs. A subclass of snoRNAs, called Small
Small Cajal body-speci ﬁc RNAs perform the same chemical
modiﬁcation of spliceosomal RNAs U1, U2, U4, U5 and
U12. Previously, it has been shown that some microRNAs
can be a derivative of snoRNAs. By a small RNA-seqexperiment of total RNA from a uterus adenocarcinoma, we
identi ﬁed a novel human mature microRNA that is identical
to the microRNA mmu-miR-1839-5p. Upon alignment ofthe sequence of hsa-miR-1839-5p, we noticed that its
mature sequence is embedded in the same direction within a
gene encoding a human scaRNA (scaRNA15/ACA45),within the long arm of chromosome 15q25.2. We designed
anin vitro stem-loop RT-PCR assay in order to validate the
existence of the novel species of microRNA in the tissuewhere it was discovered and also to evaluate expression
level in a number of total RNAs extract of different adult,
fetal and neoplastic tissues. The stem-loop RT-PCR assayrevealed that hsa-miR-1839-5p is more expressed in two
neoplastic tissues in comparison with their non-neoplastic
counterparts. Additionally, the novel human microRNA is
expressed in widely variable degrees in a variety of 9 more
adult total RNAs as well as 5 total fetal RNAs.
M. Martinez-saucedo: None. Y. Bárcenas-gómez:
None. P. Baeza: None. J. Granados-riverón: None. G.
Aquino-jarquin: None.
P12.117B
User-friendly and machine learning-empowered
platform for classi ﬁcation of NSCLC based on RNA-seq
proﬁlingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1587F. C. Collin1, M. Niemira2,A .J .K r ętowski2,3, J. Nikli ńsk4,
M. Kwa śniewski1
1Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,2Center of
Clinical Research, Medical University of Bialystok,Bialystok, Poland,
3Department of Endocrinology,
Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,4Department of Clinical
Molecular Biology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland
Introduction: RNA-seq has become a standard method for
transcriptome pro ﬁling of cancer tissues. A great number of
studies investigated genetic expression in order to identifymarker genes that could be used for diagnostic and/or
prognostic purposes. However, the generalisation of
expression pattern with limited number of genes may beinaccurate. Instead of using a speci ﬁc subset of genes, we
propose to use the whole RNA-seq pro ﬁle to improve the
diagnosis and classi ﬁcation of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer
(NSCLC) through a user-friendly platform.
Materials and Methods: A machine-learning algorithm
(Random Forest) which learns from RNA-seq pro ﬁles of
NSCLC tissues, collected in 123 patients (tumour and non-
tumour samples) was applied in order to discriminate his-
tological subtypes of NSCLC. The method has beenimplemented within the R environment and the web plat-
form has been built with the Shiny package.
Results: The web platform actually allows the user, ﬁrst,
to provide its own RNA-seq library; then it automatically
ﬁts a Random Forest model based on the expressed genes;
ﬁnally, it returns a diagnosis along with its false discovery
rate. The prototype was assessed and cross validated. The
best results were obtained when full RNA-seq pro ﬁles were
provided.
Conclusions: We propose our method as a universal
approach of use of whole RNA-seq data for diagnostic
purposes in a simple and straightforward manner.
The study was funded by the Polish National Centre for
Research and Development, the MOBIT project (STRA-
TEGMED2/266484/2/NCBR/2015).
F.C. Collin: None. M. Niemira: None. A.J. Krętowski:
None. J. Niklińsk:None. M. Kwaśniewski: None.
P12.118C
Circulating nucleoprotein complexes for breast cancer
patients are enriched by tetratricopeptide-like and ionchannel proteins
M. Belenikin
1,2, S. Tamkovich2,3, P. Laktionov31Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State
University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation,
2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,3Institute of Chemical Biology and
Fundamental Medicine, SB of RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulated in blood-
stream being packed into membrane coated structures orforming deoxyribonucleoprotein complexes (DNPCs).
Materials and Methods: DNPCs were isolated by af ﬁ-
nity chromatography with antihistone antibodies, the pro-teins were identi ﬁed by MALDI-TOF. Studying the protein
content in DNPCs circulating in the blood plasma of ten
healthy females (HFs) vs primary breast cancer ten patients(BCPs) by analysis of protein signatures & GO annotation.
Results: HFs: 176 proteins joined with 195 GO terms
were characterized; BCPs: 167 proteins joined with 168 GOterms were characterized; only 38 proteins (12% of 305
different proteins) & 96 GO (40% of 267 different GO) are
common for both HFs and BCPs. Our results assumedextracellular protein fragments are involved in binding with
cfDNA for BCPs over HFs states for two protein pools.
Only for BCPs we have identi ﬁed DNPCs formed by 5
tetratricopeptide-like helical domain superfamily proteins
(P61201, Q49AM3, Q6PGP7, Q92623, Q96EK5), and 5
ion channels (P48167, P48995, Q6PIU1, Q8NEC5,Q96KK3). It allows suggest the reason for the increase of
cfDNA concentration in the blood during the development
of tumors. In according GO analysis (cellular component)membrane proteins are more represented in the DNPC
composition, which suggests the binding of circulating
DNPC with the cell surface.
References: [1]Tamkovich SN, et al (2015). Identi ﬁca-
tion of proteins in blood nucleoprotein complexes.
doi:10.1134/S1068162015060163; [2]Tamkovich SN, et al(2016). Protein Content of Circulating Nucleoprotein
Complexes. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42044-8_26. [3]Bele-
nikin MS, et al (2018). Protein composition characterizationof circulating nucleoprotein complexes. ESHG-2018 poster:
E-P16.03.
M. Belenikin: None. S. Tamkovich: None. P.
Laktionov: None.
P12.119D
Signi ﬁcance of variants of the unknown in clinical
practice of oncogenetics
S. Vitkute
1, I. Drejeriene1,2, M. Norvydas1,
J. Kasnauskiene1
1Klaipeda University Hospital, Klaipeda, Lithuania,
2Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania1588Introduction: Advancements in genetic techniques lead to
increasingly more sequence information. However, many of
novel sequence variants are not meaningful in clinical
decision-making and are referred as -,the gray zone “. Our
study objective was to review the distribution of variants ofunknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) in high risk breast and ovarian
cancer patients.
Materials and Methods: 499 female patients with
increased risk (young age and/or positive family history
and/or triple negative breast cancer) of familial/hereditary
breast or ovarian cancer were included in this study. Themean age of patients was 53.3±9.6. Genetic counseling and
NGS analysis were performed at the Klaipeda University
Hospital (Lithuania) from 2015 until 2018. Mutations weredetected using Next Generation Sequencing (Ion Torrent ™
PGM) custom Ion AmpliSeq ™On-Demand panel (Thermo
Fisher Scienti ﬁc). Custom oncogene-panel was made of
forty-four genes, associated with familial hereditary and
syndromic cancer diseases.
Results: Mutations were detected in 181 of 499 (36%)
samples. Pathogenic mutations consisted 61% (111) of all
detected mutations. High frequency of pathogenic muta-
tions is explained by targeted study group of cancerpatients. 7 (4%) patients had a combination of pathogenic
mutation and VUS. VUS was detected in 52 (29%) patients.
Conclusions: Our results show that VUS remains an
important problem in the clinical interpretation of high-risk
cancer patients analysis results. Thus, it is of paramount
importance in diagnostic studies to classify mutationsaccording to the status - pathogenic or benign, and to update
biological databases.
S. Vitkute: None. I. Drejeriene: None. M. Norvydas:
None. J. Kasnauskiene: None.
P12.120A
Study the role of miR34 family and miR203a in the
diagnosis of ovarian cancer
É. Márton, D. Herrera Villarroel, J. Lukács, A. Penyige,
E. Janka, B. Soltész, R. Póka, B. Nagy, M. Szilágyi
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the ﬁfth most common
form of cancer death among women, due to the dif ﬁculty of
diagnosis. Circulating miRNAs proved to be promising
biomarkers in various cancers. However, only few publica-tions focus on circulating miRNAs in ovarian cancer
especially in European populations.
Materials and Methods: We screened the members of
the miR34 family (miR34a, miR34b, miR34c) and miR203a
in the plasma samples of patients with malignant (n =28, I,III or IV FIGO stage), non-malignant (n =12) ovarian
tumors and in age-matched healthy volunteers (n =60). The
relative amount of miRNAs was detected by qPCR.
Results: The expression levels of miR34a, miR34b and
miR203a were higher in the malignant samples compared to
the healthy donors (p<0.05; 0.001; 0.001 respectively).However, no signi ﬁcant difference was detected in the case
of miR34c. Diagnostic accuracy was the highest in the case
of miR203a: 84.09% with the AUC of 0.831 (95%CI=0.727-935). Spearman ’s rank correlation revealed
positive correlation between the expression values of
miR34s and miR203a that was the highest between miR34aand miR34b. The agreement between the diagnostic tests
based on miR34s and miR203a proved to be good
according to the Cohen ’s kappa values with the highest
value between miR34a and miR34b. However, the diag-
nostic tests based on these miRNAs and the standard
CA125 and HE4 showed low agreement. Target analysisrevealed that miR34a and miR34b share several target genes
involved in cancer development.
Conclusions: We conclude that miR203a and miR34b
might be promising complementary markers of CA125 and
HE4 in ovarian cancer.
É. Márton: None. D. Herrera Villarroel: None. J.
Lukács: None. A. Penyige: None. E. Janka: None. B.
Soltész: None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. M.
Szilágyi: None.
P12.121B
Germline pathogenic variants of cancer susceptibilitygenes among Japanese ovarian cancer patients
A. HIRASAWA
1, I. Imoto2, T. Naruto3, T. Akahane4,
W. Yamagami5, H. Nomura4, K. Masuda6, N. Susumu7,
H. Tsuda8, D. Aoki4
1Dept. Clin.Genomic.Med, Okayama, Japan,2Risk Assess.
Cent, Aichi Can. Cent. Hos., Nagoya, Japan,3Dep.Hum.
Genet, Grad. Sch.Biomed Sci, Tokushima Univ, Tokushima,Japan,
4Dep. Obst. & Gyne., Keio Univ., Sch. Med., Tokyo,
Japan,5Dep. Obst. & Gyne., Keio Univ., Sch. Med, Tokyo,
Japan,6Dep.Hum. Genet, Grad. Sch.Biomed Sci,
Tokushima Univ., Tokushima, Japan,7Dep. Obst. & Gyne.,
International. Univ Health & Welfare., Chiba, Japan,8Dep.
Basic Pathol. National Defense Med, Saitama, Japan
Aim: The aim of our study was to reveal the prevalence of
pathogenic germline variants of candidate genes associatedwith genetic predisposition to OC in Japanese OC patients.
Method: Germ-line DNA samples from 230 unselected
OC patients were recruited from the Keio Women ’s Health
Biobank at Keio University School of Medicine. Germ-line
DNA was enriched using the SureSelect XT TargetAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1589Enrichment System (Agilent Technologies) designed for 75
or 79 genes as a custom OC panel, followed by sequencing
using MiSeq (Illumina). Detected variants were classi ﬁed
according to the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics recommendations. Furthermore, BRCA1/2 var-
iants were interpreted using resources from Myriad GeneticLaboratories.
Results: Of 230 patients, 19 (8.3%) and 8 cases (3.5%)
carried germline BRCA1 andBRCA2 pathogenic variants,
respectively. No variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) of
BRCA1/2 genes was detected in our analysis according to
the database of Myriad Genetics. Six (2.6%) carriedpathogenic germline variants of mismatch repair genes.
Carriers of BRCA1/2 or pathogenic variants of any other
genes tested were more likely to be diagnosed younger,have ﬁrst or second-degree relatives with OC, and have OC
classi ﬁed as high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC).
Conclusion: Our data can facilitate genetic predisposition
prediction in Japanese OC patients and referring high-risk
patients for genetic counseling and testing.
A. Hirasawa: None. I. Imoto: None. T. Naruto: None.
T. Akahane: None. W. Yamagami: None. H. Nomura:
None. K. Masuda: None. N. Susumu: None. H. Tsuda:
None. D. Aoki: None.
P12.122C
The in ﬂuence of BIRC5 polymorphisms and GLI
proteins on the expression of survivin isoforms in
ovarian cancer
V. Musani
1, M. Gregori ć2, D. Trnski1, P. Ozreti ć1,
S. Levanat1, N. Rin čić1, D. Kalafati ć3, M. Sabol1
1Ruđer Bo škovi ćInstitute, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia,2Zagreb
Health School, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia,3University
Hospital Centre Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is one of the most lethal
cancers, mostly due to late diagnosis and limited treatmentoptions. Survivin (coded by BIRC5 gene) is an inhibitor of
apoptosis, has at least ﬁve different splice variants and is
often overexpressed in cancer. Survivin is direct target ofHedgehog-GLI signaling pathway, a major developmental
pathway involved in organogenesis and stem cell
maintenance.
We investigated the role of BIRC5 polymorphisms and
survivin isoform expression in OC. Additionally we
investigate the role of different GLI proteins in the regula-tion of survivin isoform expression in the SKOV-3 OC
cell line.
Materials and Methods: 40 OC samples and 74 controls
were genotyped for BIRC5 polymorphisms. Survivin iso-
form expression was analyzed on 29 OC samples andcompared to healthy fallopian tube (FT) controls. To
investigate the regulation of survivin expression by GLI
proteins, GLI knock-outs were developed and survivin
expression was determined.
Results: Fifteen different polymorphisms were found in
OC samples, and there was no difference in distributionbetween OC samples and controls. Several polymorphisms
showed linkage disequilibrium in OC samples. All ﬁve
isoforms were detected in OC samples, and only two iso-forms in FT controls. Seven polymorphisms showed sig-
niﬁcant associations with isoform expression. Survivin
isoforms were downregulated in GLI1 and GLI2 knock-outs, but not in the GLI3 knock-out. Treatment of GLI1
knock-out with GANT-61 showed an additional inhibitory
effect on several isoforms.
Conclusions: Survivin isoform expression is regulated by
both BIRC5 polymorphisms and the expression of GLI
transcription factors that bind to its promoter.
V. Musani: None. M. Gregori ć:None. D. Trnski:
None. P. Ozreti ć:None. S. Levanat: None. N. Rinčić:
None. D. Kalafati ć:None. M. Sabol: None.
P12.123D
Circulating miR200 family members are promisingcandidate biomarkers in the diagnosis of ovarian cancer
M. Szilágyi-Bónizs, É. Márton, R. Szabó, J. Lukács,
E. Janka, A. Penyige, B. Soltész, R. Póka, B. Nagy
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, HungaryIntroduction: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal form of
gynecological malignancy. CA125 and HE4 are frequentlyused biomarkers in ovarian cancer, however, these have low
diagnostic parameters. Here we studied the diagnostic
potential of circulating miRNAs in ovarian cancer.
Materials and Methods: We screened the members of
the miR200 family (miR200a, miR200b, miR200c,
miR141, miR429) in the plasma samples of patients withmalignant (n =28, I, III or IV FIGO stage) or non-malignant
(n=12) ovarian tumor and in age-matched healthy controls
(n=60). The relative amount of miRNAs was detected
by qPCR.
Results: All the tested miRNAs showed signi ﬁcantly
elevated expression in the malignant samples compared to
the healthy controls (p<0.001). Moreover, the relative
expression of miR200a, miR141 and miR429 proved to be
higher in the malignant than in the non-malignant samples(p<0.05). ROC-AUC proved to be the highest in the case of
miR200c: 0.861 (95% CI =0.776-0.947). Spearman's rank
correlation analysis revealed positive correlation betweenthe plasma levels of the studied miRNAs that was the
highest between miR200b and miR200c (r
s=0.775;1590p<0.001). Target analysis also suggested tight interaction
between these miRNAs in the regulation of cancer devel-
opment. The agreement of diagnostic tests based on miRNA
levels and the standard CA125 or HE4 was weak according
to Cohen's kappa values.
Conclusions: MiR200 family members might be pro-
mising complementary biomarkers in the diagnosis of
ovarian cancer. The plasma level of tightly interacting
miRNAs shows strong positive correlation. Grant reference:NTP-NFTÖ-18-B-0377
M. Szilágyi-Bónizs: None. É. Márton: None. R. Szabó:
None. J. Lukács: None. E. Janka: None. A. Penyige:
None. B. Soltész: None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None.
P12.124A
Study of DNA repair gene polymorphisms in ovarian
cancer
M. Gomes Ferreira
1,2, M. Ovejero-Sánchez1,3,4,
E. Sánchez Tapia1,3,4, T. Martín-Gómez5, R. Vidal5,
M. Sancho de Salas6, M. Doyagüe-Sánchez1,5,
R. González-Sarmiento1,3,4
1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL),
Salamanca, Spain,2Gynecology Service, University
Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,3Molecular
Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University ofSalamanca, Salamanca, Spain,
4Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University-CIC,
Salamanca, Spain,5Oncology Service, University Hospital
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,6Pathologic Anatomy
Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain
Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is proven to be
inﬂuenced by alterations in some DNA repair genes (e.g.
BRCA1/2). In our work, we analyzed in DNA repair genes
polymorphisms (SNPs) by TaqMan genotyping in OC
peripheral blood samples.
Material and methods: An association study of SNPs
rs1799782, rs25487, rs1130409, rs13181, rs11615,
rs1799794, rs861539, rs1042522, rs1799977 andrs1800734 of genes XRCC1, APEX1, ERCC2, ERCC1,
XRCC3, MLH1 andTP53 was performed in the germinal
DNA of 185 patients and 129 healthy controls.
Results: the GA genotype of XRCC1 polymorphism
rs1799782, the CC genotype of TP53 polymorphism
rs1042522 and the GG genotype of MLH1 polymorphism
rs1800734 were associated with increased susceptibility to
OC. The T allele of APEX1 polymorphism rs1130409 was
associated with a later onset of the disease and hereditaryOC. In relation to XRCC3 gene (rs1799794), the TT gen-
otype was associated with increased OC susceptibility inaging patients and patients with familial OC. In relation to
MLH1 gene (rs1800734), the GG genotype was associated
with greater OC susceptibility in old patients and in patients
with hereditary OC. The SNP rs1799977 of MLH1 gene
was associated with an increased risk of recurrence.
Conclusions: Our study suggests that DNA repair genes
different from BRCA1/2 likeXRCC1 ,TP53 ,MLH1 ,XRCC3
andAPEX1 could modify the risk of developing OC. This
project was funded by FIS-FEDER PI16/01920.
M. Gomes Ferreira: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None.
E. Sánchez Tapia: None. T. Martín-Gómez: None. R.
Vidal: None. M. Sancho de Salas: None. M. Doyagüe-
Sánchez: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.125B
Identi ﬁcation of differentially expressed miRNAs in
plasma samples of ovarian cancer patients
A. Penyige
1, M. Szilágyi1, B. Soltész1, É. Márton1,
J. Lukács2, R. Póka2, B. Nagy1
1Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Human
Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary,2Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty
of Medicine, Dept. of Obsterics and Gynecology, Debrecen,Hungary
Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the 6th most
common tumor in women. Its high mortality rate is partially
due to lack of effective screening methods for early
diagnosis. Given their ability to regulate gene expressionand presence in bio- ﬂuids miRNAs could be non-invasive
biomarkers for cancer diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: Total RNA was isolated from
plasma samples of 18 OC (6-6 FIGO stage I, III and IV)
patients and 6 healthy controls. MiRNA copy number was
determined using the Nanostring System with nCounterHuman v3 miRNA Panel. Background and technical var-
iations were corrected for the mean±2SD of negative con-
trols and the positive code-set, respectively. Data wasnormalized by the geometric mean of 10 housekeeping
miRNA counts. Signi ﬁcant differentially expressed (DE)
miRNAs were identi ﬁed by Kruskal±Wallis test with post
hoc Dunn's test. Target genes, candidate pathways and
lncRNA associations for signi ﬁcant miRNAs were identi-
ﬁed by a network-based analysis using miRNet, mirTarge-
tLink and Networkanalyst tools. Functional annotation
clustering of target genes and pathway analysis was done
with the DAVID tool.
Results: 26 miRNAs were upregulated, the tumor sup-
pressor miR-584-5p was down-regulated. In our DE
miRNA set miR-25-3p/26b-5p/301a-3p/19b-3p/144-39 hadthe highest degree and betweenness centrality values, theirAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1591common targets are PTEN, BCL2L11, KAT2B, SMAD4,
TP53, MALAT1, XIST, HOTAIR.
Conclusion: Functional annotation and gene-GO term
enrichment analysis of targets identi ﬁed the involvement of
cell cycle regulation, FOXO/PI3-AKT/TP53/TGF β/
SMAD4 signaling pathways, negative regulation of apop-tosis, positive regulation of proliferation and epithelial-
mesenchymal transition in OC development. Speci ﬁc
plasma miRNA pro ﬁles could represent potential diagnostic
biomarkers for OC.
A. Penyige: None. M. Szilágyi: None. B. Soltész: None.
É. Márton: None. J. Lukács: None. R. Póka: None. B.
Nagy: None.
P12.126C
Combination of germline and tumor testing yields a high
rate of loss-of-function variants in non-mucinous
epithelial ovarian cancer patients
F. Fostira
1, D. Kalfakakou1, M. S. Papamentzelopoulou1,
A. Delimitsou1, P. Apostolou1, A. Vagena1,
C. Papadimitriou2, G. Aravantinos3, G. Fountzilas4,
D. Yannoukakos1, I. Konstantopoulou1
1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos,
Athens, Greece,2eDepartment of Clinical Therapeutics,
"Alexandra" Hospital, School of Medicine, University ofAthens, Athens, Greece,
3Second Department of Medical
Oncology, Agii Anargiri Cancer Hospital, Athens, Greece,
4Department of Medical Oncology, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
Non-mucinous epithelial ovarian cancer diagnosis is a
stand-alone criterion for genetic testing referral, irrespec-
tively of family history or age at diagnosis. Identi ﬁcation of
at least BRCA1 & BRCA2 mutations are fundamental for
clinical decision making of ovarian cancer (OC) patients.
We analyzed genomic DNA from 578 epithelial non-
mucinous OC patients for mutations, implementing acommercially available 94-gene panel. Additionally, 121
tumors were collected from OC patients with negative
germline testing and assessed for somatic BRCA1 & BRCA2
mutations. Overall, 25.4% (147/578) of the patients carried
germline loss-of-function (LoF) variants, distributed in 18
genes. After BRCA1 & BRCA2 , which accounted for 72.1%
of the total, RAD51C LoF variants were the most frequent
(4.8%). Interestingly, the vast majority of LoF variants
(136/147; 92.5%) involved homologous recombination/Fanconi anemia genes, while 4.5% of the pathogenic
variants were detected in Mismatch Repair (MMR) pathway
genes. Subsequently, tumor analysis resulted in theidenti ﬁcation of damaging BRCA1 & BRCA2 variants in
11.5% of the ovarian tumors tested. Variant allelefrequencies varied from 9%-47%. Altogether, approxi-
mately one in three of OC patients in our cohort could be
good candidates for therapies targeting defective mechan-
isms of DNA repair, including HR and MMR. Our study
highlights the high prevalence of LoF variants in HR genes,
when combining germline and tumor testing in unselected,non-mucinous epithelial OC patients. These genetic defects
can predominantly lead to HR de ﬁciency, the ultimate
biomarker for therapeutic intervention by PARP inhibitionleading to tumor-cell death.
F. Fostira: None. D. Kalfakakou: None. M.S. Papa-
mentzelopoulou: None. A. Delimitsou: None. P. Aposto-
lou:None. A. Vagena: None. C. Papadimitriou: None. G.
Aravantinos: None. G. Fountzilas: None. D. Yannouka-
kos: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None.
P12.127D
Pathogenic germline mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and
CHEK2 in a single patient with pancreatic acinar cell
carcinoma
A. Fischer
1,2, A. Jahn1,2, K. Hackmann1,2, S. Zeugner2,3,4,
K. Riedmann5, N. Pfarr6, A. Grabmeier7, D. Aust2,3,4,
A. Rump1,2, E. Schröck1,2, L. Gieldon1,2
1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,Germany,
2Core Unit für Molekulare Tumor Diagnostik
(CMTD), NCT Dresden, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany,3Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus an der
Technischen Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany,
4Tumor- und Normalgewebebank am
Universitätskrebszentrum/ NCT-Standort Dresden,
Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus an der
Technischen Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany,
5Krebszentrum München CCCLMU, Medizinische Klinik
am Klinikum rechts der Isar, München, Germany,6Institut
für Allgemeine Pathologie und Pathologische Anatomie,Technische Universität München, München, Germany,
7Onkologische Tagesklinik, Kreisklinik Ebersberg
gemeinnützige GmbH, Ebersberg, Germany
Here we report on a family with hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer with a known BRCA1 frameshift mutation(NM_007294.3:c.5266dupC, p.(Gln1756Profs*74)). The
index patient ’s son was diagnosed with pancreatic acinar
cell carcinoma at 34 years of age soon after the moleculartesting in the family. Pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma is a
very rare tumor with a poor prognosis and limited treatment
options. He was therefore recommended testing of thetumor tissue with regards to possible targeted therapeutic
options in the future (PARB-inhibitor therapy).1592Using a multi-gene panel we surprisingly not only iden-
tiﬁed the familial BRCA1 mutation in the tumor tissue in
heterozygous state but additionally found a frameshift
mutation in BRCA2 (NM_000059.3:c.3708dupA, p.
(Ala1237Serfs*6)) in 50% of reads as well as a well-known
CHEK2-founder mutation (NM_007194.3:c.1100delC, p.(Thr367Metfs*15)) in 50% and an ATM stop mutation
(NM_000051.3:c.2426CG, p.(Ser809*)) in 23% of reads.
The mutations in BRCA1, CHEK2 and BRCA2 could all beconﬁrmed to be germline mutations, while the ATM
mutation was of somatic origin. Of interest the patient ’s
pedigree showed a single case of breast cancer in hisdeceased paternal grandfather at 60 years of age that had not
further been investigated.
This case challenges the current concept of targeted
testing in hereditary cancer predisposition families, espe-
cially when cancer predisposition is evident in two branches
of the family tree. It also poses the question of adequateclinical surveillance and predictive testing algorithms in a
family with three heterozygous pathogenic variants in genes
encoding for proteins that are involved in DNA repairmechanisms.
A. Fischer: None. A. Jahn: None. K. Hackmann: None.
S. Zeugner: None. K. Riedmann: None. N. Pfarr: None.
A. Grabmeier: None. D. Aust: None. A. Rump: None. E.
Schröck: None. L. Gieldon: None.
P12.128A
Analysis of patients with a personal and/or family
history of pancreatic cancer with a custom designedbroad cancer predisposition gene panel
G. Wieme
1,2, T. Rosseel1, B. Parton1,2, B. Blaumeiser3,
S. Tejpar4, B. Poppe1,2, K. De Leeneer1,2, K. B. M. Claes1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,2Cancer Research
Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium,3Centrum
Medische Genetica Antwerpen, UZA, Antwerp, Belgium,
4Moleculaire Digestieve Oncologie, UZ Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium
Pancreatic cancer is estimated to have a familial background
in 5-10% of the cases. Although the underlying genetic
basis for most of the familial clustering remains elusive,several familial cancer syndromes are associated with an
increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
In this retrospective study, 433 individuals were selected
because of a personal or family history of pancreatic cancer
in combination with breast and/or ovarian cancer, colon
cancer or melanoma.Germline DNA was analyzed using a custom designed
SeqCAP Target panel of 66 (pancreatic) cancer suscept-
ibility genes (Roche).
Data analysis is still ongoing, but we found in 21% of the
patients analyzed till now, at least one heterozygous loss of
function germline mutation in one of the 66 (pancreatic)cancer susceptibility genes.
As this is a high proportion of the patients, further
extension of the study cohort is certainly warranted. Inparallel a matched control cohort is being analyzed to
determine which genes are signi ﬁcantly more implicated in
(pancreatic) cancer predisposition. Further segregationanalysis in the families is indicated to evaluate their link
with the different cancers and highlight the need for
recommendations governing germline multi-gene paneltesting of cancer patients with a personal or family history
of pancreatic cancer.
Research supported by a grant from King Baudouin
Foundation, Fund Maaike-Lars-Trees
G. Wieme: None. T. Rosseel: None. B. Parton: None.
B. Blaumeiser: None. S. Tejpar: None. B. Poppe: None.
K. De Leeneer: None. K.B.M. Claes: None.
P12.129B
Detection of genome-wide copy number alterations in
tumor tissue and cell-free DNA of pancreatic cancer
patients
G. Wieme
1,2, F. Berrevoet3, A. Vanlander3, J. Van
Dorpe4,2, A. Hoorens4,2, M. Van der Linden4,2,
B. Parton1,2, J. Van Limmen5, A. De Bruyne5,M .D e
Man6,2, K. Geboes6,2, K. B. M. Claes1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,2Cancer Research
Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium,3Department of
General and Hepatobiliary surgery, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,4Department of Pathology,
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,5Department of
Anesthesiology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
6Department of Gastroenterology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
Diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is very challenging since
early stage pancreatic cancer is associated with non-speci ﬁc
and vague symptoms. Additionally, the current diagnostic
tools by imaging and CA19-9 measurement have limita-
tions. Liquid biopsies make it possible to detect tumor-speciﬁc molecular alterations by analysis of cell free DNA
(cfDNA) isolated from plasma, which contains circulating
tumor DNA (ctDNA). We evaluated the prevalence of largegenomic rearrangements in pancreatic cancer resections and
cfDNA of the patients. We applied shallow whole genomeAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1593sequencing (sWGS) to cfDNA samples from all patients at
different time points. Concordance of the pro ﬁles was
evaluated between cfDNA and matched FFPE tumor tissue
in samples of operable patients. Analyses were ﬁnished for
16 operable patients. Clear copy-number alterations (CNAs)
were observed in 13 FFPE tumor samples (81%). Theproﬁles were patient-unique but some recurrent alterations
were ascertained. In cfDNA of none of the operable patients
CNAs were established. In cfDNA of 75% (6/8) of themetastatic pancreatic cancer patients, clear CNAs were
identi ﬁed. In a next step, we are evaluating if this approach
can predict recurrence. Indeed, a copy-number change in afollow-up sample (6-months post-adjuvant chemotherapy)
was observed in a borderline-operative patient with
metastases. These results demonstrate CNAs in cfDNA ofadvanced pancreatic cancer cases and the potential use of
cfDNA derived pro ﬁles to monitor treatment response.
Additional patients are currently being analyzed and will bepresented at the meeting. Research project realized with the
support of “Kom op tegen Kanker ”
G. Wieme: None. F. Berrevoet: None. A. Vanlander:
None. J. Van Dorpe: None. A. Hoorens: None. M. Van
der Linden: None. B. Parton: None. J. Van Limmen:
None. A. De Bruyne: None. M. De Man: None. K.
Geboes: None. K.B.M. Claes: None.
P12.130C
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and the spectrum of molecular
alterations in the STK11 gene in Bulgaria
T. K. Kadiyska
1, I. Tourtourikov1, T. Boushnakova2,
P. Getsov3, K. Pavlov2, L. Angelova4, M. Padareva2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Gastroenterology Unit, MBAL “Tsaritsa
Yoanna ”, Sliven, Bulgaria,3Radiology Unit, University
Hospital “Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
4University Hospital “St. Marina ”, Varna, Bulgaria
Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS, OMIM
175200) is an autosomal dominant hereditary polyposis
syndrome. Clinical features include hamartomatous polyps,mucocutaneous pigmentation, and an increased risk for the
development of gastrointestinal (GI) and various extra-GI
malignancies. Serine-Threonine Kinase 11 ( STK11/LKB1 )
variants predispose to PJS.
Materials and Methods: In this study, we used direct
sequencing, followed by MLPA of genomic DNA from 5patients, clinically and histologically suspected for PJS.
Four of the patients carried out known disease causing
aberrations, while in one of the patients we found a muta-tion which has not been reported in the literature or recor-
ded in mutation databases.Results: In two of the patients we discovered a hetero-
zygous deletion of the whole STK11 gene, determined by a
50% decrease in all MLPA probes. The third patient
showed a heterozygous deletion of exon 1. The fourth and
theﬁfth patient had similar alterations in exon 7, with
patient 4 having an in-frame deletion(c.907_915delATCCGGCAG) and the ﬁfth patient- in-
frame duplication (c.907_915dupATCCGGCAG) within
theSTK11 gene (GRCh38/hg19).
Conclusions: While all of the patients reported here
exhibited symptoms of PJS, the severity of the disease and
the accompanying symptoms was not determined by thetype of the mutation; even in patients 4 and 5, who had
alterations in the catalytic kinase domain of STK11. This
suggests that even in-frame alterations in the STK11
sequence have a profound effect. Our ﬁndings are
encouraging us to further investigate the relationship
between the STK11 gene defects and the clinical severity of
the disorder.
T.K. Kadiyska: None. I. Tourtourikov: None. T.
Boushnakova: None. P. Getsov: None. K. Pavlov: None.
L. Angelova: None. M. Padareva: None.
P12.131D
Somatic MYO5Bmutations in adrenal neural tumors
promote cancer progression
J. Olausson
1,T .T e šan Tomi ć1, A. Rehammar2,
L. Deland1, K. Ejeskär3, S. Nilsson4, A. Muth5,
B. Wängberg6, O. Nilsson-Wassén7, F. Abel6
1Inst. Biomedicine, Gothenburg, Sweden,2Inst.
Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers Univeristy ofTechnology, Gothenburg, Sweden,
3Inst. Biomedicine,
Skövde University, Skövde, Sweden,4Inst. Mathematical
Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg,Sweden,
5Section for Endocrine Surgery and Abdominal
Sarcoma, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden,6Inst. Biomedicine, Gothenburg University,
Gothenburg, Sweden,7Sahlgrenska Cancer Center,
Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden
We recently reported novel recurrent germline and somatic
mutations in the myosin Vb motor gene ( MYO5B )i n
malignant pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PCC/PGL),an adolescent/adult counterpart to neuroblastoma arising
from the same neural crest origin. Here, we have explored
the functional impact of three MYO5B missense mutations(p.L587P, p.G1611S, and p.R1641C) with respect to
proliferation, migration and intracellular traf ﬁcking
in vitro . MYO5B mutated cDNA clones (pCMV6-MYO5B
Myc-DKK tagged) were generated by site directed
mutagenesis and stably transfected into human embryonic1594kidney cells (HEK293) and SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells.
All three MYO5B mutants demonstrated a signi ﬁcantly
increased proliferation rate compared to MYO5B wild type
clones (p<0.001). The Scratch-wound assay also indicated
an increased migration rate (p<0.05) in cells harboring the
two somatic variants p.L587P (located in the motor domain)and p.G1611S (located in the tail dilute domain). Moreover,
investigating the endocytic recycling pathway by the
transferrin assay showed an increased transferrin uptake inp.L587P and p.G1611S mutants, indicating a disturbed
intracellular transport. Immunohistochemistry and transcrip-
tomic analysis of 31 primary PCC/PGL tumor cases show adifferential expression of MYO5B mRNA and protein
levels in some malignant PGLs, as well as a changed
subcellular localization of MYO5B in one PGL caseharboring an acquired p.G1611S MYO5B mutation. We
are currently exploring downstream effects in mutant clones
by expression microarrays to identify the proliferationpathways activated by MYO5B mutations. Our study
uncovers the functional role of MYO5B in proliferation
and migration in adrenal neural tumors, which mightimprove future therapeutic implication.
J. Olausson: None. T. Te šan Tomi ć:None. A.
Rehammar: None. L. Deland: None. K. Ejeskär: None.
S. Nilsson: None. A. Muth: None. B. Wängberg: None.
O. Nilsson-Wassén: None. F. Abel: None.
P12.132A
Characterization of heterozygous PMS2 variants in
French patients with Lynch syndrome
Q. Wang
1, J. Leclerc2, G. Bougeard3, S. Olschwang4,
S. Vasseur3, K. Cassinari3, D. Boidin5, C. Lefol1,
P. Naïbo1, T. Frebourg3, M. Buisine2, S. Baert-
Desurmont3, French Consortium of Oncogenetic
laboratories forcolorectal cancers, Unicancer GeneticGroup (UGG)
1Centre Léon Bérard, Joint Constitutional Genetic
Laboratory HCL-CLB and Cancer Genomics platform,
Lyon, France,2Inserm UMR-S 1172, JPA Research Center,
Lille University, and Department of Biochemistry andMolecular Biology, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France,
3Rouen University Hospital and UNIROUEN, Inserm
U1245 Normandy Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rouen,France,
4Aix Marseille Université, INSERM GMGF UMR
S_910; Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital
d'enfants de la Timone & Groupe Ramsay Générale deSanté, Hôpital Clairval, Marseille, France,
5Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Lille University
Hospital, Lille, FranceHeterozygous germline PMS2 variants are responsible for
about 5% of Lynch syndrome (LS) but their prevalence is
most likely underestimated, because of the presence of
highly homologous pseudogenes, hampering routine and
exhaustive screening. Here, we describe a large series of
PMS2 heterozygous variants identi ﬁed in French LS
patients. Two hundred variants were identi ﬁed in 195
patients including 114 unique variants classi ﬁed as class-3/
4/5 according to consensus guidelines. Although SNVs andsmall insertion/deletions were predominant, genomic rear-
rangements accounted for 18% of the alterations. The
c.137G>T variant was observed in 36/195 families,accounting for 18% of the PMS2-LS, but the haplotype
analysis failed to show a clear founder effect. The median
age at ﬁrst tumour onset in class 4/5 variant carriers was 49,
and the predominantly observed tumours were colorectal
cancers (76.4%) followed by endometrial cancers (8.1%).
The earliest age at tumour onset was 21 and 9 patientsdeveloped colorectal cancer by the age of 31. By now, no
genotype/phenotype correlation was detected. Among cases
with available family history, only 6.8% of class-4/5carriers had a family history ful ﬁlling Amsterdam I/II
criteria. Tumours from PMS2 variant carriers exhibited
microsatellite instability and loss of PMS2 expression in96% and 76% of the cases, respectively. These results
conﬁrm the high predictive value of tumour loss of PMS2
expression and show that, while PMS2 variants are mostly
detected in families not ful ﬁlling Amsterdam criteria, which
supports their lower penetrance, they can nevertheless cause
colorectal cancers before 31, which highlights the varia-bility of their penetrance.
Q. Wang: None. J. Leclerc: None. G. Bougeard: None.
S. Olschwang: None. S. Vasseur: None. K. Cassinari:
None. D. Boidin: None. C. Lefol: None. P. Naïbo: None.
T. Frebourg: None. M. Buisine: None. S. Baert-
Desurmont: None.
P12.134C
Cooperative Androgen and Thyroid Hormone SignalingDrives Prostate Cancer
O. Aksoy
1, J. Pencik1, A. Varady1, A. Moazzami2,
M. Schlederer1, T. Balber3, M. Susani1, M. Hassler4,
G. Greiner5, T. Javaheri6, S. Turner7, G. Egger8,
R. Moriggl9, Z. Culig10, O. Merkel1, L. Kenner1
1Department of Pathology, Medical University Vienna,
Vienna, Austria,2Department of Molecular Sciences,
Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden,3Department of Biomedical
Imaging and Image Guided Therapy, Division of NuclearMedicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria,
4Department of Urology, Medical University Vienna,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1595Vienna, Austria,5Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria,6Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria,
7Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology,
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrooke ’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
8Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Applied Diagnostics, Vienna,
Austria,9Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria,
10Department of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria
Introduction: Androgens drive prostate cancer through
androgen receptor signaling and antiandrogen therapy in
numerous forms is still key treatment for prostate cancer(PC). In addition to androgens, thyroid hormones have been
shown to promote various cancers including PC. Active
form of thyroid hormone Triiodothyronine (T3) actsthrough interaction with nuclear receptors (TR β/TRα) and
binding proteins in cytosol such as μ-crystallin (CRYM). In
this study, we investigated the interaction of thyroidhormone with androgen signaling through its nuclear
receptor beta (TR β1) and cytosolic binding protein (CRYM)
in the progression of prostate cancer.
Materials and Methods: Tissue microarray (TMA)
containing patient samples together with cell lines derived
from metastases were used to inspect molecular mechan-isms of thyroid hormone driven tumorigenesis. RNA-seq
identi ﬁed alterations of gene expressions in response thyr-
oid and androgen signalling. Co-immunoprecipitation andyeast two-hybrid were employed to inspect a cross-talk
between androgen and thyroid signaling. Therapeutic value
of thyroid inhibition was carried out through in vivo studies.
Results: TRβgene was identi ﬁed as a common feature in
drug-resistant tumors, which predicted metastases, and
relapse in PC patients. Thyroid hormone binding proteinCRYM antagonized thyroid hormone action. Immunopre-
cipitation and yeast two-hybrid revealed interaction
between androgen receptor (AR) and thyroid receptor(TRβ). Inhibition of thyroid hormone signaling resulted in
decreased growth of tumor in vivo .
Conclusion: Inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis and
action in combination with androgen ablation therapy might
have a therapeutic relevance by deducing free T3/T4 levels
that might slow down the disease progression and delayrecurrence in patients with PCa.
O. Aksoy: None. J. Pencik: None. A. Varady: None. A.
Moazzami: None. M. Schlederer: None. T. Balber: None.
M. Susani: None. M. Hassler: None. G. Greiner: None.
T. Javaheri: None. S. Turner: None. G. Egger: None. R.
Moriggl: None. Z. Culig: None. O. Merkel: None. L.
Kenner: None.P12.136A
Genotype phenotype associations in a cohort of 1404
consecutively ascertained retinoblastoma index cases
F. Salviat
1, M. Gauthier-Villars2, M. Carton1,
N. Cassoux3, L. Lumbroso-Le Rouic3, C. Dehainault2,
I. Aerts4, F. Bonnet-Serrano2, S. Hayek2, A. Savignoni1,
D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2,5, C. Houdayer6,7
1Département de recherche clinique et innovation, Unité de
Biométrie, Institut Curie, Paris, France,2Service de
Génétique, Institut Curie, Paris, France,3Département
d’Oncologie chirurgicale, service d ’Ophtalmologie, Institut
Curie, Paris, France,4Département d'Oncologie
pédiatrique, Institut Curie, Paris, France,5Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité et INSERM U830, Paris,
France,6Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen,
France,7Inserm U1245, IRIB, Rouen, France
Retinoblastoma (Rb), the most common pediatric intrao-
cular neoplasm, results from inactivation of both alleles oftheRB1 gene. To deepen our understanding of Rb, we
performed genotype-phenotype associations in a cohort of
1404 consecutively ascertained Rb patients i.e. 866unilateral Rbs (URb) and 538 bilateral Rbs (BRb) followed
between 2000 and 2017. Main characteristics included age
at diagnosis, sex, laterality, familial history, IRC stage andmutational status. Advanced IRC stages D and E were
mainly observed (67.1% and 19.4%, respectively). Germ-
line detection rate was 93.4% for BRb and 13.0% for URb.Mutations were scattered all along the coding sequence with
a predominance of truncating mutations. Close to 50% of
ﬁrst and second hits occurred in 6 distinct regions but these
regions differed according to the 1
stor second hit
(signi ﬁcant for promoter, exons 1, 2 and 24). Compared
to nonsense mutations, risk for bilateral Rb was lower formissense, large rearrangement and in frame splice mutations
(p<0.001, p<0.05 and p =0.05 respectively). As compared
to germline mutations maintaining pRb, germline mutationsinducing the absence of pRb led to an earlier median age at
diagnosis (9 months vs 12 months, p<0.05), more frequent
bilateral involvement (84.1% vs 65.2%, p<0.001), and anadvanced IRC stage (85.3% vs 73.9%, p<0.05). Surpris-
ingly, the opposite was found for 2
ndhits where absence of
pRb was more often associated with unilateral RB (OR =
46.11, p<0.001). This is the largest genotype-phenotype
study reported to date, opening new avenues for an in depth
understanding of the disease.
F. Salviat: None. M. Gauthier-Villars: None. M. Car-
ton: None. N. Cassoux: None. L. Lumbroso-Le Rouic:
None. C. Dehainault: None. I. Aerts: None. F. Bonnet-
Serrano: None. S. Hayek: None. A. Savignoni: None. D.
Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Houdayer: None.1596P12.137B
Ruxolitinib regulates energy metabolism of multiple
myeloma cells
Ç. Biray Avci, B. Goker Bagca, N. Ozates Ay, A. Kusoglu,
Z. Abbaszade, S. Cesmeli, G. Saydam, C. Gunduz
Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey
Aim: Multiple myeloma is the cancer of bone marrow
plasma cells. Ruxolitinib which is a potent inhibitor of JAK
tyrosine kinases is approved for treatment of myeloproli-ferative neoplasms. In this study, our purpose was to
determine the possible role of ruxolitinib on energy
metabolism of ARH77 multiple myeloma cells which hasnot been investigated so far.
Methods: ARH77 multiple myeloma cells were incu-
bated via RPMI-1640 medium. Ruxolitinib was dissolved inDMSO. Seahorse XFp Cell Energy Phenotype Test Kit
(Agilent) was used to determine the phenotypic effects of
ruxolitinib on energy metabolism of ARH77 cells. Changesin expression level of the genes which control energy
pathways were determined by Glucose Metabolism RT
2
Proﬁler PCR Array (Qiagen), RT2SYBR Green qPCR
Mastermix (Qiagen) and qRT-PCR instrument (Light-
Cycler480, Roche). Fold changes were calculated via 2-ΔΔCt
quantitation method.
Results: Ruxolitinib increased oxygen consumption and
extracellular acidi ﬁcation rates 1.45 and 1.68 folds com-
pared to control, respectively. Ruxolitinib also regulatedexpression levels of PYGM, PGM2, PHKB, PCK2, H6PD,
PDK4 and GYS2 genes higher than 2 folds, which regulate
cell energy metabolism.
Conclusion: The results of our study indicate that rux-
olitinib genetically regulates cell energy metabolism which
has not been previously evaluated in ARH77 cells, and thischange is re ﬂected in cellular phenotype. Further studies
which research the potential role of ruxolitinib in energy
metabolism will provide a new perspective in myelomagenetics.
Ç. Biray Avci: None. B. Goker Bagca: None. N. Ozates
Ay: None. A. Kusoglu: None. Z. Abbaszade: None. S.
Cesmeli: None. G. Saydam: None. C. Gunduz: None.
P12.138C
Detection of cell-free, exosomal and whole blood
mitochondrial DNA copy number in plasma or whole
blood of patients with serous epithelial ovarian cancer
J. S. Keser ű
1, B. Soltész1, J. Lukács2, É. Márton1,
M. Szilágyi-Bónizs1, A. Penyige1, R. Póka2, B. Nagy11Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,2Department
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
Ovarian tumor is one of the leading causes of cancer among
women. It is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage. In
search for new speci ﬁc and sensitive biomarkers we
detected mitochondrial DNA copy number in whole blood(wb-mtDNA) and in plasma (cell-free and exosome
encapsulated mtDNA) in patients with serous epithelial
ovarian tumor.
DNA was isolated from EDTA blood and plasma
obtained from 24 patients and 24 healthy controls. Exo-
somes were isolated from cell-free plasma, and exosomalDNA was extracted. Quantitative-real-time PCR was per-
formed with Human Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) Mon-
itoring Primer Set. Kruskall-Wallis and Mann-Whitney testwere used for data analysis.
Wb-mtDNA copy number was signi ﬁcantly different
among healthy controls and patients in multiple comparison(p=0.0090 considering FIGO stages independently, and
p=0.0048 considering early- and late-stage cancers). There
was a signi ﬁcant decrease among early-stage, all advanced
stage and all cancer patients (FIGO I: 32.5±8.3, p =0.0061;
FIGO III +IV: 37.2±13.7 p =0.0139; FIGO I +III+IV: 35.6
±12.2, p =0.0017) or FIGO III patients alone (32.8±5.6,
p=0.0089) compared to healthy controls (48.6±17.1).
We found signi ﬁcant increase in exosomal mtDNA copy
number in cancer patients (236.0±499.0, p =0.0155),
advanced-stage cancer patients (333.0±575.0, p =0.0095),
FIGO III (362.0±609.2, p =0.0494), and FIGO IV (304.0
±585.0, p =0.0393) patients alone compared to healthy
controls (9.3±7.1) and in multiple comparison considering
early- and late-stage cancers (p =0.0253). Cell-free mtDNA
copy numbers were not increased signi ﬁcantly.
We observed signi ﬁcant difference in wb-mtDNA copy
number in case of early- and late-stage cancer patients and
in exosomal mtDNA copy number in case of late-stagecancer patients compared to healthy controls.
J.S. Keser ű:None. B. Soltész: None. J. Lukács: None.
É. Márton: None. M. Szilágyi-Bónizs: None. A. Penyige:
None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None.
P12.139D
Generation of Single Cell NGS Library with High
Reproducibility, and Greatly Improved Coverage and
Fidelity for Precision Medicine
M. Pesant
1, F. Sun2, D. Mellacheruvu2, B. Sisay2,
J. Langmore2, G. McLean2, A. Farmer2, E. Kamberov2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 15971Takara Bio Europe, Saint Germain en Laye, France,
2Takara Bio USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States
Introduction: Accurate, reproducible detection of muta-
tions and copy number variations (CNV) from small
amounts of DNA, including single cells, is key for geneticanalysis of clinical samples to assist in identifying the best
treatment regimen and molecular diagnoses of diseases such
as cancer.
Method: To allow accurate detection of both single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) and CNVs, we release an
enhanced version of our PicoPLEX chemistry that improvessequencing coverage, uniformity, and accuracy while
increasing the resolution for CNV detection and retaining
reproducibility. This enhanced chemistry named SMARTerPicoPLEX Gold Single Cell DNA-Seq Kit (PicoPLEX
Gold) is a single-cell library-prep kit with a simple, four-
step protocol to convert single cells into NGS libraries inunder three hours with minimum hands-on-time. Libraries
prepared from single GM12878 cells using the PicoPLEX
Gold kit were sequenced on an Illumina ®NextSeq ®plat-
form to a depth of ~35 million read pairs (2x150 cycles).
Results: PicoPLEX Gold kit generates >50% genome
coverage. This coverage represents a 2-fold improvementover the original PicoPLEX kit, along with a 4X reduction
in duplication rates. The kit detected 3.5X more SNVs
compared to Multiple Displacement Ampli ﬁcation (MDA)
with the same number of reads. PicoPLEX Gold kit pro-
duced up to 50% lower allele dropin (false-positive) rates
than MDA. The increased coverage and low bias translatedto extremely low allele-dropout rates (ADO), ~5X lower
than MDA.
Conclusion: A single PicoPLEX Gold kit library enables
reliable, high-resolution CNV analysis with shallow
sequencing, and an accurate and reproducible SNV and
CNV analysis with deeper sequencing.
M. Pesant: None. F. Sun: None. D. Mellacheruvu:
None. B. Sisay: None. J. Langmore: None. G. McLean:
None. A. Farmer: None. E. Kamberov: None.
P12.140A
Pediatric Systemic Lupus Erythematosus as amanifestation of Constitutional mismatch repair
deﬁciency
H. Toledano
1,2, E. Sofrin3, N. Orenstein3,2, N. Rurman
Shahar4, G. Amarilyo2,5, L. Basel-Salmon4,2,6,
A. Shuldiner7, P. Smirin-Yosef88, N. Lev El4,
M. Aronson9,10, H. AlTarrah9, K. Wimmer11,
U. Tabori9,12, L. Bazak4, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui7,
Y. Goldberg41Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider
Children's Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,2Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel,
3Pediatric Genetics Clinic, Schneider Children's Medical
Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,4Raphael Recanati Genetics
Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,
5Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Schneider Children's
Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,6Felsenstein Medical
Research Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva,Israel,
7Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, United
States,8Genomic Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department
of Molecular Biolog, Ariel, Israel,9Department of
Haematology-Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada,10Zane Cohen Centre, Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada,11Division of Human
Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,
12The Arthur and Sonia Labbatt Brain Tumour Research
Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,Canada
Introduction: Biallelic mutations in any of the four
mismatch repair genes MSH2, MSH6 ,MLH1 , and PMS2
result in one of the most aggressive childhood cancer
predisposition syndromes, termed constitutional mismatchrepair de ﬁciency syndrome (CMMRD). In addition to a
very high tumor risk, the CMMRD phenotype is often
characterized by the presence of signs reminiscent ofneuro ﬁbromatosis type 1. Pediatric Systemic Lupus Erythe-
matosus (pSLE) is very rare. It has been reported so far in
three CMMRD patients and has not been considered adiagnostic feature of the syndrome.
Methods: Two female patients from two different
families diagnosed clinically with pSLE presented withfeatures suggestive of CMMRD and were found to have bi-
allelic pathogenic mutations in MSH6 .
Results: We report two CMMRD female patients diag-
nosed with pSLE and compare them to the three reported
cases. Hence, there are a total of ﬁve out of approximately
200 (2.5%) currently reported CMMRD patients that alsohave pSLE.
Conclusions: Given the rarity of both CMMRD and
pSLE this phenotype is signi ﬁcant and should be further
explored. pSLE should raise the possible diagnosis of
CMMRD if supported by additional indicative features.
H. Toledano: None. E. Sofrin: None. N. Orenstein:
None. N. Rurman Shahar: None. G. Amarilyo: None. L.
Basel-Salmon: None. A. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Regeneron. P. Smirin-Yosef8:
None. N. Lev El: None. M. Aronson: None. H. AlTarrah:
None. K. Wimmer: None. U. Tabori: None. L. Bazak:
None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Regeneron. Y. Goldberg: None.1598P12.141B
Impact of Next Generation Sequencing on clinical
practice in a Spanish cohort of paediatric and adult
patients with solid tumours
D. A. Garcia-Dios1, C. Perez-Garcia1, M. J. Garcia-Ruiz1,
R. Palomo1, C. Ruiz-Lafora1, C. Lavarino2, N. gene2,
E. Jantus3, N. Camarasa4, J. Forteza5, C. Camps3,
J. Garcia-Planells1
1Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna
(Valencia), Spain,2Fundacion de Investigacion Sant Joan
de Deu, Barcelona, Spain,3Hospital General de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain,4Hospital de Castellón, Castellon, Spain,
5Instituto Valenciano de Patología/CIPF, Valencia, Spain
Survival rates in cancer patients are still improving but at a
lower rate than the previous decade. There is a clear needfor developing more ef ﬁcient tests to aid clinicians in
choosing the optimum treatment for each patient in a period
of time no longer than 10 days. Next-Generation Sequen-cing (NGS) has been proven to deliver these results in an
excellent manner. In this work, we provide the results
obtained in a cohort of 75 adult patients suffering fromdiverse solid tumours as well as 38 paediatric patients.
Adult patients obtained a signi ﬁcantly higher bene ﬁt from
the study. We detected alterations of clinical relevance(SNVs, CNVs, fusion genes and MSI) in more than 90% of
the cases. Based on these results, 25% of the patients could
beneﬁt from different therapies including FDA-approved
drugs or at least one clinical trial. Besides the somatic
mutations, 10.7% of the patients harboured a germline
pathogenic variant that had not previously detected. Out ofthe 38 paediatric patients, 15 had the option to join a clinical
trial and another three showed a genetic alteration treatable
by an FDA-approved therapy. Germline alterations weremore common in these patients that reached 28.9% of the
cases. Genetic counselling and family studies were offered
when relevant. Thanks to the results presented in this work,several patients bene ﬁted from an accurate diagnosis that
allowed clinicians to approach new therapeutic options.
Families of paediatric patients were able to identifygermline mutations carried by some of their members that
were yet unknown.
D.A. Garcia-Dios: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Perez-Garcia: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; IMEGEN. M.J. Garcia-
Ruiz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
IMEGEN. R. Palomo: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Ruiz-Lafora: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Lavarino:
None. N. gene: None. E. Jantus: None. N. Camarasa:
None. J. Forteza: None. C. Camps: None. J. Garcia-Planells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
IMEGEN.
P12.142C
Assessment of a highly-curated somatic oncology
mutation database to facilitate identi ﬁcation of clinically
important variants in NGS results
M. Ma, S. Yaung, L. Xi, C. Ju, J. Palma, M. SchmidRoche Sequencing Solutions, Inc, Pleasanton, CA, United
States
Introduction: The increasing adoption of Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) in molecular pro ﬁling of cancer presents
a growing need for streamlined interpretation of NGS
results in clinical labs.
Methods: We performed an initial assessment of an NGS
result interpretation tool called NAVIFY Mutation Pro ﬁler
(NMP), which enabled us to process a Variant Call Format
(VCF) ﬁle and generate a report with consensus recom-
mendations of NCCN, ASCO, CAP and ACMG. This
annotation tool identi
ﬁes pathogenic variants and variants of
unknown clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS), and groups variants
by AMP Tiers. At the time of this assessment, NMP con-
tained curation for ~4,000 variants. In this study, we used
NGS results from 38 anonymized clinical cases with knowntreatment regimens to retrospectively assess NMP as the
variant interpretation tool.
Results: NMP correctly associated EGFR TKI therapies
options with the corresponding 5 cases. As expected, NMP
did not recommend targeted therapies for the 10 chemo-
treated control cases. For the subject relapsed against EGFRTKI, NMP correctly interpreted the complex EGFR muta-
tion pro ﬁle containing both activating (L858R) and drug-
resistance (T790M) variants. In addition, out of 22 casesrelapsed against ALK TKI crizotinib, NMP correctly
marked 14 with crizotinib resistance when a known ALK
variant conferring crizotinib resistance was detected. Therewas limited or no published clinical evidence to interpret the
remaining 8 cases of ALK TKI resistance.
Conclusions: NMP correctly interpreted cases containing
EGFR and ALK variants in this study. With a highly-
curated knowledge base, this tool simpli ﬁes NGS clinical
reporting by identifying clinically actionable mutations.
M. Ma: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc. S. Yaung: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche Sequencing
Solutions, Inc. L. Xi: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc. C. Ju: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche
Sequencing Solutions, Inc. J. Palma: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1599M. Schmid: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc.
P12.143D
The development of SureMASTR HRR assay for SNV,
indel and CNV/CNA detection in 17 HRR-related targetgenes in blood- and FFPE-derived DNA
D. Salles, K. Bettens, C. De Vogelaere, N. van den Broeck,
N. Remmerie, H. Swennen, R. de Smet, J. De Schrijver,
D. Goossens, J. Crappé, J. Del Favero, A. Rotthier
Agilent Technologies, Niel, Belgium
Introduction: Growing evidence shows that defects in the
homologous recombination repair (HRR) pathway underlie
hereditary and sporadic tumorigenesis and that HRR
deﬁciency may dictate the sensitivity of tumors to cancer
chemotherapy that rely on defective DNA repair.
Methods: The SureMASTR HRR NGS assay contains
17 selected HRR most relevant genes. These 17 genes wereselected based on mutational analysis of a 52 HRR gene
panel in 300 high-grade serous ovarian cancer samples,
together with the most recent literature research and inputfrom Key Opinion Leaders. The panel is comprised of the
full coding region of: ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2,
BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, FANCA, FANCL, NBN,PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, RAD54L andTP53 .
Results: The SureMASTR HRR work ﬂow was devel-
oped as a single tube assay, together with the MASTRReporter software application, to enable data quality con-
trol, detection of SNPs, indels and CNV/CNAs in the
coding regions of 17 selected genes, compromising 1164amplicons, from blood and FFPE derived DNA. The assay
is optimized for cost-ef ﬁcient use of the NGS capacity and
shown to obtain (i) excellent target read mapping (>98%),(ii) uniformity of ampli ﬁcation >96% within 0,2X mean
coverage and (iii) low primer dimer (2%). Testing was
performed on Illumina ’s MiSeq and NextSeq sequencers.
Conclusions: The SureMASTR HRR assay is a single
plex assay covering 17 most relevant HRR pathway genes,
signiﬁcantly reducing the hands-on time, DNA input,
required sequencing capacity and, in combination with the
MASTR Reporter data analysis, to provide an accurate and
precise work ﬂow.
D. Salles: None. K. Bettens: None. C. De Vogelaere:
None. N. van den Broeck: None. N. Remmerie: None. H.
Swennen: None. R. de Smet: None. J. De Schrijver:
None. D. Goossens: None. J. Crappé: None. J. Del
Favero: None. A. Rotthier: None.
P12.144A
Gene expression pro ﬁling in aggressive digital papillaryadenocarcinoma sheds light on the architecture of a rare
sweat gland carcinoma
H. M. Surowy
1, A. K. Giesen1, J. Otte2, R. Büttner3,
D. Falkenstein1, H. Friedl4, F. Meier5, P. Petzsch6,
T. Wachtmeister6, D. Westphal5, D. Wieczorek1,
W. Wruck2, J. Adjaye2, A. Rütten7, S. Redler1
1Heinrich-Heine-University, Medical Faculty, Institute of
Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany,
2Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative
Medicine, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,,Düsseldorf, Germany,
3Pathology, Institute for Pathology,
University Hospital Cologne, Köln, Germany,4Department
of Dermatology, Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany,
5Department of Dermatology, Carl Gustav Carus Medical
Center, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, Dresden,
Germany,6Biological and Medical Research Center
(BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany,7Dermatopathology, Bodensee,
Friedrichshafen, Bodensee, Germany
Background: Sweat gland carcinomas are rare cutaneous
adnexal malignancies. Aggressive digital papillary adeno-carcinoma (ADPA) represents a very rare sub-entity,
thought to arise almost exclusively from sweat glands of
theﬁngers and toes. The aetiology of sweat gland
carcinomas and ADPA is largely unknown. ADPAs are
most likely driven by somatic mutations. However, somatic
mutation patterns are largely unexplored, creating barriersto the development of effective therapeutic approaches to
the treatment of ADPA. Objective: To investigate the
transcriptome pro ﬁle of ADPA using a sample of eight
formalin- ﬁxed, paraf ﬁn embedded (FFPE) tissue samples of
ADPA and healthy control tissue.
Methods: Transcriptome pro ﬁling was performed using
the Affymetrix PrimeView Human Gene Expression
Microarray and ﬁndings were validated via reverse-
transcription of RNA and real-time qPCR.
Results: Transcriptome analyses showed increased
tumour expression of 2,266 genes, with signi ﬁcant invol-
vement of cell cycle, ribosomal and crucial cancer path-ways. Our results furthermore point to tumour-
overexpression of FGFR2 (p=0.001).
Conclusions: Our results indicate the involvement of
crucial oncogenic driver pathways, highlighting cell cycle
and ribosomal pathways in the aetiology of ADPA. Sug-
gested tumour-overexpression of FGFR2 raises the hope
that targeting the FGF/FGFR axis might be a promising
treatment for ADPA and probably for the overall group of
sweat gland carcinomas. Currently transcriptome pro ﬁling
is performed in a large sample of eccrine porocarcinoma,
the most common sub-entity of sweat gland carcinomas. A1600combined analysis of the two entities is currently performed
toﬁgure out common and speci ﬁc pathways.
H.M. Surowy: None. A.K. Giesen: None. J. Otte: None.
R. Büttner: None. D. Falkenstein: None. H. Friedl: None.
F. Meier: None. P. Petzsch: None. T. Wachtmeister:
None. D. Westphal: None. D. Wieczorek: None. W.
Wruck: None. J. Adjaye: None. A. Rütten: None. S.
Redler: None.
P12.146
CTP53 c.847C&gtT (p.Arg283Cys) variant: A low-risk
breast cancer variant?
V. Trpchevska1, M. Jakimovska1, K. Kubelka-Sabit2,
M. Karagjozov2, E. Lazarova3, S. Smichkoska3,
D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska1
1RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of,2Clinical Hospital Acibadem Sistina,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
3University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Medical
Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius ”, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Based on ACMG criteria and ClinVar data,
TP53 c.847C>T (p.Arg283Cys) represents a variant of
unknown signi ﬁcance. It has been detected as germline and
somatic mutation in different cancers, but also in controls. It
is also reported in population databases (gnomAD, ExAC)with a low frequency. Using transactivation activity, it has
been classi ﬁed as partially-de ﬁcient allele, associated with
mild disease course.
Material and methods: Aiming to clarify the clinical
signiﬁcance of c.847C>T we studied 1061 breast cancer
(BC) patients and 1490 controls from the general popula-tion. The methodology included multigene panel testing on
MiSeq platform and allele-speci ﬁc PCR.
Results: Compared to the published allele frequencies
(0.02%), c.847C>T variant was signi ﬁcantly more common
among our BC patients (10/2122 or 0.47%), but also among
our controls (10/2980 or 0.34%). The majority of BCpatients carrying c.847C>T mutations had ductal, ER +,P R
+, HER2- BC. Seven of the 10 BC patients had familial
history for cancer (four of them for BC/OC), but none ofthem met the Li-Fraumeni syndrome criteria. Only one
patient had co-inherited pathogenic mutation in other cancer
gene ( BRCA2 c.6937+1G>A) and somatic pathogenic
TP53 mutations were identi ﬁed in two of the four studied
breast tumors.
Conclusion: Here, we report the highest frequency of
TP53 c.847C>T variant, detected among population of R.
Macedonia. We further suggest that TP53 c.847C>T mightrepresent a low-risk BC allele. However, large case control
studies, particularly in Balkan populations where it is
probably more common, are warranted to con ﬁrm our
ﬁndings.
V. Trpchevska: None. M. Jakimovska: None. K.
Kubelka-Sabit: None. M. Karagjozov: None. E. Lazar-
ova: None. S. Smichkoska: None. D. Plaseska-
Karan ﬁlska: None.
P12.147D
Balanced and unbalanced translocations in a series of
2,543 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
D. Costa
1, I. Granada2, B. Espinet3, R. Collado4,
A. Carrió1, N. Ruiz-Xivillé2, A. Puiggros3, M. Uribe4,
J. Delgado1
1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain,2Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain,3Hospital del Mar,
Barcelona, Spain,4Hospital General Universitario,
Valencia, Spain
Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the
most common leukemia of adults in Western countries, andhas a highly variable clinical course. Clonal chromosomal
aberrations can be detected in 40-50% or in more than 80%
of cases depending on the mitogenic agents used. Thecommon recurrent abnormalities are del(13q)[50%], tris-
omy 12 [15%], del(11q)[15-20%], del(6q) and del(17p)
[5%] and t/der(14)(q32) [4-20%]. Chromosomal transloca-tions in CLL are uncommon and most of them occurred
within complex karyotypes. OBJECTIVE: To report the
translocations identi ﬁed in patients with CLL diagnosed in
three different centers: Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Hospital Trias i Pujol de Badalona Hospital del Mar de
Barcelona and Consorcio Hospital General Universitario deValencia.
Results: Two hundred and thirty-one (9%) translocations
were identi ﬁed in 2,543 CLL patients, 172 (74%) balanced
and 59 (26%) unbalanced. All chromosomes were found to
be involved in translocations, with the single exception of
the Y chromosome. The chromosomes most frequentlyinvolved were chromosome 14 (n =35), 17 (n =29), 2
(n=24), 1 (n =21), 3 (n =13), 5 (n =12), 8,18 (n =11) and 10
(n=10). The recurrent translocation most frequently
observed was t(14;18)(q32;q21)(n =28). Translocations
were found in karyotypes as the unique chromosomal
abnormality (27%), associated with another chromosomalabnormality (25%), and as a part of a complex
karyotype (47%).
Conclusion: The infrequency of translocations in CLL
makes their identi ﬁcation and reporting interesting for theAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1601recognition of the recurrent ones and the genes involved in
this neoplasia.
D. Costa: None. I. Granada: None. B. Espinet: None.
R. Collado: None. A. Carrió: None. N. Ruiz-Xivillé:
None. A. Puiggros: None. M. Uribe: None. J.
Delgado: None.
P12.148A
High prevalence of BRCA mutations among Slovenian
triple-negative breast cancer patients
M. Banjac, A. Blatnik, K. Strojnik, V. Stegel,
S. Novakovic, V. Setrajcic Dragos, P. Skerl, G. Klancar,
M. Krajc
Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Genetic testing of ovarian cancer patients
yields a high rate of BRCA -positive results in the Slovenian
population. Here, we present genetic testing results in our
breast cancer (BC) population ful ﬁlling the hereditary breast
and ovarian cancer (HBOC) testing criteria with an
emphasis on triple negative (TN) cancers.
Methods: We analysed 402 consecutive BC cases tested
using a multigene sequencing panel. We evaluated mutation
detection rates in BC-associated genes according to oes-
trogene/progesterone (ER/PR) and human epidermoidgrowth factor (HER2) receptor status and further subdivided
TN (ER-/PR-/HER2-) BC patients according to their age at
diagnosis and family history of HBOC-associated disease.
Results: Pathogenic variants (PV) were detected in 81/
402 (19.9%) BC patients in 6 different genes (54.3%
BRCA1 , 18.5% BRCA2 , 11.1% CHEK2 , 8.6% ATM , 6.2%
PALB2 and 1.2% TP53) . 17.7% of ER +/PR+/HER2- BC
patients carried a PV, 12.0% were BRCA1/BRCA2 -positive.
In the HER2 +group, 14% were PV carriers –only BRCA2
variants were seen (6%) with no BRCA1 -positive cases.
37.9% of our 87 TN BC patients were PV carriers. Most
(29.9%) were BRCA1 -positive, followed by PALB2 (3.4%)
andBRCA2 (2.3%). TN BC patients with a positive family
history (59.8%) were more likely to be BRCA1/BRCA2 -
positive (38.5% vs. 22.9%). When strati ﬁed according to
age at diagnosis, BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation detection rate
was 66.7% between ages 20-30, 45.8% between ages 30-40,
31.0% between ages 40-50 and 18.2% between ages 50-60.
Conclusions: Testing our TN BC patients produces a
high diagnostic yield, possibly due to a high frequency of
BRCA1 carriers in the Slovene population.
M. Banjac: None. A. Blatnik: None. K. Strojnik: None.
V. Stegel: None. S. Novakovic: None. V. Setrajcic Dra-
gos: None. P. Skerl: None. G. Klancar: None. M.
Krajc: None.P12.149B
NGS panel testing of negative BRCA1/2 index patients
with Triple-Negative Breast Cancer in Cyprus
M. Zanti1,2,3, M. A. Loizidou1,3, K. Michailidou1,3,
P. Pirpa1, C. Machattou1, Y. Markou4, F. Kyriakou4,
E. Kakouri4, G. M. Spyrou2,3, K. Kyriacou1,3,
A. Hadjisavvas1,3
1Department of Electron Microscopy/Molecular Pathology,
The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia,
Cyprus,2Bioinformatics Group, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Cyprus School
of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology
and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Departments of Medical
and Radiation Oncology, Bank of Cyprus Oncology Center,
Nicosia, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
Introduction: Triple-Negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an
aggressive form of breast cancer (BC), characterized by lack
of expression of the estrogen and progesterone receptors,and the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2).
The aim of this study was to assess the distribution of
germline mutations in cancer susceptibility genes in CypriotTNBC patients that tested negative for the BRCA1/2 genes.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from 124
TNBC patients was sequenced using the TruSight Cancerpanel (Illumina). We followed the Genome Analysis
ToolKit guidelines and all variants were veri ﬁed by Sanger
Sequencing. Rare variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS)
were evaluated using in-silico pathogenicity prediction
algorithms and variants predicted as deleterious, were
selected for further investigation. Various tools were used topredict the effect of VUS on protein structure and stability.
Results: Five mutations in BC susceptibility genes
(PALB2 (4) & TP53 (1)) and ﬁve mutations in genes not
proven to be associated with BC ( ERCC2 (1),ERCC5 (1),
FANCL (1) and PRF1 (2)) were found in 10 TNBC patients.
In addition, 20 VUS in established and promising BCsusceptibility genes were predicted as deleterious, out of
which six were identi ﬁed in more than one sample ( PALB2
(3),RAD51C (2),BRIP1 (3),CHEK2 (2),ATM (2),PMS2 (3)).
Conclusions: In summary, ﬁve deleterious mutations
were identi ﬁed in ﬁve Cypriot TNBC patients in established
BC susceptibility genes other than the BRCA genes
(4.03%). Functional studies, case-control association studies
and/or co-segregation analyses are needed to evaluate the
VUS for potential pathogenicity. Grant: EU H2020;
669026; Establishment of the Bioinformatics Chair at the
CING (BIORISE)
M. Zanti: None. M.A. Loizidou: None. K. Michailidou:
None. P. Pirpa: None. C. Machattou: None. Y. Markou:
None. F. Kyriakou: None. E. Kakouri: None. G.M.1602Spyrou: None. K. Kyriacou: None. A.
Hadjisavvas: None.
P12.150C
Ultra-high multiplexed 20,000-amplicon NGS panel for
tumor mutational burden (TMB) analysis using a rapid4-hour work ﬂow
E. Jan, L. Lee, K. Pendleton, Y. Liu, C. Li, L. Lin, G. Liu,
Z. Liu
Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United StatesIntroduction: In the immuno-oncology ﬁeld, tumor muta-
tional burden (TMB) is gaining signi ﬁcant importance with
its correlation to patient response to checkpoint inhibitor
chemotherapy. TMB is generally calculated using whole
exome sequencing using laborious hybrid-capture methods.However, targeted sequencing provides better coverage of
regions of interest at reduced costs. Here we present
CleanPlex
®technology for TMB analysis, a 4-hour cost-
effective target enriched NGS library preparation method.
We demonstrate excellent performance metrics using a
highly-multiplexed NGS panel that contains ~20,000amplicons covering 355 genes for TMB assessment.
Methods: Input of 20 ng of genomic DNA was used to
generate CleanPlex sequencing-ready libraries in a 3-stepworkﬂow combining target enrichment and library pre-
paration. The protocol includes an ultra-high multiplex PCR
step to amplify ~20,000 target regions of interest, a back-ground cleaning step to remove non-speci ﬁc PCR products,
and a ﬁnal PCR to add Illumina
®sequencing adapters and
sample indexes. Libraries were sequenced on IlluminaNextSeq
®platform. Sequencing metrics like on-target rates
were calculated, and variants were identi ﬁed using Paragon
Genomics ’variant calling algorithm.
Results: Using CleanPlex technology, this prototype
TMB panel exhibits >95% uniformity at 0.2X mean, limited
GC bias, and >94% detection rate for mutants with 5%allele frequencies. CleanPlex background cleaning step is
essential and removes undesirable PCR by-products.
Conclusion: CleanPlex technology is an ultra-high mul-
tiplexed PCR-based technology that generates consistent,
high quality amplicon libraries with high uniformity, low
GC bias, and sensitive variant calling even with ~20,000amplicons and with a work ﬂow under 4 hours and ideal for
TMB analysis.
E. Jan: None. L. Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. K. Pendleton: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc. Y. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. C. Li: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.
L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Own-
ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intel-
lectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. Z.
Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Para-
gon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc..
P12.151D
Inﬂuence of the tumorsuppressor gene ITIH5 on
different cervical carcinoma cell-speci ﬁc3 D
tumorspheroid models
C. Backsch
1, A. K. Daum1, A. Gille1, M. Stein1,
L. Jansen1, J. Clement2, W. Weigand3, I. B. Runnebaum1,
M. Dürst1
1Department of Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine,
Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany,2Department of
Hematology and Medical Oncology, Jena University
Hospital, Jena, Germany,3Institute for Inorganic and
Analytical Chemistry, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena,
Jena, Germany
Introduction: Progression from human papillomavirus-
induced premalignant cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia to
cervical cancer is driven by genetic and epigenetic events.Previous studies revealed a progressive down-regulation of
the gene ITIH5 in the course of cervical carcinogenesis.
Functional in vitro analyses con ﬁrmed a suppressive effect
of ITIH5 on relevant mechanisms for cancer progression in
conventional two-dimensional cell culture. Aim of the
current study is to investigate the in ﬂuence of ITIH5 (with
and without use of cytostatics) on different cervical
carcinoma cell-speci ﬁc 3D-tumorspheroid models.
Materials and Methods: ITIH5 was ectopically over-
expressed in SiHa and HeLa cells using retroviral trans-
duction. Cell line speci ﬁc multicellular tumor spheroids
(MCTS) are generated using the hanging-drop method.Proliferation-, migration-, invasion- as well as live/dead
assays and immunohistochemical analyses are performed toAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1603investigate the in ﬂuence of ITIH5 on MCTS formation
before and after treatment with different cytostatics.
Results: Functionally, ITIH5 overexpression signi ﬁcantly
suppressed tumor spheroid growth and spheroid invasive-
ness in both, SiHa and HeLa spheroids. Immunohisto-
chemical analyses revealed a signi ﬁcant reduction in cell
proliferation and hypoxia as well as an increase in apoptosis
upon ITIH5 overexpression. So far, an altered susceptibility
on cervical MCTS to routinely used cytostatic drug treat-ment could be not observed. Investigations with novel
cytotoxic metal complexes are also ongoing.
Conclusions: Our results provide further evidence of
ITIH5 possessing tumor suppressive properties in cervical
carcinogenesis. Possible effects of ITIH5 itself and on
chemotherapy of cervical carcinoma cell lines using 3Dtumorspheroid models may provide a new approach for
individualised therapy of cervical cancer in the future.
C. Backsch: None. A.K. Daum: None. A. Gille: None.
M. Stein: None. L. Jansen: None. J. Clement: None. W.
Weigand: None. I.B. Runnebaum: None. M.
Dürst: None.
P12.152A
FGFR3 and/or CDKN2A/2B somatic mutations arepresent with high frequency in patients with early stage
urothelial cancer
K. Popovska Jankovic
1, G. Bozinovski1, Z. Popov1,2,3,
A. J. Dimovski1
1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
2Zan Mitrev Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of,3University Clinic for Urology,
UKIM-Faculty of Medicine, Universtity "Ss Cyril andMethodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of
Urothelial cancer is one of the most common type of cancer
worldwide and the molecular defects associated with the
initiation of this tumor has great clinical importance.Several studies have implicated the involvement of FGFR3
and CDKN2A/2B genes in urothelial cancerogenesis. We
evaluated the frequency of the most common mutations inthe FGFR3 gene and deletions of the CDKN2A/2B genes in
snap-frozen tumors from 196 patients (163 males, 33
females) with early stage bladder cancers collectedimmediately after surgery. The methodology included
SNaPshot analysis for nine variants in FGFR3 gene
(S249C, Y375C, R248C, G372C, A393C, K652E/Q andK652M/T) and MLPA analysis for determination ofdeletions in CDKN2A/2B genes. A total of 65.2% of
patients had somatic defects in one of the two analyzed
genes of which 18.5% had only a deletion of CDKN2A/2B
genes, 24.1% had a mutation in the FGFR3 gene and 22.6%
had a combination of both defects. The most common
mutation was S249C (32.1%) followed by Y375C (6.5%).No signi ﬁcant difference was found in the distribution of
these defects between men and women, whereas a higher
frequency of defects were detected in patients >50 (64.6)compared to patients <50 years of age (28.5) (p<0.05).
These defects were found with higher frequency in patients
with early stage (77.3%) compared to patients with moreadvanced disease (30.0%) (p<0.05). Our results indicate
that molecular defects in FGFR3 and/or CDKN2A/2B are
important factors in the initiation of the urothelialcancerogeneis in patients with bladder cancer.
K. Popovska Jankovic: None. G. Bozinovski: None. Z.
Popov: None. A.J. Dimovski: None.
P12.153B
Population-based analysis of germline variations in theBAP1 gene in patients with uveal melanoma
P. E. Repo
1,2, R. Järvinen1,2, J. E. Jäntti1, S. Markkinen1,
M. Täll2, V. Raivio2, J. A. Turunen1,2, T. T. Kivelä2
1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland,
2University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland
Pathogenic germline variants in BRCA1-associated protein
1(BAP1 ) gene cause BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome
(BAP1-TPDS) with increased risk of several cancers,especially uveal melanoma (UM). Pathogenicity of loss-
of-function BAP1 variants is clear, as opposed to missense
and regulatory region variants. We sequenced coding,promoter, UTR, and intronic regions of BAP1 and analyzed
copy number variations in a nation-wide study, enrolling
432 of 533 consecutive Finnish UM patients diagnosedfrom 2010 to 2017, and one Finnish-Swedish UM family.
We analyzed BAP1 functions necessary for tumor suppres-
sion using nuclear localization and deubiquitinating activityassays. We found twenty rare variants, and classi ﬁedﬁve of
them as likely pathogenic. Two LOF variants (c.67 +1G>T;
c.1780_1781insT) are putative founder mutations, and bothabolished nuclear localization in vitro . The former as well
as two heterozygous exon 5 (c.281A>G) and 9 (c.680G>A)
missense variants reduced deubiquitinating activity. A deepintronic 25bp deletion in intron 1 caused aberrant splicing
in vitro . Based on functional studies and family cancer
history, three exon 13 missense variants were classi ﬁed as
benign. No copy number variations were found. Frequency1604of pathogenic variants was 1.9% (95% con ﬁdence interval,
0.8-3.6) overall and 25% among 16 UM families. To
establish the pathogenicity of BAP1 variants, family cancer
history and functional assays are essential. Pathogenic
variants outside BAP1 coding region can cause BAP1-
TPDS.
Funding: the Helsinki University Hospital Research
Fund; the Cancer Foundation; the Sigrid Jusélius Founda-
tion; the Eye and Tissue Bank Foundation; the FolkhälsanResearch Foundation; the Eye Foundation; the Mary and
Georg C. Ehrnrooth Foundation.
P.E. Repo: None. R. Järvinen: None. J.E. Jäntti: None.
S. Markkinen: None. M. Täll: None. V. Raivio: None. J.
A. Turunen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Thea Fin-land, Blueprint Genetics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Novartis Finland. T.T. Kivelä: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expertwitness); Modest; Santen Finland.
P12.154C
Expression of Wnt signalling pathway in colorectal and
breast cancer: Clinicopathological associations
M. Michelli
1, A. Zougros1, I. Chatziandreou1,
N. V. Michalopoulos2, G. Theodoropoulos3, E. Patsouris1,
A. A. Saetta1
11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,Greece,
2Department of Surgery, Attikon Hospital, School
of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece,31st Department of Propaedeutic
Surgery, Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,
Greece
Introduction: Wnt pathway regulates important cell
functions such as proliferation and migration and isdysregulated in colorectal and breast cancer. Thus, it is
considered an attractive therapeutic target with many drugs
being investigated in clinical trials.
Materials and Methods: The relative mRNA expression
levels of Wnt3 ligand, Frizzled7 receptor, and β-catenin in
102 samples of colon cancer and 88 samples of breastcancer were determined by RT-PCR and the ΔΔCt method.
Results: Regarding colorectal carcinomas, increased
relative mRNA expression levels of Wnt3 and Frizzled7were found in 60% and 53% whereas decreased mRNA
expression levels of β-catenin were observed in 57% of the
cases respectively. Statistically signi ﬁcant linear correlation
was observed between the expression of Wnt3 or Frizzled7
andβ-catenin. In addition, statistical signi ﬁcant correlationwas found between mRNA expression levels of β-catenin
and metastasis in lymph nodes. As far as breast carcinomas
are concerned, increased relative mRNA expression levels
of Wnt3 and β-catenin were found in 49% and 24% of
carcinomas, respectively. Interestingly, decreased relative
mRNA expression levels were observed in Frizzled7 in84% of the cases. Expression levels of β-catenin were sig-
niﬁcantly correlated with patients ’age and tumour grade,
whereas expression levels of Wnt3 were signi ﬁcantly cor-
related with tumour grade and expression levels of
β-catenin.
Conclusions: The study of Wnt pathway components is
of potential clinical importance considering the emergence
of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for the adminis-
tration of targeted therapies against Wnt pathway ligandsand receptors, which are used in ongoing clinical trials.
M. Michelli: None. A. Zougros: None. I. Chatzian-
dreou: None. N.V. Michalopoulos: None. G. Theodor-
opoulos: None. E. Patsouris: None. A.A. Saetta: None.
P12.155D
Mutational landscape of the nucleotide excision repair
(NER) de ﬁciency revealed from skin tumours of the
Xeroderma pigmentosum subgroups
A. A. Yurchenko
1, H. Fassihi2, A. Lehmann3, A. Sarasin4,
P. Kannouche5, S. Nikolaev1
1INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Université Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France,2National
Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, St John ’s Institute of
Dermatology, Guy ’s and St Thomas ’NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom,3Genome Damage and
Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, United
Kingdom,4Laboratory of Genetic Instability and
Oncogenesis, UMR8200 CNRS, University Paris-Sud,Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,
5UMR8200
CNRS, Stabilité Génétique et Oncogenèse, Gustave Roussy
Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France
Rare autosomal disease Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP) is
characterised by 1000 times increased risk of skin cancer. 8XP subgroups can be classi ﬁed as de ﬁcient in only global
NER (E, C); in both global and transcription coupled NER
(A, B, D, G, F) and in translesion synthesis (V). Wecharacterised genomic mutational landscapes of skin
tumours (n =10) in XPC, XPD and XPV subgroups
representing different types of de ﬁciencies and compared
them with tumour type matched sporadic cancers in order to
reveal their unique mutagenic properties. XPC samples
were characterised by high mutation load (80 mut/Mb) with3.5 times more di-nucleotide mutations (CC>TT 15%) than
in normal samples and very strong transcriptional bias inAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1605intensively transcribed genes (1:5.5 vs. 1:1.5). Excess in the
mutation load in XPC in late replication was lower than in
sporadic cancers (1.5 times, vs. 2.5 times). XPD tumour
demonstrated unique signature of transcription coupled
damage on actively transcribed genes and absence of
mutation enrichment in the late replicating regions. XPVtumors were characterised by unique mutational signature
with excess of CpCpN>CpTpN mutations and depletion of
mutations in late replicating regions. NpCpG context wasparticularly mutable in XPV and XPD skin tumours.
Moreover striking unique mutational properties of XP
subgroups in the context of nucleosomes and replicationfork polarity were observed. Our results reveal unique
mutagenic properties of major NER elements which can be
mechanistically associated with the diverse syndromemanifestations in XP patients and shed light on our
understanding of repair of UV damage in humans.
A.A. Yurchenko: None. H. Fassihi: None. A. Leh-
mann: None. A. Sarasin: None. P. Kannouche: None. S.
Nikolaev: None.
P13
Basic mechanisms in molecular and cytogenetics
P13.01A
Maternal mosaicism involving different 18p (micro-)deletions transmitted as a typical 18p deletion to a
patient with De Grouchy syndrome I
L. Pölsler
1, M. Locher1, M. Obwegeser2, C. Fauth1,
J. Zschocke1, S. Rudnik1
1Division of Human Genetics; Medical University
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,2Department of Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, LKH Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria
Complete loss of the short arm of chromosome 18 (18p-
deletion syndrome or DeGrouchy syndrome I) causes
cognitive impairment, ptosis, structural brain malforma-
tions, and other features. We describe a family in which the
mother of a child with 18p-syndrome showed several
different mosaic 18p deletions. Index patient was a 10-year-
old girl with intellectual disability (IQ 60), ptosis, white
matter abnormalities and mild facial dysmorphism. Hermother and two older brothers were healthy but had mild
learning disability.
SNP array in the girl showed near-total loss of 18p (14,7
MB deletion). Chromosome analysis of the mother indi-
cated a normal karyotype in 20/30 metaphases, with 18p
deletion in 10/30 metaphases (33%). Interphase FISH withprobes for the subtelomeric (D18S552, Vysis) and a more
proximal region (RP11-620N7, Empire Genomics, maps to18p11.23) revealed a more complex mosaic with two dis-
tinct cell lines: ~70% of cells carried a microdeletion of the
18p subtelomeric region, and ~30% the large 18p
-deletion
(involving 18p11.23). In oral buccosa of the mother the
ratio was 95% microdeletion and 5% larger deletion. The
karyotypes including FISH of the father and one brotherwere normal. SNP array analysis in the mother and FISH
analysis in the second brother are currently underway.
While deletions involving chromosome 18 are common,mosaicism for structural rearrangements is exceedingly rare.
This is the ﬁrst report of mosaicism for two different size
deletions of chromosome 18p with vertical transmission ofthe larger deletion to a symptomatic daughter.
L. Pölsler: None. M. Locher: None. M. Obwegeser:
None. C. Fauth: None. J. Zschocke: None. S.
Rudnik: None.
P13.02B
Extrapineal melatonin synthesis during aging
B. PopovicInstitute of Human Genetics, School of Dental Medicine,
Belgrade, Serbia
Diminished expression of many antioxidant factors during
aging could be responsible for developing of many diseasesassociated with aging. One of the most important scavenger
of ROS, with more ef ﬁcient properties than classical
antioxidant enzymes, is melatonin. The goal of our studywas to better understand the role of melatonin in the
antioxidant defense during aging in extrapineal organs.
Since two key enzymes are involved in melatonin
synthesis, AA-NAT and ASMT, their gene expression was
evaluated in the brain, liver, kidney, heart, skin, and intes-
tine, of 2.5 and 36-months-old Wistar rats. Also, as mela-tonin might in ﬂuence the expression of antioxidant
enzymes, the activity of SOD, CAT, and GSH in liver was
estimated. In addition, microelements (Cu, Zn,and Mn)were also measured in liver due to their role in regulating
the activity of antioxidant enzymes.
Theﬁnding of signi ﬁcantly increased expression of AA-
NAT and HIOMT in liver and skin of older animals sug-
gests that all organs do not age at the same rate. Moreover,
the maintaining of antioxidant defense in liver during agingwas con ﬁrmed by our results that the activity of CAT
enzyme was signi ﬁcantly higher in older ones, SOD activity
was decreased, while in both age groups there were nodifferences in GSH activity. Also, a less amount of micro-
elements in liver leads to decreased activity of SOD and
increased activity of CAT in older animals.1606In all, metabolic products of melatonin, the antioxidant
enzymes and microelements in extrapineal organs have an
important role in the aging process.
B. Popovic: None.
P13.03C
Transcriptomic analysis of liver organoids reveals
altered metabolic pathways in alpha 1 antitrypsin
deﬁciency
G. Gomez-Mariano1, N. Matamala1, S. Martínez1,
I. Justo2, A. Marcacuzco2, C. Jimenez2, S. Monzón3,
I. Cuesta3, M. Huch4, B. Martinez-Delgado1
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Health Carlos III
(ISCIII), Madrid, Spain,2General and Digestive Surgery
Department. Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain,
3Bioinformatics Unit, Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII),
Madrid, Spain,4Wellcome Trust –Medical Research
Council Stem Cell Institute. University Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Introduction: Alpha-1 antitrypsin de ﬁciency (AATD) is an
inherited disorder associated with lung and liver disease.The most common de ﬁciency allele is the Z allele
(Glu342Lys), which causes AAT polymerization and
accumulation within the hepatocytes, and predisposes toneonatal hepatitis, hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma. In addition, the reduction of circulating AAT
leads to lung tissue damage. Our objective was to studyhepatic disease in organoids from patients with AATD
using RNA sequencing technology.
Materials and Methods: We have established liver
organoids from AATD patients and controls. Organoids are
3D culture systems in which adult stem cells differentiate to
specialized cells under the appropriate culture conditions.We have performed RNA sequencing of liver organoids
from controls and patients with ZZ genotype with TruSeq ™
Stranded mRNA (Illumina) using a NextSeq System deIllumina. We have determined differentially expressed
genes between control and ZZ organoids and identi ﬁed the
pathways enriched for these genes.
Results: The transcriptomic analysis revealed 157 dif-
ferentially expressed genes in ZZ organoids versus control.
Interestingly, a number of genes altered in ZZ organoids areinvolved in glycan biosynthesis and metabolism, speci ﬁ-
cally glucosaminoglycans and glucoesphingolipids.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed new molecular targets
and pathways involved in AATD hepatic disease. Our
results demonstrate that organoids are appropriate systems
for modeling hepatic disease in AATD.
G. Gomez-Mariano: None. N. Matamala: None. S.
Martínez: None. I. Justo: None. A. Marcacuzco: None.C. Jimenez: None. S. Monzón: None. I. Cuesta: None. M.
Huch: None. B. Martinez-Delgado: None.
P13.04D
Whole-exome sequencing identi ﬁes heterozygous de
novo stop-loss mutations in HBB resulting in an
elongated β-globin chain in two children with severe
anemia
T. T. Koopmann
1, G. W. E. Santen1, Q. Wais ﬁsz2,
M. W. Elting2, F. J. Smiers1, J. L. Kerkhoffs3,P .J .d e
Pagter1, C. L. Harteveld1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,
2Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Haga Hospital, The Hague,
Netherlands
Background: β-Thalassemia is a genetic disease character-
ized by reduced or absence of β-globin gene (HBB)
expression. Some mutations in HBB may produce unstable,abnormal hemoglobins causing (haemolytic) anemia or
dominantly inherited β-thalassemia.
Methods: Two unrelated children presented with mac-
rocephaly and severe congenital anemia. They required
stem cell transplantations at ages 2 and 4 without clear
diagnosis. Since the parents of both probands had no familyhistory of anemia or abnormal Hb, thalassemia was
unsuspected. As genetic testing for variants in genes asso-
ciated with congenital anemia did not result in an expla-nation for the phenotype, whole-exome sequencing was
performed.
Results: We identi ﬁed two novel, de novo missense stop-
loss mutations in HBB (c.422T>C and c.422T>A). The
mutations identi ﬁed caused the loss of a stop codon and an
elongation of the translated β-globin chain of 21 amino
acids (167 a.a. instead of the usual 146)
due to a new stop codon in the 3' untranslated region
(3'UTR) of the HBB gene. The predicted β-globin chains
were p.(*148Glnext*21) or p.(*148Lysext*21); the latter
variant was called HbMokum.
Discussion: Using whole-exome sequencing, we identi-
ﬁed a de novo mutation in two previously undiagnosed
children with severe anemia. Both children carry an almost
identical heterozygous stop-loss mutation in HBB resultingin an elongated β-globin chain, which most likely produces
an unstable hemoglobin. Frameshift mutations in the HBB
gene resulting in elongated β-globin chain have been
described before, but resulted in shorter β-chains (max. 157
a.a.) and milder phenotypes than the mutations
described here.
T.T. Koopmann: None. G.W.E. Santen: None. Q.
Wais ﬁsz:None. M.W. Elting: None. F.J. Smiers: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1607J.L. Kerkhoffs: None. P.J. de Pagter: None. C.L.
Harteveld: None.
P13.06B
Characterization of genomic alterations of cytarabine-
resistant AML cells with FLT3-ITD mutation
J. H. Yen1, Z. A. Chen2, L. I. Lin3, P. Y. Chen4
1Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics,
Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan,2Department of Life
Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan,
3Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical
Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan,4Center of Medical Genetics, Hualien Tzu Chi
Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan
Introduction: Cytarabine (ara-C) is a key agent for
standard treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Despite its clinical ef ﬁcacy, chemoresistance to cytarabine
is still a common and serious problem in AML therapy. Thepresence of an internal tandem duplication (ITD) within the
FLT3 gene confers a worse prognosis in patients with
AML; however, its underlying mechanisms remain unclear.An ara-C resistant cell line with FLT3-ITD mutation (MV4-
11-R) had previously been established. In this study, we
aimed to characterize genomic changes for ara-C resistancein the MV4-11-R cells.
Materials and Methods: Cell growth rate was accessed
using counting or MTT assay. Cytogenetic alterations werestudied using traditional G-banding and spectral karyotyp-
ing (SKY) analysis. Gene expressions related to ara-C
metabolism, such as ENT1 and DCK, were investigatedusing qRT-PCR.
Results: Firstly, we con ﬁrmed that MV4-11 cells con-
tained the homozygous FLT3-ITD mutation as previouslyreported. The cell growth rate of MV4-11-R showed dra-
matically increase to 2.5-fold compared with that of native
MV4-11 cells at 96 h culture. Cytogenetic analysis revealedthat resistant and parent cells had a modal number of 47~49
chromosomes. The most prominent differences within them
are gain of many structural aberrations in resistant cells.Interestingly, 15% of resistant cells showed tetraploid kar-
yotypes and acquired additional structural rearrangements.
Conclusions: Our data found that the resistant clone
MV4-11-R exhibited stronger proliferative activity and
more complex karyotype than its parent cells. These results
suggest that acquisition of resistance to ara-C could beaccompanied by global genomic changes and possibly
involved chromosomal instability.
J.H. Yen: None. Z.A. Chen: None. L.I. Lin: None. P.Y.
Chen: None.P13.07C
Endoreduplication in cultured lymphocytes: genotoxic
or promising ﬁnding of compound testing
M. Hadzic, A. Haveric, S. Haveric
Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology,
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Introduction: Endoreduplication is a special type of
nuclear polyploidization presented by multiple, uniform
copies of chromosomes, more common in plants andinvertebrates. Phenomenon of endoreduplication is related
to homeostasis maintenance and tumorigenesis. Endopoly-
ploid cells are non-reproductive, but they may possess thepotential for DNA double-strand break repair and ability to
delay apoptosis. We have compared endoreduplications
induction in lymphocyte cultures from healthy donors andpsoriatic patients treated by the same antiproliferative
compound.
Materials and Methods: Chromosome aberrations ana-
lysis was conducted on 100 metaphases per each blood
sample and treatment. Lymphocytes were cultivated for 72
h, treated with potential antiproliferative compound, con-trols were set as well. In order to test antigenotoxic potential
of selected bio ﬂavonoids, they were added in normal lym-
phocyte cultures after induction of genotoxic effects bytested antiproliferative compound.
Results: Results have shown that the antiproliferative
compound treatment induces endoreduplications in bothpsoriatic and normal lymphocyte cultures but in different
conditions. In lymphocytes from psoriatic patients, endor-
eduplications occurred after addition of antiproliferativecompound, while the same effect was not observed in
normal lymphocytes. We recorded that selected bio-
ﬂavonoids induce endoreduplications in normal lympho-
cytes after genotoxic insults of tested compound thereby
inhibiting damage progress and reducing genotoxicity.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings show that endoreduplication
may be result of genotoxic activity of potential anti-
proliferative compound in psoriatic patients but not in
normal lymphocyte cultures where it may be a potentialmechanism for cell survival.
M. Hadzic: None. A. Haveric: None. S. Haveric: None.
P13.08D
Theﬁne-tuned balance between expression and
degradation regulates the cells' fate
A. S. Atemin, A. V. Ivanova, S. D. Uzunova,
R. Aleksandrov, S. S. Stoynov, M. N. Nedelcheva-Veleva
Institute of Molecular Biology, So ﬁ
a, Bulgaria1608In order to ensure their survivability cells have evolved
numerous mechanisms to control their gene expression.
These mechanisms have precise time and space temporal
regulation. To investigate them our laboratory used a state
of art microscopy system which allows long term live cellimaging and a variety of biochemical approaches. In
Saccharomyces cerevisiae we excreted the key protein
(Dia2) which is part of a modular ubiquitin ligase SCF(Skp1/cullin/F box) that plays a crucial role through normal
replication and as well as in the S-phase checkpoint
activation. Our results show that when this protein ismissing the replication control of the cell is dysregulated
and thus the genome expression is destabilized. Further-
more, the dia2 deletion strand also exhibited very intriguingphenotype regarding its cell cycle progression and protein
expression. We have observed the same phenotype in
higher eukaryotes when the destabilization of proteins isblocked via an inhibitor (MG132), which inhibits the
proteasome. This shows that these mechanisms are
universally conserved. We speculate that the protein whichplays the same role in higher eukaryotes is βTrCP. To
investigate that we have silenced the gene in Hela Kyoto
cell lines and we have preliminary results that this ubiquitinligase targets numerous proteins and thus regulates the cell
cycle and the whole genome expression.
A.S. Atemin: None. A.V. Ivanova: None. S.D. Uzu-
nova: None. R. Aleksandrov: None. S.S. Stoynov: None.
M.N. Nedelcheva-Veleva: None.
P13.09A
High-throughput analysis of driver mutations in FGFR3
by digital PCR
S. Moura, R. Salazar, I. Tiemann-Boege
Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz,
Austria
Introduction: Mutations occurring at increased frequencies
in the germline of older men in the FGFR3 gene were
suggested to confer a selective growth advantage tospermatogonial stem cells. These mutations have been
associated with several congenital disorders. Many more
mutations have been reported in FGFR3 for cancer, and it is
possible that these expand in the male germline with age.
Materials and Methods: To test an age-related expan-
sion of driver mutations, we are screening sperm and testesof different aged donors with two high-throughput techni-
ques: bead emulsion ampli ﬁcation (BEA) and allele-speci ﬁc
PCR. We are focusing on 13 de novo mutations occurring
within a ~3kb region of the FGFR3 , identi ﬁed in sperm
DNA by duplex sequencing (DS) in our laboratory.Results: With our approach, we veri ﬁed with BEA
similar levels of the c.1118A>G mutation in sperm
(~1.65x10
-5) as measured with DS. We observed an
increased mutation frequency with donor ’s age in
118 sperm donors of different ages. Moreover, there is a ~5-
fold difference between young ( ≤30 years) and middle-aged
donors (>45 years). Interestingly, analysis of ~30% of one
testis from an 80-year-old man did not show any high-
frequency clusters previously observed for other mutationsin the FGFR3 (TDII and ACH).
Conclusions: BEA can validate mutations discovered by
DS, and more importantly be used for a more detailed andhigh-throughput screening of age-related expansions of
these in the male germline (sperm and testes) to gain further
knowledge about the mechanisms in germline mutagenesisand their potential consequences.
Project funded by FWF (P30867-B26).
S. Moura: None. R. Salazar: None. I. Tiemann-
Boege: None.
P13.10B
CDH1 intronic Cis-Regulatory Elements control CDH1
gene tissue-speci ﬁc expression
C. São José
1,2,3, A. Ferro1, P. Oliveira1, J. Carvalho1,
H. Pinheiro1, D. Huntsman4,5,6, R. Acuna-Hidalgo3,7,
S. Mundlos3,7,8, C. Oliveira1,2
1Ipatimup/i3S, Institute of Molecular Pathology and
Immunology at the University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto,Portugal & Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde
(i3S), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2Faculty of
Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
5Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics (CTAG),
BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada,6Genetic
Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of BritishColumbia and Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
BC, Canada,
7Institute for Medical and Human Genetics,
Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany,8Berlin-
Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT),
Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
Introduction: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC)
is caused by germline CDH1 coding alterations. Despite not
having CDH1 coding mutations, nor in the remaining
exome, >50% of HDGC patients present germline mono-
allelic CDH1 expression, which may indicate a role for
CDH1 locus, beyond the coding sequence. We aimed at
dissecting the potential role of intronic Cis-RegulatoryAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1609Elements (iCREs) in an attempt to identify novel causes
of HDGC.
Materials and Methods: We performed a bioinformatics
analysis based on open chromatin pro ﬁles and prioritized
iCRE1 and iCRE8 for further studies. iCREs were cloned in
LacZ-reporter constructs and integrated into ColA1 locus of
mouse embryonic stem cells to generate transgenic mice.
Empty-vector mice were used as control for ColA1-driven
expression. To test tissue-speci ﬁcβ-galactosidase expres-
sion, endoderm (stomach, esophagus, duodenum, liver),
ectoderm (heart) and mesoderm (skin) tissues were dis-
sected. iCRE8 was sequenced in HDGC probands.
Results: While no obvious β-galactosidase expression
was observed for iCRE1 across tissues, in iCRE8 mice
embryos, tissue-speci ﬁc expression was detected in
endodermal-derived tissues (stomach, esophagus and duo-
denum), where E-cadherin exerts a primordial function.
iCRE8 sequence overlaps several genomic and epigenomicregulatory features, is mutated in one HDGC proband and is
being explored by 4C-seq and ATAC-seq.
Conclusion: iCRE8 is likely a CDH1 cis- regulatory
region important for CDH1 expression in the stomach, and
may encompass a novel target for CDH1 deleterious var-
iants in HDGC patients.
Funding: 1)The Solve-RD project has received funding
from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under grant agreement No 779257;2)FEDER/COMPETE, “POCI-01-0145-FEDER-030164 ”;
3)FCT Fellowship, “SFRH/BD/140796/2018 ”.
C. São José: None. A. Ferro: None. P. Oliveira: None.
J. Carvalho: None. H. Pinheiro: None. D. Huntsman:
None. R. Acuna-Hidalgo: None. S. Mundlos: None. C.
Oliveira: None.
P13.11C
Identi ﬁcation of a possible chimera following routine
peripheral blood screening after a trauma in a pregnant
woman
J. Knijnenburg
1, M. van Zwam2, K. de Graaff2,J .A .C .t e r
Huurne1, S. Bhagwandien-Bisoen1, M. Verschuren1,
S. G. J. Arkesteijn1, A. C. Schaap1, K. Kuipers-Heijboer1,
C. L. Harteveld1
1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands,2Reinier de Graaf Groep,
Delft, Netherlands
Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is a
benign condition caused by deletions in the beta-globin
gene cluster, or by point mutations in the gamma-globin
gene promoter sequences. In heterozygous carriers, 2 to30% of fetal type of hemoglobin (HbF) continues to be
expressed after birth. Offspring of a carrier of a deletiontype of HPFH has an increased risk for a hemoglobinopathy
if the partner is carrier of a mutation in the beta-globin
(HBB) gene, in which mutations are relatively frequent in
certain populations.
Peripheral complete blood count was performed in a
pregnant woman after a bike trauma, including ﬂow cyto-
metry and hemoglobin electrophoresis. This excluded feto-
maternal transfusion but showed a HbF fraction of 15%.
Additional testing showed a mosaic (delta-beta)0-thalasse-mia deletion, identifying the HPFH-type 2. This deletion
explains the elevated HbF, usually resulting in a HbF
fraction of 30%. To con ﬁrm the mosaic deletion, which may
explain the lower HbF fraction, SNP array was performed.
The mosaic deletion was con ﬁrmed, but surprisingly the B
allele frequency plot showed a genome-wide complex andpatchy chromosomal pattern which could be explained by
genetic chimerism, or alternatively, by an around 50%
contamination of the DNA sample with the fetus or a closerelative.
Short tandem repeat (STR) marker analysis was per-
formed and repeated with an independent blood sample.This test con ﬁrmed the genetic chimerism in the patient.
Since no Y chromosome contribution was seen, this chi-
meric state is most probably of no further clinical relevanceto the patient.
J. Knijnenburg: None. M. van Zwam: None. K. de
Graaff: None. J.A.C. ter Huurne: None. S. Bhagwan-
dien-Bisoen: None. M. Verschuren: None. S.G.J.
Arkesteijn: None. A.C. Schaap: None. K. Kuipers-Heij-
boer: None. C.L. Harteveld: None.
P13.13A
Gain-of-function mutations in KCNN3 encoding the
small-conductance Ca
2+-activated K+channel SK3
cause Zimmermann-Laband syndrome
C. K. Bauer1, P. E. Schneeberger2, F. Kortüm2,
J. Altmüller3,4, F. Santos-Simarro5, L. Baker6, J. Keller-
Ramey7, S. M. White8,9, P. M. Campeau10, K. W. Gripp6,
K. Kutsche2
1Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany,2Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
3Cologne Center for Genomics University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,4Center for Molecular Medicine
Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne,Germany,
5Sección de Genética Clínica, Instituto de
Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital
Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid,Spain,
6Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont
Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States,16107GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,8Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children ’s Research
Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia,
9Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia,10Department of Pediatrics, Sainte-
Justine Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC,Canada
Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is characterized by
coarse facial features with gingival enlargement, intellectual
disability (ID), hypertrichosis, and hypoplasia or aplasia of
nails and terminal phalanges. De novo missense mutations
inKCNH1 encoding the voltage-gated K
+channel Eag1
have been identi ﬁed in a proportion of subjects with ZLS.
We report de novo missense variants in KCNN3 in three
individuals with typical clinical features of ZLS. KCNN3
(SK3/KCa2.3) constitutes one of three members of the
small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+(SK) channels that
are part of a multiprotein complex consisting of the pore-
forming channel subunits, the constitutively bound Ca2+
sensor calmodulin, protein kinase CK2 and protein
phosphatase 2A. CK2 modulates Ca2+sensitivity of the
channels by phosphorylating SK-bound calmodulin. Patch-
clamp whole-cell recordings of KCNN3 channel-expressingCHO cells demonstrated that disease-associated mutations
result in gain-of function of the mutant channels, character-
ized by increased Ca
2+sensitivity leading to faster and
more complete activation of KCNN3 mutant channels.
Pretreatment of cells with the CK2 inhibitor 4,5,6,7-
tetrabromobenzotriazole revealed basal inhibition of wild-type and mutant KCNN3 channels by CK2. Analogous
experiments with the KCNN3 p.Val450Leu mutant pre-
viously identi ﬁed in a family with portal hypertension
indicated basal constitutive channel activity and thus a
different gain-of-function mechanism compared to the ZLS-
associated mutant channels. With the report on de novo
KCNK4 mutations in subjects with facial dysmorphism,
hypertrichosis, epilepsy, ID, and gingival overgrowth, we
propose to combine the phenotypes caused by mutations inKCNH1 ,KCNK4 andKCNN3 in a group of neurological
potassium channelopathies caused by an increase in K
+
conductance.
C.K. Bauer: None. P.E. Schneeberger: None. F.
Kortüm: None. J. Altmüller: None. F. Santos-Simarro:
None. L. Baker: None. J. Keller-Ramey: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx, Gaithersburg,
Maryland, USA. S.M. White: None. P.M. Campeau:
None. K.W. Gripp: None. K. Kutsche: None.
P13.14B
A novel 22q11.2 deletion mediated by LCR22A-G andmeta-analysis in a Greek-Cypriot cohortI. Papaevripidou
1, A. Alexandrou1, P. Evangelidou1,
L. Kousoulidou1, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou2,3,
G. A. Tanteles2, C. Sismani1,4
1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus
Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Clinical
Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre,Nicosia, Cyprus,
4The Cyprus School of Molecular
Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Chromosomal region 22q11.2 is susceptible to genomic
rearrangements due to low-copy repeat (LCR) clusters.These high homology sequences mediate meiotic non-
allelic homologous recombination, resulting in copy
number variations (CNVs), the most common beingDiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome (MIM# 192430,
188400).
Here we present a novel deletion within 22q11.2, indi-
cating a novel recombination event mediated by LCR A-G.
In light of this new ﬁnding, we re-investigated the CNVs
within 22q11.2 by revisiting array-CGH data from 2700prenatal and postnatal cases of Greek-Cypriot patients with
intellectual disability and multiple congenital anomalies.
The novel LCR22A-G deletion was identi ﬁed in a fetus
with high NT and atrioventricular septal defect and
encompassed DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial Syndrome and the
22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome (MIM# 611867). This istheﬁrst report of a LCR22A-G deletion revealing the
occurrence of a novel recombination event.
The frequencies of CNVs mediated by different LCRs
were shown to be in agreement with published literature. A
total of 32/2700 individuals (1.2%) carried CNVs (18
deletions and 14 duplication) mediated by LCR22A to Hwith the most common (43.75%) spanning the proximal
LCR22A-D (14/32). In 15.6% (4/32) and 6.25% (2/32) the
CNVs were mediated by the central LCR22B-D andLCR22C-D respectively. The remaining were classi ﬁed in
the distal group with one D-F (3.12%), three F-H (9.4%),
two F-G (6.25%), one G-H (3.12%) and one D-G (3.12%).
Newly discovered CNVs within 22q11.2 region may help
elucidate pathological genetic mechanisms leading to
abnormal phenotypes, thus contributing to better under-standing, management and prognosis for 22q11.2 CNV
carriers.
I. Papaevripidou: None. A. Alexandrou: None. P.
Evangelidou: None. L. Kousoulidou: None. V. Christo-
phidou-Anastasiadou: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. C.
Sismani: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1611P13.15C
Mosaic ring chromosome 13 syndrome: approach to
conventional and molecular cytogenetics
E. Genis, A. Aydin Gumus, D. Gun Bilgic, S. Cam
Manisa Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey
Introduction: Ring chromosome 13 is a rare chromosome
abnormality in which the ends of chromosome 13 join
together to form a ring shape. When a ring forms, there may
be missing genes where the chromosome's ends fusetogether. The aim of this study was to investigate the
formation of ring 13 chromosomes by cytogenetic and
molecular techniques.
Methods: Standard conventional cytogenetic method
with 72 hour-culture was done to peripheral blood lym-
phocytes. Molecular analysis was performed with sub-telomeric FISH and SNP array.
Results: A 5-month-old baby girl, was borned 2530 gr
weight, 36-week, from a couple ’s second IVF pregnancy
was sent to us with suspicion of chromosomal anomaly. Her
parents were the third generation consanguineous. On
physical examination, umbilical hernia, VSD, plumpcheeks, depressed nasal bridge, small mouth-thin lip,
hypoplastic earlobe and tragus, normal genital development
were found. According to ISCN 2016, in 30 metaphaseswith G-band; 46,XX karyotypes in 3 metaphases; 46,XX,r
(13) chromosomes in the other metaphases were found.
Normal constitutional karyotypes (46,XY and 46,XX) weredetected in her parents. After G-banding, FISH study with
100 nucleus / 20 metaphase and locus-speci ﬁc subtelomeric
probes showed no deletion in ring chromosomes. The SNParray (illumina 656K) was performed to verify the FISH
method, no deletion or duplication was detected. Discus-
sion:A few de novo ring 13 chromosome familial caseshave been reported in the literature. This is a rare case of
individuals with complete-ring 13 chromosome who have
normal phenotypes and no loss of genetic material.
E. Genis: None. A. Aydin Gumus: None. D. Gun Bil-
gic:None. S. Cam: None.
P13.16D
Investigating the potential role of MPHOSPH6 in
human telomere length regulation
F. Gibson, P. S. Braund, M. J. Denniff, N. J. Samani,
V. Codd
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom
Telomere length is associated with atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease and cancer, both of which are leadingcauses of mortality. Recent studies identi ﬁed genetic
variants in seven loci that associate with human leukocyte
telomere length (LTL). Many contain genes known to
regulate telomere length, e.g. components of the telomere
capping SHELTERIN complex or of the telomerase enzyme
required for telomere length maintenance. However, someloci contain no candidate, suggesting they may contain
genes with previously unidenti ﬁed roles in telomere
biology.
Our most recent analysis (unpublished) identi ﬁed a region
containing MPHOSPH6 that associates with LTL at a level
of genome-wide signi ﬁcance (P<5x10
-8). Bioinformatics
analysis revealed that the LTL associated variants also
strongly associate with MPHOSPH6 expression changes,
suggesting a link between MPHOSPH6 expression andLTL. MPHOSPH6 is an RNA exosome component and is
involved in the maturation of snoRNAs in yeast, therefore
we hypothesised MPHOSPH6 could affect LTL throughregulating telomerase RNA (TERC) maturation and con-
sequently telomerase activity.
We reduced MPHOSPH6 expression via siRNA-
mediated knockdown in HCT116 cells and investigated
TERC expression using RT-qPCR and telomerase activity
using the telomerase repeated ampli ﬁcation protocol assay.
Signi ﬁcant reductions of MPHOSPH6 expression (4.61-
fold decrease, p<0.01, n =3) were achieved independently
with two siRNAs. This resulted in substantial loss of telo-merase activity (4.37-fold decrease, p<0.01, n =3) and
reduction of TERC RNA levels (2.06-fold decrease,
p<0.01, n =3).
These data indicate a role for MPHOSPH6 in TERC
processing and telomerase activity.
This work is supported by the van Geest Heart and Car-
diovascular Diseases Research Fund and the University of
Leicester.
F. Gibson: None. P.S. Braund: None. M.J. Denniff:
None. N.J. Samani: None. V. Codd: None.
P13.17A
Molecular weight of a protein-DNA complex can be
inferred from native gel electrophoresis
T. Schwarz
1, Y. Striedner1, K. Haase1, J. Kemptner2,
N. Zeppezauer1, P. Hermann3, I. Tiemann-Boege1
1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz,
Austria,2Red Cross Blood Transfusion Center Upper
Austria, MedCampus II, Johannes Kepler University, Linz,Austria,
3Department of Applied Statistics, Johannes Kepler
University, Linz, Austria
Introduction: PRDM9 is a multi-domain protein respon-
sible to determine the locations of meiotic recombination1612hotspots by recognizing speci ﬁc DNA motifs via its
repetitive array of zinc ﬁngers (ZnFs). Recently it was
shown that PRDM9 forms an active multimer; however,
neither the size nor the factors inducing the multimerization
are known.
Materials and Methods: We performed in vitro binding
studies, based on gel shift assays, to infer the size of the
protein multimer using DNA fragments that increased in
length, containing either one or two speci ﬁc target sites. We
tested different protein constructs including truncated pro-
tein versions, and analyzed the molecular weight and the
corresponding migration distance of binding complexes inrelationship to known standards to further determine the
protein stoichiometry.
Results: We observed that PRDM9 multimerizes to an
active trimer which is formed within the repetitive DNA-
binding ZnF domain and 5 out of 11 ZnF repeats are suf-
ﬁcient to form the trimer. Moreover, we demonstrated that
only one of the ZnF arrays within the trimer contacts the
DNA, whereas the remaining two ZnFs likely perform ZnF-
ZnF interaction to maintain the multimeric conformation.
Conclusions: In this work, we report a method using
native gel electrophoresis to infer the size, as well as, to
investigate the molecular interaction of a multimeric proteinwith DNA. This simple method is suitable especially for
proteins with complex structures or repetitive motifs as it is
the case for many ZnF proteins.
This project was funded by FWF P27698.
T. Schwarz: None. Y. Striedner: None. K. Haase:
None. J. Kemptner: None. N. Zeppezauer: None. P.
Hermann: None. I. Tiemann-Boege: None.
P13.19C
Nicking of double-stranded nucleosomal cell free DNA
in sepsis patients
H. Helgason
1, B. Gudmundsson1,2, H. G. Thormar1,3,
S. Karason1,2, K. Sigvaldason2, J. J. Jonsson1,2
1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland,2Landspitali,
Reykjavik, Iceland,3Lifeind ehf. (BioCule), Reykjavik,
Iceland
Introduction: Elevated levels of cell free DNA (cfDNA) in
plasma are associated with various medical emergenciessuch as sepsis and stroke and trauma. In sepsis, levels of
cfDNA correlate with disease severity. The goal of this
study was to examine if structural damage in cfDNA ispresent in sepsis patients.
Materials and Methods: Samples were collected from
nine consenting patients (age 18 +) admitted with severe
sepsis to the two ICU´s of Landspitali from December 2016
until May 2017. Samples were also collected from ﬁvehealthy controls. The sample DNA was gently isolated
using the Genomic Mini AX kit according to protocol.
Northern Lights assay (NLA) was used to detect structural
damage in cfDNA such as single/double-stranded breaks,
bends, and inter/intra strand links. Study was approved by
National Bioethics Committee and Icelandic DataAuthority.
Results: Damage in cfDNA was observed in all the sepsis
patients including: Nicking in double-stranded nucleosomalfragments, incomplete degradation of nucleosomal DNA,
and lesions causing bending of DNA molecules. Elevated
levels of plasma cfDNA were lowered after treatment andcfDNA damage decreased.
Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst demon-
stration of cfDNA damage in sepsis patients. Damage incfDNA might re ﬂect increased damage to DNA or lack of
repair associated with cell death prior to release into the
bloodstream. Alternatively, these results might re ﬂect
damage to nucleosomal DNA in plasma. Damage in cfDNA
might contribute to intense immune stimulation in sepsis
patients and be a biomarker for sepsis. Icelandic Technol-ogy Development Fund 142709-0613
H. Helgason: None. B. Gudmundsson: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-
niﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). H.G. Thormar: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Lifeind ehf.
(BioCule). B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col-laborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). S.
Karason: None. K. Sigvaldason: None. J.J. Jonsson: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; LIfeind ehf. (BioCule). E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule).
P13.20D
Small supernumerary marker chromosomes as a reason
for infertility can only be reliably assessed by
cytogenetics & molecular cytogenetics
A. B. H. Al-Rikabi
Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany
Impaired spermatogenesis is indicative for gross chromo-
somal anomalies, including small supernumerary marker
chromosomes (sSMCs). sSMCs can easily, reliable and forAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1613due to their speci ﬁc features like mosaicism and often pure
heterochromatic constitution be exclusively identi ﬁed by a
standard chromosome analyses. Almost 200 cases were
included in this study, which could show that sSMC can be
optimally characterized by single cell directed (molecular)
cytogenetics. In infertile males sSMC derive predominantlyfrom one of the acrocentric chromosomes, especially #15,
#14 and #22. Altered spermiograms were found in 62% of
these male sSMC-carriers, while the remainder ones hadinfertility in connection with repeated abortions in partner-
ship. Meta analyses for detectability of sSMC by array-
comparative genomic hybridization revealed that 81-87% ofthe cases would not have been picked up by exclusive use
of this approach. As impaired spermatogenesis is known to
be indicative for gross chromosomal anomalies in infertilemale patients, it is obvious from this study that sSMC
presence also needs to be considered. However, sSMC can
only be reliably detected by standard karyotyping and notby modern high throughput approaches, as proven here.
A.B.H. Al-Rikabi: None.
P13.21A
The Fanconi anemia proteins FANCM and FAAP24
limit telomere instability and BLM/Pol δ-dependent
break induced replication in the alternative lengthening
of telomeres (ALT) pathway
M. Meyn
1,2,3,J .T e2, M. Komosa2, F. Al-Azri2,3
1University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI, United
States,2The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada,3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
~15% of human tumours use the Alternative Lengthening of
Telomere (ALT)mechanism to maintain telomeres. We
previously demonstrated that depletion of FANCD2, amember of the BRCA/Fanconi anaemia DNA repair
pathway, causes a hyper-ALT phenotype. We now extend
our analysis to the DNA translocase FANCM and its partnerFAAP24.
Weﬁnd siRNA depletion of FANCM or FAAP24 in ALT
human cells results in increased replicative stress at telo-meres, rapid telomere elongation, and 4-5 fold increases in
ECTR DNA number. Importantly, FANCD2 localizes to
telomeric foci in FANCM or FAAP24 depleted ALT cells,suggesting that FANCM and FAAP24 protect against
telomeric replicative stress independently of other Fanconi
anaemia proteins.
siRNA depletion of the BLM DNA helicase or the pol δ
DNA polymerase in ALT cells resulted in telomere short-
ening and markedly fewer ECTR DNA molecules. Deple-tion also suppressed the excessive ECTR production and
increased telomere length seen in FANCM and FAAP24-deﬁcient ALT cells, suggesting that these abnormalities are
an exaggeration of the ALT phenotype.
Our results support models in which failed telomeric
replication forks give rise to DNA breaks and gaps used by
BLM/pol δ-dependent break induced replication to drive
ALT and produce ECTR DNA. FANCM and FAAP24restrain ALT by preventing collapse of stalled telomeric
replication forks. Consequently, loss of FANCM or
FAAP24 increases the natural substrate for ALT, failedtelomeric replication forks, which results in a hyper-ALT
phenotype. As the hyper-ALT phenotype is associated with
cell death, disruption of the BRCA/Fanconi anemia path-way may be a novel treatment strategy for ALT tumours.
M. Meyn: None. J. Te: None. M. Komosa: None. F. Al-
Azri: None.
P13.22B
A Molecular diagnosis of WOREE syndrome thatrequired genome sequencing to identify the second hit
pathogenic variant in WWOX
A. Plagos
1, P. Callier1,2, A. Bruel1,3, S. Moutton1,4,
M. Chevarin1,3, T. Jouan1,3, F. Tran Mau Them1,3,
Y. Duffourd1,3, L. Faivre1,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3,4,
A. Vitobello1,3, C. Philippe1,3
1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, Dijon, France,2Laboratoire de
génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plate-forme
Hospitalo-Universitaire de Biologie, CHU Dijon,, Dijon,
France,3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic
génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU
Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4Centre de Référence
maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement etsyndromes malformatifs », centre de génétique, FHU-
TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France
Introduction: Bi-allelic germline variants in WWOX (WW
domain-containing oxidoreductase) have been implicated in
spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and WOREE syndrome(WWOX-related epileptic encephalopathy). We report here
a molecular diagnosis of WOREE syndrome that required
genome sequencing (GS) to identify the second hit.
Material and Methods: Solo exome sequencing (ES)
followed by trio GS were performed on a girl presenting
with generalized hypotonia, myoclonic epilepsy, ataxia,psychomotor delay, stereotypies, strabismus and cerebral
atrophy.
Results: After ES, two compound heterozygous missense
mutations in SLC30A10 were considered as candidate
variations for the disease in this patient and classi ﬁed of
unknown signi ﬁcance. A missense variation (p.Thr12Arg)
inWWOX without any other variation in a gene associated
with an autosomal recessive encephalopathy did not1614particularly catch our attention at ﬁrst during analysis of ES
data. The identi ﬁcation of a second hit was only possible
after GS which revealed a complex CNV consisting of two
intronic deletions in introns 4 and 5 associated with an
inversion of the ﬁfth exon of WWOX. The deletions/
inversion was con ﬁrmed at the genomic level for both
intronic junction fragments. RNA studies showed that this
intragenic rearrangement resulted in abnormal pre-mRNA
splicing.
Conclusions: GS allowed us to identify the second hit
pathogenic variant in a patient heterozygous for a missense
variant after ES. This compound heterozygous genotype islikely responsible for the severe epileptic encephalopathy in
this patient, a phenotype consistent with a WOREE syn-
drome. Interestingly, this patient is the ﬁrst one presenting a
WWOX-related phenotype associating epileptic encepha-
lopathy and ataxia.
A. Plagos: None. P. Callier: None. A. Bruel: None. S.
Moutton: None. M. Chevarin: None. T. Jouan: None. F.
Tran Mau Them: None. Y. Duffourd: None. L. Faivre:
None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Vitobello: None. C.
Philippe: None.
P13.23C
Balanced X-autosome translocations and premature
ovarian failure are associated with altered expression of
growth factors, junction organization and immunepathways
A. Di-Battista
1,2, M. Moyses-Oliveira3, M. Zamariolli1,
M. Melaragno1, A. Reymond2
1Universidade Federal de S ão Paulo, S ão Paulo, Brazil,
2University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,3Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States
Patients with balanced X-autosome translocations and
premature ovarian failure (POF) are an interesting paradigm
to study positioning effect of chromosome segments. Theypresent breakpoints that do not disrupt genes related to the
phenotype and map within cytobands Xq13-Xq21, from
which 80% cluster in Xq21. As deletions within Xq21 donot cause POF, and since different breakpoints and
translocation with different autosomes lead to the same
phenotype, we hypothesized a “position effect ”as possible
mechanism. We ﬁne-mapped the breakpoints in six patients
with POF and balanced Xq-autosome translocations,
established lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients andmatched female controls and pro ﬁled their transcriptome
through RNA-seq. The 68 genes differentially expressed in
the patients ’group are enriched for genes encoding
important proteins for the organization of cell junctions
and the immune response. Previous transcriptome studiespinpointed that cellular assembly and maintenance are
among the most expressed pathways in ovarian cells.
Additionally, GWAS showed that immune pathway-related
genes were associated with age at normal menopause,
allowing to postulate that genes involved in this regulation
could also be involved in POF. As the perturbed transcriptsare neither mapping to the X chromosome, nor to the
autosome breakpoint, this might indicate that the effect is
indirect, and the phenotype is triggered by perturbations ofnormal contacts between genes and their regulatory
elements. To further challenge this model, we are currently
assessing the chromatin accessibility of the same cell lines.These results should help elucidating the impact of
derivative chromosomes repositioning within interphase
nuclei. Financial support: FAPESP#2017/20847-9.
A. Di-Battista: None. M. Moyses-Oliveira: None. M.
Zamariolli: None. M. Melaragno: None. A.
Reymond: None.
P14
New diagnostic approaches - Technical aspects - Quality
control
P14.001D
Speci ﬁc genotype variants have distinct 3D facial gestalt
morphometry: pilot study on Czech cases with 16p11.2microdeletions / microduplications and STAT3 variants
M. Havlovicová
1, V. Moslerová1, J. Drábová1,
H. Z ůnová1,T .R a špličková1, M. Malíková1,
R. Kremlíková Pourová1, P. Tesner1, V. Zoubková1,
A.Šedivá2, D. Novotná1, M. Macek jr.1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical
Faculty of Charles University and University HospitalMotol, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Department of
Immunology, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University
and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic
Craniofacial assessment is instrumental in the diagnostics of
syndromic disorders, where typical facial features lead toetiological diagnosis. However, massively parallel sequen-
cing brought the commonly applied “genotype ﬁrst”
diagnostic strategy. In such cases 3D facial morphometry(3D) digitalizes patients' facial phenotype and enables
phenotype driven variant prioritization.
Here we report 2 groups of syndromic cases versus age
and sex-matched population controls. Firstly, patients with
recurrent microdeletions / microduplications in the 16p11.2
proximal region (diagnosed by aCGH, SNP array, FISH andMLPA) who had similar pattern in both CNVs, which were
only partially mirrored and were more pronounced in casesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1615with microdeletions. These 3D observations are in accor-
dance with previously reported differential penetrance of
other phenotypic features (e.g. head circumference, BMI),
which is in general lower in cases with microduplications in
patients with 16p11.2 syndrome. Secondly, we analyzed 2
cases with combined immunode ﬁciency and pathogenic
variants in STAT3 with one having a loss of function, while
the other has a gain of function. Interestingly, reverse 3D
phenotyping found almost “inverse ”facial features.
Speci ﬁc patterns of 3D facial phenotype and also a certain
degree of mirroring of phenotypes in opposite genotypes
have been found in presented groups of patients. Our cur-rent results support the use of 3D as a useful tool in ana-
lyzing and comparing facial features, including
characterization of the overall age-speci ﬁc facial gestalt in
syndromes without consistent facial phenotype and/or in
ultrarare genetic disorders where there are limited data on
their facial phenotype.
Supported by CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014, LM2015091, 17-
29423A and 00064203.
M. Havlovicová: None. V. Moslerová: None. J. Drá-
bová: None. H. Zůnová: None. T. Ra špličková: None. M.
Malíková: None. R. Kremlíková Pourová: None. P.
Tesner: None. V. Zoubková: None. A.Šedivá: None. D.
Novotná: None. M. Macek jr.: None.
P14.002A
Identi ﬁcation of disease causing aberrant splice events in
lymphocytes
M. Gur, A. Shaag, O. Elpeleg
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel
Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) revolutio-
nized the ﬁeld of Human Genetics with a quick and accurate
method to identify disease causing variants, with diagnostic
rates of approximately 25-50%. Whole genome sequencing(WGS) improves the diagnostic rate, but not dramatically,
mainly due to an interpretation gap, yet to be closed.
RNAseq was suggested as a complementary method,allowing direct observation of the transcriptome and the
identi ﬁcation of missplicing events derived from deep
intronic or coding sequences variants, that are dif ﬁcult to
interpret, even when identi ﬁed with WES or WGS.
Although RNAseq was proved to improve diagnostic yield,
the need to obtain RNA from the relevant disease tissue isan obstacle to implementing it as a clinical method.
Methods: 56 cases of varied phenotypes were tested by
PCR for speci ﬁc gene missplicing or abnormal expression
in RNA extracted from lymphocytes. Most cases were
identi ﬁed with WES, where a splice variant was suspected.Results: 27%(15/56) of tested genes were not expected to
be expressed in whole blood according to the GTEx data-
base, but only in 5%(3/56) cases we were not able to detect
a transcript. 23 case (41%) validated the disease causing
variant, resulted in misspliced transcripts.
Conclusions: The cases validated with RNA extracted
from lymphocytes included developmental delay, hypoto-
nia, ataxia and other phenotypes not involving the circu-
lating system, demonstrating the feasibility of detectingaberrant splicing events in an accessible tissue, suggesting
that improving the ability to detect rare transcripts with
RNAseq, will allow this method to serve as a clinicaldiagnostic tool.
M. Gur: None. A. Shaag: None. O. Elpeleg: None.
P14.003B
Sequencing the previously unsequencable using
ampli ﬁcation-free targeted enrichment powered by
CRSIPR-Cas9
J. Ekholm, Y. Tsai, I. McLaughlin, B. Galvin, J. ZieglePaciﬁcs Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States
Genomic regions with extreme base composition bias and
repetitive sequences have long proven challenging for
targeted enrichment methods, as they rely upon some formof ampli ﬁcation. Similarly, most DNA sequencing technol-
ogies struggle to faithfully sequence regions of low
complexity. This has especially been trying for repeatexpansion disorders such as Fragile X disease, Huntington
disease and various Ataxias, where the repetitive elements
range from several hundreds of bases to tens of kilobases.We have developed a robust, ampli ﬁcation-free targeted
enrichment technique, called No-Amp Targeted Sequen-
cing, that employs the CRISPR/Cas9 system. In conjunctionwith SMRT Sequencing, which delivers long reads
spanning the entire repeat expansion, high consensus
accuracy, and uniform coverage, these previously inacces-sible regions are now accessible. This method is completely
ampli ﬁcation-free, therefore removing any PCR errors and
biases from the experiment. Furthermore, this techniquealso preserves native DNA molecules, allowing for direct
detection and characterization of epigenetic signatures. The
No-Amp method is a two-day protocol that is compatiblewith multiplexing of multiple targets and multiple samples
in a single reaction, using as little as 1 μg of genomic DNA
input per sample. We have successfully targeted a numberof repeat expansion disorder loci ( HTT,FMR1 ,ATXN10 ,
TCF4 ,C9orf72 ) with alleles as long as >2700 repeat unites
(>13 kb). Using the No-Amp method we have isolatedhundreds of individual on-target molecules, allowing for
reliable repeat size estimation, mosaicism detection and1616identi ﬁcation of interruption sequences - all aspects of
repeat expansion disorders which are important for better
understanding the underlying disease mechanisms.
J. Ekholm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio. Y. Tsai: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio. I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio. B. Galvin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio. J. Ziegle: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio.
P14.005D
Finland ’s largest next generation biobank provides
valuable resources for genomics research
A. Joensuu1,2, K. Silander1, M. Perola1,2, S. Soini1
1THL Biobank, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland,2Research Program for Clinical and
Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Background: Studying the genetics of complex diseases
requires large genotyped datasets of tens of thousands ofindividuals, while whole-exome (WES) or whole-genome
(WGS) sequencing data is often necessary for studying rare
variants. High-quality analyses require high-quality pheno-type data and well-de ﬁned disease endpoints. Since 1992
the Finnish National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL)
has systematically collected DNA samples from allparticipants of its health examination surveys. These
samples have now been processed, and vast amounts of
genomic data is available to researchers through THLBiobank.
Materials and Methods: THL Biobank collections
include genetic data from >10 Finnish study cohorts. Cur-rently the collections include: GWAS chip data N>74,000,
of which >50,000 imputed in the FinnGen project to a high-
coverage population-speci ﬁc reference panel (N>100,000
reached within a year); WES N>12,500; WGS N>2,000;
methylation data N>500; gene expression data N>550. All
study participants can be followed up (for up to 25 years)from national registers for disease endpoints and drugpurchases, and the vast majority has wide availability of
questionnaire and laboratory variables. Additionally, there
are cells available for >10,000, RNA for >3,000 and NMR
metabolomics for >40,000 of these.
Results and Conclusions: THL Biobank data is available
for research use for researchers and companies worldwide.Since 2015, 98 biobank projects have been initiated,
including interesting projects ranging from pharmacoge-
nomics and returning genetic data to study participants tocardiovascular and cancer research. Of the biobank pro-
jects 93% (91/98) have included genomic data, thus genetic
data is of high interest for researchers seeking biobankmaterial.
A. Joensuu: None. K. Silander: None. M. Perola:
None. S. Soini: None.
P14.006A
Splinted ligation adapter tagging (SPLAT), a sensitiveand versatile library preparation method for single
stranded DNA
A. Raine, U. Liljedahl, J. Nordlund
SNP&SEQ Technology Platform, National Genomics
Infrastructure (NGI), Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala,
Sweden
Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) com-
bined with bisul ﬁte conversion is the gold standard
technique for interrogation of DNA methylation levels.However, sample preparation for whole genome bisul ﬁte
sequencing (WGBS) is challenging due to the side effects of
the bisul ﬁte treatment causing DNA strand breakage and
single strandedness. We recently developed Splinted
Ligation Adapter Tagging (SPLAT), a sensitive library
preparation method for WGBS (Raine et al, 2017, NAR).To evaluate platform-related bias, we have evaluated
SPLAT in comparison with commercial WGBS library
preparation kits on different Illumina platforms (Raine et al,2018, PLoS One).
Materials and Methods: We have optimized the SPLAT
protocol for preparing sequencing libraries from samplescontaining low quantities of single-stranded DNA or mix-
tures of single/double-stranded DNA. This includes samples
of ultra low-input (picograms) and direct WGBS librarypreparation from cells.
Results and Conclusion: We show that SPLAT is a fast
simple and cost ef ﬁcient library preparation method that
produces sequencing libraries of high complexity, uniform
genome coverage and compares favorably to commercial
WGBS kit. Moreover, SPLAT can be applied to low (andAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1617ultra-low) levels of DNA and may be useful for cell-free
(liquid biopsy) DNA library preparation.
A. Raine: None. U. Liljedahl: None. J.
Nordlund: None.
P14.007B
BRCA germline mutation detection in cervical
exfoliated cells by next-generation sequencing
M. He, M. Li, C. Huang, Z. Mei, F. Chen, H. Jiang
MGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, ChinaIntroduction: Female deleterious germline BRCA1 and
BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) gene mutation are at increased risk fordeveloping breast or ovarian cancer.
1The aim of this study
was to develop an NGS-based work ﬂow for BRCA
mutation screening in cervical exfoliated cells, which areusually used to assay human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection in primary cervical cancer screening.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted
from 64 cervical swab specimens from healthy women. And
an NGS-based work ﬂow was designed using the MGICare
BRCA1/2 multiplex PCR amplicon libraries followed byMGISEQ-2000RS sequencer. A reference BRCA1/2
mutation dataset from whole genome sequencing (WGS) of
these samples was used to assess detection performance.
Results: Total 680 BRCA1/2 benign variants were found
in these swab specimens and the consistency with WGS
data was 99.41% (671 in 675 reference BRCA1/2 muta-tions). The same reference variant (chr13, 32912299, T>C,
50%) from four samples not detected by multiplex PCR-
NGS was with low sequencing depth (7x, 12x, 19x, and19x, respectively) in WGS data and it does not exist con-
ﬁrming by Sanger sequencing. Another 9 real BRCA1/2
variants detected by multiplex PCR-NGS were also veri ﬁed
by Sanger sequencing. No pathogenic mutations were found
in these healthy women.
Conclusions: We found better SNP detection accuracy
than WGS and new insights into BRCA mutation screening
accompanying HPV screening.
Reference:1. Chan, M., et al. (2012).Development of a next-
generation sequencing method for BRCA mutation screen-
ing: a comparison between a high-throughput and abenchtop platform. J Mol Diagn 14, 602-612.
M. He: None. M. Li: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; MGI Tech Co., Ltd. C. Huang: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; MGI Tech Co., Ltd. Z. Mei: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; MGI Tech Co.,
Ltd.F. Chen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;MGI Tech Co., Ltd. H. Jiang: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; MGI Tech Co., Ltd..
P14.008C
Variants with reduced variant fractions in NGS-based
germline diagnostics for hereditary breast and ovariancancer
M. Larsen
1, K. Keupp1, K. Weber-Lassalle1, L. Bülow1,
B. Bluemcke1, B. Versmold1, A. Waha1, J. Driesen1,
A. Baasner1, C. Eßer1, B. Schömig-Markiefka2,
B. Wappenschmidt1, R. Schmutzler1, E. Hahnen1,
E. Pohl-Rescigno1
1Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Center
for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne,
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,2Institute for Pathology, Center for
Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne, Faculty
of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne,
Germany
Next generation sequencing (NGS) is the standard for
detecting germline variants in a routine diagnostic setting.The high sensitivity of NGS allows the detection and
accurate quanti ﬁcation of variants showing low variant
fractions (VFs). In 11 index patients with familial breastand/or ovarian cancer, NGS-analysis of blood-derived DNA
identi ﬁed 11 distinct deleterious variants (IARC class 4/5)
with unusually low VFs of 10-30%. These were found infour established cancer predisposition genes (7x TP53 ,
2xCHEK2 ,1 x BRCA1 and 1x MSH2 ). Complementary
NGS-analysis of DNA derived from tumour or non-diseased tissue (available from 8 of 11 patients) con ﬁrmed
three variants (2x TP53 ,1 x BRCA1 ). Inheritance of the
deleterious mutation to the offspring was seen in the caseof the BRCA1 -positive patient. The ﬁve remaining variants
(3xTP53 ,2 xCHEK2 ) were absent in the complementary
tested tissue and therefore may be blood-speci ﬁc. One likely
scenario for the occurrence of these variants is
chemotherapy-induced clonal hematopoiesis, as recently
shown for TP53 . In line with this hypothesis, four of the
ﬁve patients (3x TP53 ,1 xCHEK2 ) received chemotherapy
(carboplatin) prior to blood draw. In summary, variants with
low VFs may be due to somatic mosaicism (e.g. clonalhematopoiesis) or mosaics affecting germline. These data
indicate that VFs needs to be considered in the interpreta-
tion of NGS results and variants with low VFs need to beconﬁrmed in independent tissues. This can provide insights
into the cause of the tumor disease and possible heredity of
mutations to provide the patient with accurate counseling.
M. Larsen: None. K. Keupp: None. K. Weber-Las-
salle: None. L. Bülow: None. B. Bluemcke: None. B.1618Versmold: None. A. Waha: None. J. Driesen: None. A.
Baasner: None. C. Eßer: None. B. Schömig-Markiefka:
None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. R. Schmutzler: None.
E. Hahnen: None. E. Pohl-Rescigno: None.
P14.009D
Estimation of tumor mutational burden based on direct
comparison to a panel of normals or a panel of tumors
J. Rehker, M. Ball, C. Heydt, R. Pappesch, R. Buettner,
S. Merkelbach-Bruse
University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
The amount of somatic variants in cancer, the tumor
mutational burden (TMB) has been associated with positive
outcome of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy in several
cancer entities. Distinguishing somatic variants from highlevels of germline variants or sequencing artifacts can be
accomplished by sequencing a matched normal sample
from the same individual, which is often not available inroutine diagnosis. While raw variant calls can be ﬁltered for
germline variants by population frequency in public
databases, sequencing artifacts are speci ﬁc to wet-lab
methodology. We employed standard open source software
for alignment (bwa) and variant calling (GATK4 mutect2)
combined with a one on one artifact ﬁltering different to
GATK's best practices. Variants in in the tumor were
directly compared to the alignments of a panel of normals
rather than being called in each sample and then combinedin a vcf ﬁle which then serves as a blacklist. We estimated
TMB on a custom gene panel of ~1GB coding exons and
compared results of 9 samples to several sequencing panelsand software solutions of commercial vendors. Our
approach showed different levels of correlation with tested
alternative solutions, peaking R^2 =0.995 (Illumina
TSO500) and R^2 =0.959 (QIAseq TMB Panel). We
currently evaluate the pipeline in tumor only mode and
will present a detailed comparison.
J. Rehker: None. M. Ball: None. C. Heydt: None. R.
Pappesch: None. R. Buettner: None. S. Merkelbach-
Bruse: None.
P14.010A
Low frequency variant detection from highly degradedDNA and RNA
U. Das Chakravarty
1, A. Royall1, M. Hong1, H. Huang1,
K. Lai1, K. Dilger1, K. Bryan2, Y. Wang1, L. Lewis2,
S. Rose2, Y. Zheng11Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., Redwood City, CA,
United States,2Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.,
Coralville, IA, United States
Clinical oncology samples are often limited in quality and
quantity, making NGS-based detection of pathologicvariants challenging. Sensitive and accurate detection of
low-frequency variants can be accomplished using hybrid
capture and ultra-deep targeted sequencing, but rely on highconversion during library construction. Size-selection is
required to remove adapter-dimers resulting in signi ﬁcant
sample loss and reduced sensitivity to low frequencyvariants. Speci ﬁcity also suffers as many low-frequency
artifacts arise during sample preparation and hybrid capture.
Duplexed molecular barcoding can eliminate these artifacts,but conventional duplexed adapters are dif ﬁcult to synthe-
size and purify, leading to reduced ligation ef ﬁciency. We
present the IDT library preparation kit optimized for low-input and degraded samples. Our chemistry relies on a
proprietary engineered DNA ligase and sequencing adapters
that prevent chimeras and suppress dimer-formation negat-ing the need for size-selection. We adopted the work ﬂow
for both DNA and RNA applications and demonstrated
efﬁcacy using diverse sample types. To assess sensitivity,
we created libraries using mixtures of genome in a bottle
gDNA and performed hybrid capture using a custom panel
targeting single nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy numbervariants (CNVs), and gene fusions. When compared to
commercially available methods, our approach yielded a 1.5
to 4-fold increase in library complexity with improvedsensitivity to <0.25% variants using 1-25 ng cfDNA, and
<0.5% using 25-250 ng FFPE DNA. RNA libraries were
constructed from FFPE NGS reference standards to evaluatefusion detection. Our method provides superior sensitivity
and speci ﬁcity for detection of low-frequency variants, even
with highly degraded DNA and RNA.
U. Das Chakravarty: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. A. Royall: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNATechnologies, Inc. M. Hong: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. H.
Huang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Inte-
grated DNA Technologies, Inc. K. Lai: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies,
Inc.K. Dilger: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. K. Bryan: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA
Technologies, Inc. Y. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. L.
Lewis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Inte-
grated DNA Technologies, Inc. S. Rose: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1619Inc.Y. Zheng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc..
P14.011B
Allelic drop-out is a common phenomenon reducing the
diagnostic yield of PCR-based target sequencing
A. Shestak1, A. Bukaeva1, S. Saber2,
E. Zaklyazminskaya1,3
1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Cardiac Electrophysiology Research
Center, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research
Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,3Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Allelic drop-out (ADO) is a known phenomenon of
selective allele ampli ﬁcation representing the potential
problem of correct DNA diagnostics. Both NGS and Sanger
sequencing are PCR-based methods, Sanger sequencing isused to verify NGS results. The purpose of this study is to
demonstrate the incidence of ADO reducing the diagnostic
yield in primary cardiomyopathy genetic testing viasemiconductor NGS and Sanger sequencing of target gene
panels.
Methods: We have developed 3 AmpliSeq custom gene
panels for mutational screening: “K
+/Na+ion channels ”,
“Desmosomal proteins ”,“Sarcomeric proteins ”, contains
1049 primer pairs (37 genes) totally, 152 kb. About 140probands were screened with at least one of these gene
panels. AmpliSeq sequences were analyzed in silico and
visually compared with Sanger control sequences, notingthe facts of heterozygosity loss.
Results: We have detected 12 ADO cases both in Sanger
(5 cases) and AmpliSeq (7 cases) sequencing data. All ADOevents happened due to frequent or rare SNVs in the oli-
goprimer annealing sites and were detected due to mismatch
in frequent SNPs zygosity nearby. Three pathogenic var-iants would be missed if were not revealed by re-sequencing
with alternative method and alternative oligos.
Conclusion: All PCR-based methods have a risk of ADO
leading to a decrease of diagnostic yield of genetic testing.
ADO can theoretically affect 1% amplicons. It seems that
real scope of ADO might be much higher and depends onnumbers of primer pairs. The software for ADO detection is
needed. This work was supported by RNF grant №16-15-
10421.
A. Shestak: None. A. Bukaeva: None. S. Saber: None.
E. Zaklyazminskaya: None.
P14.012C
Utilizing long-read amplicon sequencing forcomprehensive pan-ethnic spinal muscular atrophy
(SMA) carrier screening
D. A. Zeevi
1, J. Harting2, R. Bringer1, I. McLaughlin2,
S. Scher3, J. Ekstein3
1Dor Yeshorim Committee for Prevention of Jewish Genetic
Diseases, Jerusalem, Israel,2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo
Park, CA, United States,3Dor Yeshorim Committee for
Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, New York, NY,
United States
Introduction: Carrier screening for spinal muscular atrophy
(SMA) often involves copy number assay of SMN1 exon 7
dosage. These assays are typically insensitive to 2 ciscopies
ofSMN1 on one chromosome and none on the other; a
scenario which accounts for 8%-29% of carrier states,
depending on ethnicity. Thus, we established a new pan-ethnic assay to improve cisallele carrier detection.
Materials and Methods: 96 Jewish subjects, from var-
ious countries of origin across 4 continents were selected forstudy. An established qPCR assay was performed on all
samples to assay SMN1 exon7 dosage. Subsequently, a
16kb region, encompassing SMN1 /2 exon 7 and ﬂanking
polymorphic SNP sites, was PCR ampli ﬁed from each
sample with barcoded primers for SMRT sequencing on a
Sequel System (Paci ﬁc Biosciences). Consensus reads were
uniquely mapped to either SMN1 orSMN2 and c.840C>T
status was independently determined. Finally, SMN1 exon 7
dosage was validated by a commercial MLPA kit (MRCHolland).
Results: The combined qPCR and long-read amplicon
analysis correctly identi ﬁed the allelic state of 95 samples
passing quality control. Interestingly, SMN1 >SMN2 gene
conversion events were identi ﬁed in both a zero copy and
an unrelated 1 copy carrier. In addition, SMN2 >SMN1 gene
conversion events were also detected in 3 ciscarrier con-
trols and 3 other unrelated 3-copy individuals. None of the
gene converted samples were of the same ethnicity.
Conclusion: We describe a novel rapid and low-cost pan-
ethnic carrier screen for SMA, expanding the scope of SMA
carrier detection beyond that of currently establishedscreening methods.
D.A. Zeevi: None. J. Harting: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. R. Bringer:
None. I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. S. Scher: None. J.
Ekstein: None.
P14.013D
The epigenomic landscape of coverage variability inlow-pass plasma cell-free DNA sequencing from non-
invasive prenatal screening1620N. B. Larson, J. Na, C. P. Sosa, R. A. Rowsey, C. Wang
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United StatesLow-pass whole-genome sequencing of plasma cell-free
DNA (cfDNA) has been widely adopted as an assaytechnology for a variety of non-invasive applications,
including prenatal screening of fetal genomic abnormalities.
These aligned reads can be summarized as binned readcounts overlapping contiguous partitions of the genome,
providing evidence of copy-number aberrations and aneu-
ploidy. However, our experience indicates cfDNA sequen-cing exhibits a greater degree of regional coverage
variability both within and across samples than encountered
in typical whole-genome sequencing. Moreover, we havefound that traditional intra-sample GC content and mapp-
ability correction are insuf ﬁcient to fully account for this
variability, resulting in temporal trends in chromosomalcoverages across samples. To comprehensively explore
genomic features that may contribute to this variability, we
examined cfDNA sequencing coverage pro ﬁles for N =
2258 normal non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) assay
results. Autosomal GC-corrected bin-level coverage (10kb
bin size) was modeled as a function of assay date usingsmoothing splines, adjusting for estimated fetal fraction. We
identi ﬁed 42,683 10kb segments (16.6%) throughout the
genome with signi ﬁcant temporal associations (FDR
<0.05). Next, we explored genomic annotation enrichment
among the signi ﬁcant regions using >8000 epigenomic
features from the Roadmap Epigenomics Project and otherpublic resources. Hypergeometric enrichment testing iden-
tiﬁed 817 signi ﬁcant associations (Bonferroni-adjusted
P<0.05), with the top enrichment results corresponding toH3K9me3 histone modi ﬁcations in leukocyte cell-lines.
These ﬁndings suggest cell-speci ﬁc heterochromatin com-
position may contribute to inter- and intra-sample coveragecorrelation patterns via differential cfDNA degradation,
which could be leveraged to improve coverage normal-
ization and increase screening assay performance.
N.B. Larson: None. J. Na: None. C.P. Sosa: None. R.A.
Rowsey: None. C. Wang: None.
P14.014A
High error rate in a speci ﬁc region of the CFTR gene
may lead to false variant ﬁndings when using massively
parallel sequencing in molecular diagnostics of cystic
ﬁbrosis
Z. Kubiritova
1,2, J. Budis3,4, M. Kucharik3, T. Szemes2,3,4,
J. Radvanszky1,3,4
1Institute for Clinical and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences,Bratislava, Slovakia,2Department of Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University,
Bratislava, Slovakia,3Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis is a relatively common but
severe autosomal recessive disorder. Molecular-genetic
testing of the associated CFTR gene is routinely performed
in standard clinical care. During a validation process of ourmassively-parallel-sequencing (MPS) results, we identi ﬁed
a region around exon_10 that was found to be particularly
prone to speci ﬁc sequencing errors.
Material and Methods: MPS data were generated using
different sequencing panels on Illumina MiSeq/NextSeq
platforms. Read mapping and variant calling was performedusing Bowtie2 and Vardict, respectively. Genotyping of the
TG
n/Tnmotif was performed using Dante, an alignment free
STR genotyping tool. Exon_10 and surrounding intronicregions were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: We identi ﬁed several types of false variants in
this region. One group was found to be caused by a highlyhomologous but not fully matching region in chromosome
20. Since this region was not present in GRCh37, corre-
sponding reads were attracted by the CFTR gene creating
thus false variant calls. Using GRCh38 these variants dis-
appeared. The same homologous region caused problems
also to our STR genotyping tool which detected an addi-tional TG/T allele. Another group was found to be typically
associated to sequencing reads directly spanning the intro-
nic TG
n/Tnpolymorphic locus. These were associated to
larger repeat numbers and had their origin in repeat-induced
sequencing errors.
Conclusion: The mentioned CTFR region revealed ﬁnd-
ings worth of investigations, possibly having implications
for another genomic regions too. Such error sources should
be kept in mind when evaluating variants and consideringadditional validation analyses. Supported by:
VaV_MZSR_2018/46-SAV-5 and VEGA_1/0433/19.
Z. Kubiritova: None. J. Budis: None. M. Kucharik:
None. T. Szemes: None. J. Radvanszky: None.
P14.015B
Clinical reporting of NGS data: A systematic Nordic
collaborative, peer-reviewed benchmarking
C. Nadeau
1, S. Alagaratnam1, O. Agafonov1,
G. M. Pedersen1, B. N. Ray-Sannerud1, S. McAdam1,
J. J. Jónsson2, K. A. W. Wadt3, M. Dunø3, K. Lagerstedt-
Robinson4, D. Undlien5, V. Wirta6, M. Rossing7
1DNV GL, Høvik, Norway,2Dept. of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, Landspitali - National University
Hospital and Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1621Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik,
Iceland,3Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,4Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet
and Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Univ
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,5e. Department of Medical
Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway,6Science for Life Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, KarolinskaInstitutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
7Center for Genomic
Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark
The clinical genomics report details key ﬁndings from the
interpretation of diagnostic next-generation sequencing(NGS) data and represents a core hand-off between
specialized clinical genomics laboratories and the broader
healthcare community. However, the design of clinicalgenetics reports is not standardized, where misunderstand-
ing of results, limitations or key ﬁndings can lead to
incorrect therapeutic decisions and directly impact patientmanagement. In this study, we ﬁrst reviewed existing
guidelines and regulations on clinical reporting. To evaluate
variation across clinical reports, we then conducted a peer-reviewed benchmarking exercise among members of the
Nordic Alliance for Clinical Genomics (NACG) from
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. Partici-pating laboratories were given three ﬁctional clinical cases,
from which they produced clinical reports using their
current production pipelines. Participants then evaluatedeach other ’s reports using a structured questionnaire. The
results of the benchmarking showed a signi ﬁcant variation
of reporting on one hand, and dif ﬁculties in comprehending
key information on the other. Finally, we performed a series
of semi-structured interviews with specialists involved in
medical genetic testing and end-users of the reports.Through these activities, we identi ﬁed gaps in existing
guidelines for clinical reporting of genetic variants as well
as pain points for effective information transfer. The ﬁnal
phase of this project focused on the report end user ’s needs
and challenges as input for a redesign of the clinical
genomics report, with the aim to ensure effective andaccurate ﬂow of information from the genomic laboratory to
the end user.
C. Nadeau: None. S. Alagaratnam: None. O. Agafo-
nov: None. G.M. Pedersen: None. B.N. Ray-Sannerud:
None. S. McAdam: None. J.J. Jónsson: None. K.A.W.
Wadt: None. M. Dunø: None. K. Lagerstedt-Robinson:
None. D. Undlien: None. V. Wirta: None. M.
Rossing: None.P14.016C
Quality improvement in clinical NGS through a peer-
driven Nordic collaboration
S. Alagaratnam
1, G. Meldre Pedersen1, S. McAdam2,
V. Wirta3, J. Lundeberg4, M. Dunø5, K. A. W. Wadt5,
M. Rossing6, J. J. Jónsson7, J. Saarela8,9, D. Undlien10
1Precision medicine programme, Group Technology and
Research, DNV GL, Høvik, Norway,2Digital Health
Incubator, Digital Solutions, DNV GL, Høvik, Norway,
3Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Microbiology,
Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet and Science
for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden,4Science for
Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden,5Dept. of
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital,Copenhagen, Denmark,
6Center for Genomic Medicine,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,
7Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali –
National University Hospital and Dept. of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland,8Centre for Molecular
Medicine Norway, Oslo, Norway,9Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,
10Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Although the technology for high-quality next-generation
sequencing (NGS) data is widely available in a research
context, clinical implementation of high-throughput NGS-
based diagnostics has proven dif ﬁcult. This requires many
topics surrounding quality assurance, assay validity, data
security, legal and regulatory considerations and the
interface with pre-existing hospital infrastructure all to beaddressed. Many molecular diagnostics departments run in-
house developed bioinformatic and variant interpretation
pipelines, with wide variation in the extent to whichcomparisons against gold standards and pro ﬁciency testing
are performed. An alliance of Nordic laboratories imple-
menting genomics in clinical settings, the Nordic Alliancefor Clinical Genomics, has applied the approach of peer-
driven collaboration to a series of benchmarking exercises.
Components of the NGS diagnostic pipeline includingvariant calling, variant interpretation and clinical reporting
were all examined in turn. Benchmarking exercises were
designed by members of the alliance to re ﬂect their real-
world needs, then executed, before the results were
discussed in plenum at a series of bi-annual workshops. 6
workshops have been held to date, with the number ofparticipants growing from 18 to 66 at each workshop, and
the corresponding number of participating organizations1622from 5 to 19. This approach gave the participating units the
unique opportunity to compare their production perfor-
mance against each other, and for differences and ﬁndings
to be discussed on a practical level and summarized. For all
three exercises, one or more participating units incorporated
learnings and implemented changes in their current clinicalpipelines, demonstrating the value of a peer-driven forum
for such quality improvement activities.
S. Alagaratnam: None. G. Meldre Pedersen: None. S.
McAdam: None. V. Wirta: None. J. Lundeberg: None.
M. Dunø: None. K.A.W. Wadt: None. M. Rossing: None.
J.J. Jónsson: None. J. Saarela: None. D. Undlien: None.
P14.017D
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) as a key player inimproving diagnostic yield for rare diseases (RDs): the
collaborative experience of 2 centres in Greece
N. Marinakis
1, G. Christopoulou2, D. Veltra1,
M. Sviggou1, K. Kekou1, C. Sofocleous1, E. Tsoutsou1,
K. Kosma1, A. Oikonomaki2, P. Constantoulakis2,
H. Fryssira1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1
1Department of Medical Genetics, National & Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece,2Genotypos-Science
Labs MSA, Athens, Greece
Introduction: We report 12 months of clinical NGS by the
Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, and a
collaborating service lab, for patients referred for a widerange of genetic conditions.
Material and Methods: During 12 months, 186 patients
(85% pediatric) were referred, following clinical evaluation,pre-test counselling and signed informed-consent. Clinical
geneticists and other medical specialists selected whole or
clinical exome sequencing (~19,000 or ~4,500 genes)according to phenotype. Library preparation used Whole
Exome Solution and Clinical Exome Solution kits (Sophia
Genetics), run on a NextSeq-500 (Illumina). Bioinformaticsanalysis used SOPHiA DDM
®and VarAFT 2.14. Variants
were categorised according to ACMG guidelines; only
“Pathogenic ”or“Likely pathogenic ”variants were repor-
ted. In most cases Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed variants
and family segregation.
Results: RDs included: Neurodevelopmental (28
patients), Neuromuscular (31), Skeletal/connective tissue
(20), Metabolic (8), Dysmorphic syndromes (16), Intellec-
tual disability/Autism (6), Kidney (10), Cardiopathies (10),Skin (6), Ears/Eyes (11), Other (30). Diagnostic yield was
42% overall (78/186 cases), reaching >60% for Neurode-
velopmental, Skeletal/connective tissue, Skin, Ears/Eyes; 56cases exhibited autosomal dominant inheritance (49 de-
novo, 7 inherited), 12 recessive and 10 X-linked, including35 known, 47 novel variants (submitted to ClinVar) and 8
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS).
Discussion: NGS supports marked improvement in
diagnostic-yield for many RDs, sometimes revealing aty-
pical phenotypes and/or genotypes. Higher diagnostic yield
is achieved for clinically well-de ﬁned cases, supported by
family segregation studies. Close collaboration between the
laboratory and clinics, supports high quality standards
(clinical, laboratory, interpretation, counselling/reporting),fundamental to optimise de ﬁnitive diagnosis, although VUS
remain challenging.
N. Marinakis: None. G. Christopoulou: None. D.
Veltra: None. M. Sviggou: None. K. Kekou: None. C.
Sofocleous: None. E. Tsoutsou: None. K. Kosma: None.
A. Oikonomaki: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. H.
Fryssira: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None.
P14.018A
Utility of gene panel testing in children with seizure
onset after 2 years of age: Results from a European and
Middle Eastern epilepsy genetic testing program
K. Gall
1, E. Izzo2, N. Miller2, K. Alakurtti1,
E. H. Seppala1, L. Koskinen1, J. Koskenvuo1, T. Alastalo1
1Blueprint Genetics, San Francisco, CA, United States,
2BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States
Background: Epilepsy is one of the most common
childhood-onset neurological conditions with a geneticbasis. Genetic diagnosis provides potential for etiologically-
based management and treatment. Existing research has
focused on early-onset (<2 years) epilepsies while dataregarding later-onset epilepsies is limited. Program goals:
Determine, in a selected pediatric epilepsy cohort, the
overall and actionable molecular diagnostic (MDx) yieldand the CLN2 disease MDx yield. CLN2 is a severe, rapidly
progressive neurodegenerative disease with onset of
seizures at/after 2 years and average age-of-diagnosis of5 years.
Methods: Blueprint Genetics ’next-generation sequen-
cing (NGS)-based 283-gene epilepsy panel was used. Copynumber variant (CNV) detection from NGS data was
included. Variant interpretation was performed according to
ACMG guidelines. Program results (Oct/2017-Nov/2018)are reported from 210 patients (Europe, Middle East) with
inclusion criteria: Age 24-60 months, ﬁrst seizure at/after
24 months, and at least one additional ﬁnding. The program
was sponsored by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.
Results: Median age-at-testing: 42 months; median age-
of-ﬁrst-seizure-onset: 30 months; average delay from ﬁrst
seizure to comprehensive genetic testing: 10.3 months.
Genetic diagnosis was established in 42 patients; 20.0%Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1623MDx yield. CNVs were reported in 26.2% of diagnosed
patients; 27.3% of CNVs identi ﬁed were intragenic. MDx
included 5 CLN2 ( TPP1 gene) diagnoses, 4 MECP2, 3
SCN1A, 3 Angelman syndrome, 2 each of CHD2, KCNA2,
MFSD8, SCN2A and STXBP1.
Conclusion: This program demonstrates the clinical uti-
lity of a comprehensive epilepsy gene panel for patients
with ﬁrst seizures at/after 2 years for MDx of pediatric
epilepsy and CLN2 disease to guide management andtreatment.
K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin. N. Miller: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin. K. Alakurtti: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E.H. Seppala: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J.
Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P14.019B
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) basedchromosomal microarray analysis may detect early
stages of malignancy
S. Zeligson
1, O. Weiss1, R. Sheffer2, O. Lobel1,
A. Frumkin2, M. Ben Uziyahu1, S. Revel Vilk1, D. Harel2,
G. Goldstein2, O. Weinstein2, J. Dagan2, V. Meiner2,
R. Segel1
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,
2Hadassah Medical center, Jerusalem, Israel
Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) detecting con-
stitutional copy number variations (CNVs), is the ﬁrst-tier
test for individuals with developmental delay or congenital
anomalies. We present a patient with acute myeloidleukemia (AML) incidentally diagnosed by CMA done on
peripheral blood. A nine years old boy of consanguineous
parents was referred to CMA because of multiple CALspots with axillary freckling, and severe failure to thrive
(weight and height: -3.5SD, head circumference: -4SD). At
age four years he had Wilms tumor, with a relapse at agesix. Former genetic workup included normal karyotype,
methylation pattern of H19 and NF1 sequencing. SNP-
based CMA testing revealed multiple changes in mosaicstate: mosaic duplications of 1q, 3q, 6p, 21q, 11q, 21q,
mosaic loss of 6p, and mosaic copy neutral loss of
heterozygosity (CN-LOH) of 10q, 19q, 21q, with multiplehomozygous regions (22%). This CMA result indicated
hematological malignancy, later diagnosed as therapyrelated AML. Peripheral blood karyotype detected multiple
spontaneous chromosomal changes, including: single and
double strand breaks, quadri-radial structures, marker
chromosomes and translocations. Diepoxybutane-induced
breakage test did not indicate increased breakage. Bone
marrow karyotype showed 6p deletion, partial trisomy of11q, mosaicism for del5q, consistent with t-AML. Whole
exome sequencing revealed a homozygous missense
mutation in BLM (c.3416G>C), indicating Bloom syn-drome, explaining the clinical presentation. Here we
demonstrate that in addition to diagnosis of deletion/
duplication syndromes, mosaicism and CN-LOH, the useof SNP-based CMA platforms allows detection of pre-
viously undiagnosed systemic maladies. We urge CMA
analysts to be alert to changes in SNP pattern.
S. Zeligson: None. O. Weiss: None. R. Sheffer: None.
O. Lobel: None. A. Frumkin: None. M. Ben Uziyahu:
None. S. Revel Vilk: None. D. Harel: None. G. Goldstein:
None. O. Weinstein: None. J. Dagan: None. V. Meiner:
None. R. Segel: None.
P14.020C
Identifying rare copy number variants using genome-
wide array data
J. G. Dennis, D. Easton
Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Genotyping experiments by the Breast
Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) have identi ﬁed
more than 100 loci associated with the risk of breast cancer.Rare deletions and duplications within susceptibility genes
are known to increase breast cancer risk but the contribution
of rare CNVs within other genes and non-coding regionshas not been studied with large sample sizes.
Materials and Methods: We called CNVs from the
intensity measurements from Illumina custom arrays(iCOGS and Oncoarray) for ~150,000 breast cancer cases
and ~120,000 controls. To reduce noise we applied a
principal component adjustment to the intensities and strictsample and locus quality control. We calculated z-scores
from the distribution of intensities at each probe and used
circular binary segmentation to identify runs of probeswhere the z-scores for a sample were shifted. We derived
cut-offs for the mean z-scores of segments that indicated
probable deletions or duplications.
Results: Comparison with known rare CNVs in 1000
Genomes samples indicate a sensitivity rate of approxi-
mately 86% for deletions and 71% for duplications. Weestimated the rate of false positive CNV calls to be around
7% for deletions and 16% for duplications. The z-scores1624provide a metric for the con ﬁdence of the CNV call. Tests
for breast cancer risk showed the strongest associations for
known CNVs in CHEK2 and BRCA1.
Conclusions: By accounting for the variance in probe
intensity on genotyping arrays, our method improves the
calling of rare CNVs and may provide more powerful testsof disease association.
J.G. Dennis: None. D. Easton: None.
P14.021D
A universal simple and cost-ef ﬁcient digital PCR method
for the targeted analysis of copy number variations
K. Cassinari
1,2, O. Quenez1,2, G. Joly-Hélas1,
L. Beaussire1, N. Le Meur1, M. Castelain1,
A. Goldenberg1, A. Guerrot1, A. Brehin1, J. Deleuze3,
A. Boland3, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1,2, D. Campion1,2,4,
P. Saugier-Veber1, N. Gruchy5, T. Frebourg1,
G. Nicolas1,2, N. Sarafan-Vasseur1, P. Chambon1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F76000,
Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,2Rouen University Hospital, CNR-MAJ,
F76000, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized
Medicine, Rouen, France,3Centre National de Recherche
en Génomique Humaine, Institut de Génomique, CEA, Evry,France,
4Department of Research, Rouvray Psychiatric
Hospital, Sotteville-lès-Rouen, France,5Caen University
Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 14000, NormandyCenter for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Caen,
France
Introduction: Rare copy number variations (CNVs) are a
major cause of genetic diseases. Simple targeted methods
are required for their con ﬁrmation and segregation analysis.
We developed a simple and universal CNV assay based on
dPCR and universal Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA)-hydro-
lysis probes.
Methods: We analyzed the mapping of the 90 LNA
hydrolysis probes from the Roche Universal Probe Library
(UPL). For each CNV, selection of the optimal primers andLNA probe is almost automated, probes are reused across
assays and each dPCR assay includes the CNV amplicon
and a reference amplicon. We assessed the assay perfor-mances on 93 small and large CNVs and performed a
comparative cost-ef ﬁciency analysis.
Results: UPL-LNA probes presented nearly 20,000,000
occurrences on the human genome and were homo-
geneously distributed with a mean interval of 156 bp. The
assay accurately detected all the 93 CNVs, except one(<200 pb), with variation coef ﬁcients below 10%. The assaywas shown to be more cost-ef ﬁcient than all the other
methods.
Conclusion: The universal dPCR CNV assay is simple,
robust and cost-ef ﬁcient as it combines a straightforward
design allowed by universal probes and endpoint PCR, the
advantages of a relative quanti ﬁcation of the target to the
reference within the same reaction, and the high speci ﬁcity
of the LNA-hydrolysis probes. This method should be a
useful tool for genomic medicine, which requires simplemethods for the interpretation and segregation analysis of
genomic variations.
K. Cassinari: None. O. Quenez: None. G. Joly-Hélas:
None. L. Beaussire: None. N. Le Meur: None. M. Cas-
telain: None. A. Goldenberg: None. A. Guerrot: None. A.
Brehin: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Boland: None. A.
Rovelet-Lecrux: None. D. Campion: None. P. Saugier-
Veber: None. N. Gruchy: None. T. Frebourg: None. G.
Nicolas: None. N. Sarafan-Vasseur: None. P.
Chambon: None.
P14.022A
Prenatal CNV detection by means of exome sequencing
instead of microarray diagnostics: one test ﬁts all!
D. Westra
1, R. Pfundt1, S. J. C. Stevens2, I. Feenstra1,
C. F. H. A. Gilissen1, K. Neveling1, M. R. Nelen1,
H. G. Yntema1, D. F. C. M. Smeets1, N. de Leeuw1,
B. H. W. Faas1
1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Maastricht UMC +, Maastricht, Netherlands
Introduction: Nowadays, in fetuses with structural
abnormalities, rapid whole exome sequencing (WES) is
frequently performed in addition to routine diagnostics tests
(QF-PCR and microarray analysis). Since our in-housediagnostic work ﬂow now allows for prenatal WES results
within two weeks, we evaluated whether genome-wide,
exome-based CNV analysis on prenatal samples with a non-aberrant QF-PCR result is suf ﬁciently robust and accurate to
replace the current microarray work ﬂow.
Methods: For all samples received between 01/2016 and
10/2018 for which both rapid WES and microarray analysis
were performed, aberrant microarray pro ﬁles explaining the
ultrasound abnormalities were compared to exome-basedCNV pro ﬁling data. In addition, for all clinically relevant
CNVs reported in the prenatal setting in 2018, the potential
detection of these using exome sequencing data, based onCNV size and/or gene content, was investigated.
A total of 21 clinically relevant CNVs (with sizes ranging
from 500 kb –8.7 Mb) were examined.
Results: Exome-based CNV analysis detected 21/21 of
the investigated chromosomal aberrations, includingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1625recurrent pathogenic CNVs such as the 22q11 microdele-
tion. The advantage of simultaneously detecting both SNVs
and CNVs by WES is underscored by a fetus in which a
paternal 1q21.1 microdeletion and a maternal SNV in the
RBM8A gene were identi ﬁed, resulting in autosomal
recessive TAR syndrome.
Conclusions: Our results show that exome-based CNV
proﬁling can detect clinically relevant copy number varia-
tions in prenatal samples that are also identi ﬁed by micro-
array analysis. Exome-based CNV analysis can, therefore,
replace prenatal microarray analysis for samples with a non-
aberrant QF-PCR result.
D. Westra: None. R. Pfundt: None. S.J.C. Stevens:
None. I. Feenstra: None. C.F.H.A. Gilissen: None. K.
Neveling: None. M.R. Nelen: None. H.G. Yntema: None.
D.F.C.M. Smeets: None. N. de Leeuw: None. B.H.W.
Faas: None.
P14.023B
Low-coverage WGS with CNV detection is a viable
replacement for aCGH
M. Kucharík1, J. Budi š1,2,3, A. Gnip4, T. Szemes1,5,2,
J. Tur ňa5,3
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Comenius University
Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,3Slovak Center of
Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia,5Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Copy number variations (CNV) are repeated
sequence segments of DNA in the human genome whichcontribute substantially to normal population variability.
However abnormal CNVs are a cause of numerous genetic
disorders. Several methods for CNV analysis are used, fromthe conventional cytogenetic analysis through microarray-
based methods (aCGH) to next-generation sequencing. We
present GenomeScreen - NGS based CNV detectionmethod.
Materials and Methods: A previously described CNV
detection algorithm used for NIPT was adjusted to allowreplacement of aCGH for whole blood or buffy coat. We
determined theoretical limits of its accuracy and con ﬁrmed
it with extensive in-silico study as well as genotypedsamples.
Results: When using WGS achievement of theoretical
limit for Z-score of >7, at least 3M uniquely mapped readsare required to detect deviation with the length of 200k
bases or more. This ﬁnding is supported both with the in-
silico analysis and analysis on lab-prepared samples. In bothanalyses we were able to detect all of the simulateddeviations with length of at least 200k and even some with
smaller length (between 100k and 200k).
Conclusions: We compared clinical samples de ﬁned by
aCGH method in Slovakia (Human Genome CGH Micro-
array Kit, 4x44K), which has roughly 200k bases resolu-
tion. This resolution is in line with GenomeScreen. Thedisadvantage of the aCGH method are huge gaps longer
than 200k bases leaving 38% of genome uncovered,
whereas only 13% is uncovered when GenomeScreen isused (mainly centromeres). Lastly, cost per sample is about
2.5 times lower for GenomeScreen.
M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budi š:A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. A. Gnip: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex a.s. T.
Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd.. J. Turňa:None.
P14.024C
Reproducibility of genome-wide CNV analysis and new
concept for distant relatedness determination
M. Korabecna
1, A. Zinkova1, I. Brynychova1,
H. Simkova1, J. Geryk2
1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic,2University Hospital Motol, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: High resolution microarray technology is
widely used to detect CNVs. Interpretation of results is
based on correct evaluation of the extent and clinical
signiﬁcance of each detected variant. Due to low population
frequency of many benign variants, we decided to explore a
new concept - application of CNV detection for distant
relatedness determination. We analysed a large four-generation pedigree without any genetic impairment, we
followed the segregation of CNVs and reproducibility of
their calls.
Materials and Methods: We tested the performance of
Agilent Sure Print G3 Human Microarray 2x 400K. We
isolated DNA from saliva using Oragene technology. Agi-lent Male and Female Control DNAs were used.
Results: We compared 27 pairs of ﬁrst degree relatives,
12 pairs of ﬁrst cousins, 12 pairs of ”uncle -nephew
type”(r=1/4), 4 pairs of double ﬁrst cousins and 15 pairs of
second cousins. We followed three times the segregation
from a common ancestor to the fourth generation and fourtimes to the third generation. Typically we detected around
30 CNVs per individual and we followed the segregation
with high precision (identical genomic coordinates for theanalysed CNV in different individuals).1626Conclusions: In our pilot study, we provided the evi-
dence that a microarray with evenly distributed probes is
able to detect segregation of CNVs with high reproduci-
bility across four generations and that more ef ﬁcient CNV
detection algorithm based on WGS and appropriate popu-
lation data may represent a handy tool for distant related-ness determination. Supported by the Ministry of Interior of
the Czech Republic grant no.VI20172020102.
M. Korabecna: None. A. Zinkova: None. I. Bry-
nychova: None. H. Simkova: None. J. Geryk: None.
P14.025D
Detection of copy number variations from NGS data
using read depth information: a diagnostic performance
evaluation
O. Quenez
1, K. Cassinari2, S. Coutant2, F. Lecoquierre2,
K. Le Guennec1, S. Rousseau1, A. Richard1, S. Vasseur2,
E. Bouvignies2, J. Bou2, G. Lienard2, S. Manase2,
S. Fourneaux2, M. Vezain2, P. Chambon2, G. Joly-Helas2,
N. Le Meur2, M. Castelain2, A. Boland3, J. Deleuze3,
c. FREX4, E. Kasper2, T. Frébourg2, P. Saugier-Veber2,
S. Baert-Desurmont2, D. Campion1,5, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1,
G. Nicolas1
1Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandie Univ,
UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen UniversityHospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized
Medicine, Rouen, France,
2Department of Genetics,
Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and RouenUniversity Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France,
3Centre National
de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Institut deGénomique, CEA, Evry, France,
4FREX Consortium,
Rouen, France,5Department of Research, Centre
hospitalier du Rouvray, Sotteville-lès-Rouen, France
Introduction: The detection of Copy Number Variations
(CNVs) from NGS data is under-exploited and chip-basedtechnologies or targeted techniques are still commonly used
for their detection in a diagnostic setting. We assessed the
performances of CNV calling using CANOES, a read-depthcomparison method applied to gene panels and whole
exome sequencing (WES).
Methods: We applied CANOES to NGS data obtained
from (i) 465 samples with both gene panel and compre-
hensive Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short Fluoresent
(QMSPF) data available (total of 60 exons assessed), (ii) 95additional samples with NGS data from 2 different gene
panels, (iii) 135 samples with both WES and array CGH
(aCGH) data available and (iv) 1,056 additional WES.
Results: From the gene panel data, CANOES detected all
14 events that were previously identi ﬁed by QMPSF, withneither any false positive nor any false negative among
465 samples (Sensitivity (Se) =speciﬁcity=100%). In
addition, CANOES detected 97 candidate CNVs in 95
additional samples, 86 of which were con ﬁrmed by a tar-
geted technique (PPV =90.1% overall). From the WES
data, CANOES detected 159 of the 195 exonic eventspreviously detected by aCGH among the 135 samples with
WES+aCGH data available (Se =81.5%). Overall, the PPV
of CANOES from WES data was 94.8% after the con-ﬁrmation of 108 of the 123 calls targeting a list of 355 genes
among 1,056 additional patients.
Conclusions: CANOES showed very high diagnostic
performances in the context of NGS gene panels. Combi-
nation with other detection tools may increase the diag-
nostic performances.
O. Quenez: None. K. Cassinari: None. S. Coutant:
None. F. Lecoquierre: None. K. Le Guennec: None. S.
Rousseau: None. A. Richard: None. S. Vasseur: None. E.
Bouvignies: None. J. Bou: None. G. Lienard: None. S.
Manase: None. S. Fourneaux: None. M. Vezain: None. P.
Chambon: None. G. Joly-Helas: None. N. Le Meur:
None. M. Castelain: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze:
None. C. Frex: None. E. Kasper: None. T. Frébourg:
None. P. Saugier-Veber: None.
S. Baert-Desurmont:
None. D. Campion: None. A. Rovelet-Lecrux: None. G.
Nicolas: None.
P14.027B
Development of a genetic risk score for coeliac disease
and validation in a clinical diagnostic setting
S. A. Sharp1, S. E. Jones1, R. A. Kimmitt2, M. N. Weedon1,
A. Halpin3, A. R. Wood1,S .K i n g4, R. N. Beaumont1,
W. A. Hagopian5, J. M. Turner4, R. A. Oram2,1
1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of
Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom,
2Academic Renal Unit, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS
Foundation, Exeter, United Kingdom,3Alberta Transplant
Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada,
4Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada,5Paciﬁc Northwest Diabetes
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States
Introduction: There has been increasing interest in genetic
risk scores (GRS) in disease diagnosis. Speci ﬁc HLA-DQ
alleles predispose to coeliac disease (CD) and HLA typing
is occasionally used as a rule-out test. However, CD ispolygenic and genome wide association studies (GWAS)
have implicated ~40 additional loci. Using single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) we aimed to combine all associatedloci into a GRS and assess its utility as a clinical tool.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1627Methods: We used imputation to identify SNPs strongly
correlated(r2>0.95) with 4 key HLA-DQ haplotypes
(DQ2.5/DQ2.2/DQ7.5/DQ8) in UKBiobank. We derived
HLA-DQ odds ratios from 12,000 cases and 12,000 con-
trols(Wellcome Trust). We combined this with additional
SNPs from recent GWAS to generate a coeliac genetic riskscore(C-GRS).We validated the C-GRS in a population
based cohort(UKBiobank) with 1237 cases identi ﬁed by
hospital admission codes. We genotyped the C-GRS in161 samples from a paediatric clinic where patients had
been assessed using anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies,
biopsy and HLA typing.
Results: The C-GRS consisted of 42 SNPs and was
highly discriminative of CD in UKBiobank. The C-GRS
was more discriminative than HLA strati ﬁcation alone
(ROC-AUC =0.88 [95%CIs:0.87-0.89] v 0.81, p<0.0001)
and highly discriminative in the paediatric clinic (ROC-
AUC=0.82 [95%CIs:0.75-0.90], p<0.0001).
Conclusions: A C-GRS can aid in identifying incident
cases of CD and is more effective than HLA typing alone.
Given the low costs of SNP genotyping relative to HLAtyping a C-GRS could improve the availability and utility of
coeliac genetic testing in CD diagnosis and in recruitment to
research studies.
S.A. Sharp: None. S.E. Jones: None. R.A. Kimmitt:
None. M.N. Weedon: None. A. Halpin: None. A.R.
Wood: None. S. King: None. R.N. Beaumont: None. W.
A. Hagopian: None. J.M. Turner: None. R.A.
Oram: None.
P14.028C
Clinical validation of Copy Number Variant (CNVs)
detection by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)
A. Ferran Martín, L. Gonzalez, M. Calvo, I. Royo,
C. Camprubi, D. Trujillano, X. Maçia, C. Torres,E. Gonzalez, I. Segura, M. Flores, H. San Nicolas,
J. Fortuño, N. Campos, A. Torrents
Reference Laboratory, Hospitalet de Llobregat
(Barcelona), Spain
Objectives: Despite the great advances achieved in clinical
genetics enabled by the incorporation of Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS), a signi ﬁcant percentage of patients with
genetic diseases still do not have a conclusive molecular
diagnosis. The incorporation of speci ﬁc pipeline bioinfor-
matic methods has allowed the implementation of CopyNumber Variants (CNVs) detection in NGS analysis,
improving its diagnostic ef ﬁciency. In this study, the
clinical utility of the detection of CNVs by NGS has beenproven.Materials and Methods: During 2018, 275 patients were
studied using the NGS technique without obtaining an
accurate genetic diagnosis.
Bioinformatic tools that compare the normalized
sequencing depth between patients and controls were used
to determine CNVs. The results obtained were comparedwith patients owns laboratory database. CNVs were con-
ﬁrmed by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampli ﬁca-
tion (MLPA).
Results: Pathogenic CNVs causing the disease were
detected in 11 out of the 275 patients (4%). Speci ﬁcally,
CNVs were detected for pathologies with autosomaldominant inheritance patterns ( TSC2 ,MSH2 andFBN1
), as
well as for genes with autosomal recessive inheritance
patterns, including two homozygous deletions ( KCNV2 and
RDX ) and one heterozygous deletion with a Single
Nucleotide Variant (SNV) in the PKHD1 gene. One of the
most notable cases corresponds to a patient suspected ofhypomagnesemia who showed compound heterozygous
deletions in the TRPM6 gene.
Conclusion: These results con ﬁrm that the inclusion of
the detection of CNVs by NGS in the genetic diagnostic
routine allows to increase the diagnostic ef ﬁciency offered,
obtaining increasingly signi ﬁcant results and with a better
cost-effectiveness than conventional techniques.
A. Ferran Martín: None. L. Gonzalez: None. M.
Calvo: None. I. Royo: None. C. Camprubi: None. D.
Trujillano: None. X. Maçia: None. C. Torres: None. E.
Gonzalez: None. I. Segura: None. M. Flores: None. H.
San Nicolas: None. J. Fortuño: None. N. Campos: None.
A. Torrents: None.
P14.029D
Evaluation of preliminary benchmark deletions for the
reference sample NA12878
R. Rajagopalan
1,2, S. Pastor3, L. K. Conlin1,4
1Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,2School f
Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems,
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, United States,3Dept.
of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
4Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, United States
Introduction: Reference materials and standards play a
pivotal role in research and clinical settings alike for
benchmarking the quality of genetic material used, data
produced and performance of software tools used forbioinformatic analyses. De ﬁciencies in the baseline truth set
will result in misleading performance metrics. In this work,1628we evaluated the preliminary benchmark deletions pub-
lished by the genome in a bottle consortium (GIAB) for the
reference sample NA12878.
Methods: We used orthogonal data from Illumina SNP
array, Illumina short-read sequencing and long-read
sequencing data from PacBio and Nanopore to manuallyreview every deletion greater than 1kb in size. To assess the
presence of each deletion call, we computed the relative
read depth across the deletions compared to the rest of thegenome, evaluated paired-end, and split-reads supporting
the deletion call.
Results: There were 610 deletions (>1kb) in the pre-
liminary benchmark dataset published by the GIAB. Fifteen
percent of the deletions (94/610) were found to be LINE
insertions in the reference genome falsely identi ﬁed as
deletions in the NA12878. Sixteen percent of the dele-
tions (98/610) had con ﬂicting evidence across datasets. We
saw evidence for 69% of the deletions (423/610) acrossdatasets.
Conclusion: We performed a manual review of 610
preliminary benchmark deletions dataset for the sampleNNA12878. We found 31% of the variants were either to be
likely false-positive or ambiguous across orthogonal plat-
forms. This is the ﬁrst important step in understanding the
false positive deletions from genome sequencing data and
reﬁne the existing benchmark dataset.
Funding: NIH grant R01-HG009708.
R. Rajagopalan: None. S. Pastor: None. L.K.
Conlin: None.
P14.030A
Detection of genetic imbalances by array-based
comparative genomic hybridization in patients withsyndromic craniostenosis
T. N. Delchev, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella, H. Kathom,
S. Hadjidekova, D. Toncheva
Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Craniosynostosis is characterized by the
premature fusion of one or several of the calvarial sutures.This fusion restricts normal growth of the skull, face and
brain causing a number of neurological and neurosurgical
complications. Craniosynostosis can be isolated or syn-dromic. Syndromic craniostenosis is usually caused by a
genomic imbalance or de ﬁcit although the exact mechanism
oftenly remains unknown. Array-based comparative geno-mic hybridization (array CGH) is a powerful and high-
resolution approach for detection of DNA copy number
variants (CNVs).Materials and Methods: The genome pro ﬁling of forty-
two patients with syndromic craniosynostosis was carried
out by oligo array CGH. Agilent ISCA, 4x44, v2.0, with 35
kbp backbone resolution were used. The slides were scan-
ned on Agilent ﬂuorescent scanner G2505C and analyzed
by BlueFuse Multi, v 4.2 (20289) (BlueGnome,Cambridge, UK).
Results: We found ﬁve pathogenic rearrangements con-
sisting of: three deletions (ranging from 1.1 to 11.24 Mb)and two duplications (ranging from 14.92 to 25.19 Mb). We
also found two likely pathogenic mutations: one duplication
(4.62 Mb) and one deletion (177.93 Kb).
Conclusion: Finally we concluded that 16.6 % of our
patients carry clinically signi ﬁcant, pathogenic and/or likely
pathogenic mutations. These data strongly support the ideathat only a whole-genome high-resolution analysis such as
array CGH is able to provide an accurate diagnosis for
genetic imbalances in patients with syndromiccraniostenosis.
T.N. Delchev: None. D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H.
Kathom: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D.
Toncheva: None.
P14.031B
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated enrichment of targeted genomic
regions in human
R.Šket1, T. Tesovnik1, M. Debeljak1,2, J. Kova č1,2
1Unit of Special Laboratory Diagnostics, University
Children's Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: CRISPR/Cas9 technology has been widely
used for different modi ﬁcation of eukaryotic and bacterial
genomes. Here we applied (inactive) Cas9 for guidedenrichment and hence targeted sequencing of human
genomic regions in proximity of LDLR (chr19), PCSK9
(chr1) and APOB (chr2), genes associated with the familial
hypercholesterolemia.
Materials and Methods: Speci ﬁc single guide RNA
(sgRNA) probes were constructed and used for targetingLDLR ,PCSK9 andAPOB genes in human DNA, extracted
from whole blood samples. Different approaches encom-
passing SNAP-tag, biotin-tag, and immunoprecipitation of(inactive) Cas9 enzyme, were used for capturing of double-
stranded DNA target regions in fragments of app. 30k bp in
size. Captured DNA was further used for Illumina librarypreparation, sequencing and downstream bioinformatics
analysis.
Results: Applying different ratios between sgRNA,
human DNA, and dCas9 enzyme, together with multiple
capture techniques, resulted in successful enrichment,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1629especially when using biotin based capture and molar
excess of sgRNA/Cas9. Control and reduction of off-target
DNA/Cas9 associations and unspeci ﬁc binding of DNA to
paramagnetic particles used for immunoprecipitation
emerged as the crucial parameters affecting the enrichment
efﬁciency.
Conclusion: Altogether, our approach offers additional
insight into speci ﬁc enrichment of targeted genes and pre-
sents cost-effective and rapid tool in the investigation of thespeciﬁc genomic regions associated with familial hyperch-
olesterolemia. Grant information: Tertiary Projects, Medical
University Centre of Ljubljana (Nr. 20170085).
R.Šket:None. T. Tesovnik: None. M. Debeljak: None.
J. Kovač:None.
P14.032C
Breast cancer circulating tumour cell (CTC) detection
and characterization using a bead-based RNA multiplexpanel
J. Scerri, S. Baldacchino, C. Saliba, C. Scerri, G. GrechUniversity of Malta, Msida, Malta
Introduction: The presence of ≥5 circulating tumour cells
(CTCs) per 7.5 ml of blood correlates with poor prognosis
in metastatic breast cancer patients. Molecular characterisa-tion of CTCs requires highly sensitive assays capable of
detecting low-frequency RNA transcripts.
Method: A QuantiGene ™4-plex assay was optimized
for direct use on lysed CTCs, to quantitatively assess
molecular biomarkers associated with breast cancer classi-
ﬁcation ( ERBB2 ), epithelial CTC detection ( EPCAM ,
KRT19 ) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition ( FN1).
Serial dilutions (5-1000 cells) of ﬁve breast cancer cell lines
known to express at least one of the target genes (SKBR3,BT474, JIMT-1, MCF7 and Hs578T) were prepared and
microscopically counted. The cells were lysed and used
directly in the QuantiGene ™4-plex assay. Readings were
taken on the Luminex ®200™and MAGPIX ®instruments.
Results: The assay gave linear readings (R
2≥0.99) for the
genes expressed by each cell line down to a mean limit of26 cells (range: 6-58). KRT19 outperformed EPCAM as
epithelial biomarker. The mesenchymal, triple-negative cell
line Hs578T expressed only FN1, which maintained a linear
signal down to only 6 cells. In the HER2-positive cell lines,
ERBB2 was an excellent biomarker, even in JIMT-1, which
is known to be a low expresser. High concordance(R
2≥0.87) was recorded between the two instruments.
Conclusion: Direct cell lysis and signal ampli ﬁcation
technology make bead-based multiplex RNA panelsapplicable on liquid biopsies in the clinical laboratory. The
technique is being currently optimized with the use ofupstream, antibody-independent CTC enrichment methods
for its application in patient liquid biopsy specimens.
J. Scerri: None. S. Baldacchino: None. C. Saliba:
None. C. Scerri: None. G. Grech: None.
P14.033D
Comparative validation of two molecular tag-based
library systems for sequencing of circulating tumor
DNA
T. Nouspikel, L. Ho, T. McKee, T. Koessler
Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland
Liquid biopsy, the analysis of cell-free DNA released by
tumor cells into plasma, is becoming a promising biomarker
in clinical oncology. Potential applications include: opti-
mizing therapy (e.g. detecting resistance), monitoringresidual disease, appraising tumor mutation burden, and
early detection of relapses. Yet, this analysis is technically
challenging, largely because the minute amounts ofcirculating tumor DNA (ctDNA) often require detecting
mutations at frequencies lower than 1%. Molecular tags are
a recent technical improvement allowing to better distin-guish low frequency mutations from sequencing noise.
With the aim of implementing novel diagnostic tests in
our hospital, we systematically compared two leadingcommercial systems for molecular tags libraries: Avenio
(Roche) and QiaSeq (Qiagen), both with synthetic control
DNA (Horizon) and with DNA from patients with lung orcolon carcinoma. Our comparison included a set of 12 cases
of colorectal cancer for which we compared sequencing of
liquid biopsies with that of the initial tumors. Overall, therewas excellent agreement between the two ctDNA sequen-
cing techniques, but poor correlation with the initial tumor,
likely due to tumor evolution during the delay betweensurgery and liquid biopsy. Dilution experiments revealed
excellent linearity of detection, with a lower limit of
quanti ﬁcation around 0.2%. Repeatability and reproduci-
bility were good. A key factor was bioinformatic analysis,
and dedicated software proved superior to generic open-
source programs.
In conclusion, both ctDNA sequencing systems proved
equally good and provided sensitivities in the 10
-3range,
thus approaching the theoretical limit that can be expectedgiven the low amount of ctDNA in plasma.
T. Nouspikel: None. L. Ho: None. T. McKee: None. T.
Koessler: None.
P14.034A
Effective neonatal genetic diagnostics of cystic ﬁbrosis in
Khanty-Mansi region (Russia)1630M. Donnikov1,2, V. Mescheryakov1, A. Vorobev1,
A. Popov1, N. Satsuk3, L. Kolbasin2, D. Lozhkin1,
N. Kuntsevitch1, L. Kovalenko1, I. Urvantseva1,4
1Medical Institute of Surgut State University, Surgut,
Russian Federation,2Medical Genetics Counseling Service
of the Regional Cardiological Hospital “Center of
Diagnostics and Cardiovascular Surgery", Surgut, Russian
Federation,3Regional Children Clinical Hospital,
Nizhnevartovsk, Russian Federation,4Regional
Cardiological Hospital "Center of Diagnostics and
Cardiovascular Surgery", Surgut, Russian Federation
Introduction: Newborn screening (NBS) dramatically
improved cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) preclinical diagnostics,
although the need of early detection of CFTR mutations
still challenges regional genetics laboratories in Russia. We
applied 3-step approach using known molecular methodsfor fast mutation search, which helped physicians quickly
start appropriate neonatal treatment.
Materials and Methods: gDNA from 501 dried blood
spots (DBS) obtained using column extraction; high reso-
lution melting (HRM) analysis performed using “Precision
Melt Software ”(Bio-Rad); Sanger sequencing, MLPA
performed on “GenomeLab GeXP ”(Beckman Coulter)
according to manufacturers ’protocols.
Results: We applied 3-step approach (HRMA-Sanger-
MLPA) for all suspicious CF cases after NBS. In 2016 -
2018 we studied 401 samples and revealed 34 carriers with
one CFTR mutation and 17 children (later included in
regional CF registry) with two mutations. First we looked
for seven major regional mutations using HRM-based
genotyping, then HRM-based gene scanning revealed exonswith deviating melting patterns, which in turn were sub-
jected to Sanger sequencing. Finally, MLPA was used for
all samples. All ﬁndings (see Table) were validated later
with 100% concordance by NGS performed elsewhere. This
study also updated the list of major regional CFTR
mutations.
Conclusions: the proposed approach allowed to perform
CFTR mutation testing rapidly (TAT 3 - 4 days) for neo-
natal DBS samples at level of regional genetics laboratory,which is particularly important for new CF cases among
scattered population in Siberia.
List of mutant alleles revealed in the study
№HGVS Legacy mutant
alleles number%
from total
1 c.1521_1523delCTT (p.
Phe508del)[delta]F508 44 64.6
2 c.274G>A (p.Glu92Lys) E92K 4 5.9
3 c.54-5940_273 +10250del21kb
(p.Ser18ArgfsX16)CFTRdele2,3 3 4.44 c.412_413insACT (p.
Leu137_Leu138insThr)L138ins 2 2.9
5 c.1399C>T (p.Leu467Phe) L467F 2 2.9
6 c.1545_1546delTA (p.
Tyr515X)1677delTA 2 1.5
7 c.3196C>T (p.Arg1066Cys) R1066C 2 1.5
8 c.43delC (p.Leu15PhefsX10) 175delC 1 1.59 c.489 +1G>T 621 +1G->T 1 1.5
10 c.653T>A (p.Leu218X) L218X 1 1.5
11 c.1040G>A (p.Arg347His) R347H 1 1.512 c.1624G>T (p.Gly542X) G542X 1 1.5
13 c.2012delT (p.Leu671X) 2143delT 1 1.5
14 c.3208C>T (p.Arg1070Trp) R1070W 1 1.515 c.3846G>A (p.Trp1282X) W1282X 1 1.5
16 c.3983 T>A (p.Ile1328Lys) - 1 1.5
68 100
M. Donnikov: None. V. Mescheryakov: None. A.
Vorobev: None. A. Popov: None. N. Satsuk: None. L.
Kolbasin: None. D. Lozhkin: None. N. Kuntsevitch:
None. L. Kovalenko: None. I. Urvantseva: None.
P14.035B
Newborn screening EQA for Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and
Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase de ﬁciency
(MCADD): Ten year review (2008-2018)
F. Moon, R. Treacy, Z. C. Deans
GenQA, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Newborn screening is performed within the ﬁrst 8 weeks of
life to screen for diseases which are treatable if detected
early. Most of these tests are biochemical based but two
disorders include molecular testing for con ﬁrmation of
diagnosis; Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase de ﬁ-
ciency (MCADD) and cystic ﬁbrosis (CF). To monitor the
ability of molecular laboratories to detect MCADD and CFmutations from neonatal blood spot cards, an external
quality assessment (EQA) was set up in 2008. For these
EQAs, samples are distributed four times a year to providecontinual monitoring of the quality of testing. To mimic the
newborn screening carried out in laboratories as closely as
possible, routine neonatal bloodspot cards are used with realpatient blood samples. For the CF EQA a variety of
different CF variants are tested including the four most
common European CFTR variants (p.Phe508del, p.
Gly542*, p.Glu551Asp and c.621 +1G>T). Compound
heterozygotes and samples in which no variants are detected
are also included. For the MCADD EQA, participants arerequested to test the samples for the most common ACADM
variant c.985A>G p.(Lys329Glu) Approximately 30 labora-
tories currently participate in one or both bloodspot EQAs.These include participants from nine countries. A review of
these EQAs over the last ten years will be presented.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1631Including participating countries, the samples used in the
EQA runs, common errors and changes in mutation
nomenclature.
F. Moon: None. R. Treacy: None. Z.C. Deans: None.
P14.036C
Next-generation cytogenetics in medical genetics with
high-resolution optical mapping
T. Mantere1, K. Neveling1, M. Stevens-Kroef1, D. Olde
Weghuis1, D. Smeets1, A. Hoischen1,2,3
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Radboud Institute
of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University MedicalCenter, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Department of Internal
Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases
(RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands
Structural variants (SVs) are an important source of genetic
variation in the human genome and they are involved in a
multitude of human diseases, including cancer and devel-
opmental disorders. In a diagnostic set-up, comprehensiveanalysis of all molecular cytogenetic aberrations in a given
sample still requires a combination of techniques, such as
CNV-microarrays, karyotyping and FISH. We hypothesizethat the combination of classical approaches could be
largely replaced by novel optical mapping technology.
We had early access to the new SaphyrDC system (Bio-
Nano Genomics), which enables SV detection based on
optical mapping of labeled high-molecular weight DNA.
We performed optical mapping with >100X genome cov-erage to detect cytogenetic aberrations in 4 leukemia sam-
ples and compared the results with those obtained using
classical methods. In all samples, a very good concordancewith the results was achieved. This held true for deletions,
insertions, inversions and translocations, including 3-way
Philadelphia chromosome (46,XX, t(9;22;14)(q34;q11;q11.2)) and even chromothripsis. Importantly, we were able
to identify aberrations in samples with a cancer cell content
of just ~40%, using the latest single-molecule SV detectiontool from BioNano. Optical mapping also identi ﬁed novel
events e.g. an inversion of chromosome 11
(chr11:24,875,044-26,299,641) and a translocation (t(5;14)(q35.2;q 32.2)), both validated afterwards.
Optical mapping may have the potential to replace most
classical cytogenetic tests. Therefore, we are now launchinga study to systematically compare the sensitivity and spe-
ciﬁcity of optical mapping in 100 leukemia samples and
50 samples with known germline cytogenetic aberrationsagainst the standard of care work ﬂow.T. Mantere: None. K. Neveling: None. M. Stevens-
Kroef: None. D. Olde Weghuis: None. D. Smeets: None.
A. Hoischen: None.
P14.037D
Identi ﬁcation of genomic aberrations in children with
global developmental delay or intellectual disability
through detecting copy number changes and whole
exome sequencing
P. Chen, Y. Chen
Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome
Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan
Developmental delay (DD) is the late emergence of
developmental milestones during infancy and early child-
hood. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been regardedas one of the major causes of DD. The aim of this study is to
determine the ef ﬁciency of whole exome sequencing (WES)
as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test in comparison with array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for DD.
We have enrolled 322 subjects diagnosed with global
developmental delay or intellectual disability of unknowncause. All individuals have completed aCGH tests (Positive
rate: 17.1%). WES was performed on 24 trios and 10 pro-
bands with Agilent SureSelect target enrichment systemusing Illumina HiSeq2000. Twelve trios have been analyzed
by Golden Helix Varseq. On average, 339 CNVs with
conﬁrmed states, absent quality control ﬂags, and p-
values<0.01 were called. Spans of these CNVs ranged from
118bp to 2Mbp, with approximately 329 CNVs <100kb, 9
CNVs 100kb-1Mb, and 1 CNV >1Mb in each case.Duplications accounted for 57.6% con ﬁdent CNV calls.
Moreover, WES allows us to investigate single nucleotide
variations (SNVs). Among the 12 trios, we have discoveredcausal SNVs for two cases corresponding with their clinical
phenotypes. Further validation by qPCR is required to
conﬁrm the precision of CNV detection results by WES.
We will also evaluate how consistent WES detection results
are with aCGH.
Here we demonstrate the capacity of WES for detecting
CNVs and SNVs. WES may be considered a promising
ﬁrst-tier diagnostic tool for its versatility, moderate cost, and
the potential to reduce diagnostic odyssey.
P. Chen: None. Y. Chen: None.
P14.038A
A head-to-head evaluation of the diagnostic ef ﬁcacy and
costs of trio versus singleton exome sequencing analysis
T. Y. Tan, S. Lunke, B. Chong, D. Phelan, M. Fanjul-
Fernandez, J. Marum, V. Siva Kumar, Z. Stark, A. Yeung,1632N. J. Brown, C. Stutterd, M. B. Delatycki, S. Sadedin,
M. Martyn, I. Goranitis, N. Thorne, C. L. Gaff,
S. M. White
Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Melbourne,
Australia
Diagnostic exome sequencing (ES) can be performed on
the proband only (singleton; sES) or proband and bothbiological parents (trio; tES). In this study we sought to
compare the ef ﬁciencies of exome sequencing (ES) by trio
(tES) versus singleton (sES) approach, determine costs,and identify factors to cons ider when deciding on optimal
implementation strategies for the diagnosis of monogenic
disorders. We undertook ES in 30 trios and analysed eachproband ’s sES and tES data in parallel. Two teams were
randomly allocated to either sES or tES analysis for each
case and blinded to each other ’sw o r k .E a c ht a s kw a s
timed and cost analyses were based on time taken and
diagnostic yield. We modelled three scenarios to deter-
mine the factors to consider in the implementation of tES.sES diagnosed 11/30 (36.7%) cases and tES identi ﬁed one
additional diagnosis (12/30 (40.0%)). tES obviated the
need for Sanger segregation, reduced the number ofvariants for curation, and had lower cost-per-diagnosis
when considering analysis alone. When sequencing costs
were included, tES nearly doubled the cost of sES.Reﬂexing to tES in those who remain undiagnosed after
sES was cost-saving over tES in all as ﬁrst-line. This
approach requires a large differential in diagnostic yieldbetween sES and tES for maximal bene ﬁt given current
sequencing costs. tES may be preferable when scaling up
laboratory throughput due to ef ﬁciency gains and
opportunity cost considerations. Our ﬁndings are relevant
to clinicians, labor atories and health se rvices considering
tES over sES.
T.Y. Tan: None. S. Lunke: None. B. Chong: None. D.
Phelan: None. M. Fanjul-Fernandez: None. J. Marum:
None. V. Siva Kumar: None. Z. Stark: None. A. Yeung:
None. N.J. Brown: None. C. Stutterd: None. M.B.
Delatycki: None. S. Sadedin: None. M. Martyn: None. I.
Goranitis: None. N. Thorne: None. C.L. Gaff: None. S.
M. White: None.
P14.039B
Analytical validation of a sensitive myotonic dystrophy
type 1 (DM1) diagnostic test that provides precise repeat
sizing and resolves zygosity in a single PCR
G. Latham, K. Jefferson, J. Kemppainen, V. Le,
J. Wisotsky, M. Fahey, B. Hall, J. T. Brown
Asuragen, Austin, TX, United StatesIntroduction: Myotonic dystrophies are autosomal domi-
nant, multisystemic disorders with variable expressivity
characterized by progressive myopathy. Myotonic dystro-
phy type 1 (DM1) is caused by CTG expansions in the 3 ’
UTR of the DMPK gene on chromosome 19q13.3. The
severity of disease and age at onset is roughly correlated
with the number of the trinucleotide repeats. Reliable
assessment of CTG expansions is critical for diagnosis ofDM1. We developed and validated the AmplideX
®DM1 Dx
Kit, which generates numerical values for alleles ≤200
repeats and a categorical value for alleles >200 repeats.
Materials and Methods: The kit enables repeat-primed
PCR of genomic DNA isolated from whole blood, followed
by capillary electrophoresis (CE), manual peak annotation,and automated repeat length calculations. For exploratory
size estimation beyond 200 repeats, the kit facilitates an
optional agarose analysis.
Results: Analytical validation spanned 2192 valid mea-
surements, 1588 genotypes, and 730 unique CE ﬁles.
Single-site precision demonstrated that alleles with 5 to 145repeats were sized within 1 repeat of the mode (n>200). The
limit of detection was <4% fractional mosaic by probit
analysis. All homozygous and heterozygous samples werecorrectly identi ﬁed. Expanded alleles were accurately sized
when ≤200 repeats and larger expansions up to at least 1900
repeats were ampli ﬁed and categorically detected. A method
comparison yielded highly correlated results (100% con-
cordance and y =0.91+1.01x, R2 =1.00).
Conclusions: This single-tube assay combines gene-
speciﬁc and repeat-primed designs to assess DM1 genotype
and resolve zygosity. It is a streamlined procedure that
reduces the labor and turnaround time required forsouthern blot.
G. Latham: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Asuragen. K. Jefferson: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. J. Kemppainen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. V.
Le:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asura-
gen.J. Wisotsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Asuragen. M. Fahey: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. B. Hall: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. J.T. Brown: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen.
P14.040C
Solution-based isolation of ultra-high-molecular weight
(UHMW) DNA from fresh/frozen human blood andcultured cells in less than 3 hours
H. B. Sadowski
1, C. Proskow2, A. Files2, K. Pham2,
Y. Zhang2, G. Pljevaljcic2, A. Hastie2, M. Borodkin2Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 16331Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States,
2Bionano Genomics, San Deigo, CA, United States
Optical mapping of genomic DNA on the Bionano
Genomics Saphyr ®system for genome assembly or
structural variation detection relies on starting withUHMW DNA. To achieve this, we developed methods
for the isolation of genomic DNA that involves the
embedding of material in agarose plugs, and overnightlysis in situ with detergent and proteinase K. After
extensive washing on day 2, the agarose plug is melted,
treated with beta agarase, and the liberated DNA dropdialyzed. The UHMW DNA is ready for quanti ﬁcation
a n dl a b e l i n go nd a y3 .T h i s “plug lysis ”method is
extremely robust, but it is also labor intensive, dif ﬁcult to
automate, lengthy and expensive. To address these
shortcomings, we coupled so lution-based lysis with a
puriﬁcation step that leverages a novel process to bind,
wash and elute UHMW genomic DNA. This entire
protocol can be conducted in less than 3 hours on a batch
of 6 samples, allowing 12 samples to be processed in oneday. The eluted material is ready to use by day 2 and
contains high quality DNA that is clean enough for the
direct label and stain (DLS) protocol. The resultinglabeling metrics of this labeled DNA on a Saphyr Chip ®
are comparable to labeled DNA isolated by the traditional
“plug lysis ”protocol. We have validated protocols for
fresh/frozen human blood and cells, and are developing
protocols for plant and animal tissue. These protocols are
automatable, providing the needed solution for research-ers needing to purify DNA from hundreds to thousands of
individuals per year.
H.B. Sadowski: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. C. Proskow: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. A.
Files: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bio-
nano Genomics. K. Pham: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. Y. Zhang: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. G. Pljevaljcic: None. A. Hastie: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M.
Borodkin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics.
P14.041D
Turbolase: a radically streamlined high throughput
sample prep to sequencing work ﬂow
H. Fiske, D. Masser, R. Stedtfeld, J. Lenhart, V. Makarov,
L. Kurihara
Swift Bioscience, Ann Arbor, MI, United StatesNormalase is a novel enzymatic library normalization
method that eliminates library quanti ﬁcation and manual
concentration adjustment of each sample prior to library
pooling. When combined with Swift 2S Turbo rapid library
kits, a highly streamlined ‘
Turbolase ’workﬂow is created
that is readily automated on the Hamilton Star and otherplatforms, where simple bulk processing improves through-
put and reduces cost for NGS laboratories. Swift 2S Turbo
kits comprise two enzymatic steps and a single puri ﬁcation
that completes DNA fragmentation, end repair and adapter
ligation. This is followed by standard library ampli ﬁcation
using Normalase PCR primers to condition the libraries andproduce a required minimum yield in excess of the 4 nM
ﬁnal concentration. This is followed by a single puri ﬁcation
and two 15-minute Normalase incubation steps that; 1)enzymatically select 4 nM of each library, and 2)
enzymatically normalize each library to 4 nM within a
single pool. The pools can then be directly sequencedwithout further puri ﬁcation. Normalase allows for > 10-fold
variation in input quantity, while generating ≤10%
variation in sample representation within a pool resultingin optimal cluster density and sample balance for Illumina
sequencing. The ‘Turbolase ’workﬂow is compatible with
full-length indexed adapters that have been added byligation as well as work ﬂows that require indexing PCR
primers. Normalase is also compatible with library
preparation kits available from other vendors. Normalasefor pooling of libraries for pre-hybridization capture is
currently under development, which make multiplexed
hybridization capture protocols streamlined and robust fromlibrary generation to sequencing.
H. Fiske: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Swift Biosciences. D. Masser: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. R. Stedtfeld: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Swift Bios-
ciences. J. Lenhart: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. V. Makarov: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. L.
Kurihara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Swift Biosciences.
P14.042A
New approaches for adapter synthesis in Duplex
Sequencing
M. Ivankovic
1, R. Salazar1, J. Pröll2, I. Tiemann-Boege1
1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz,
Austria,2Center for Medical Research, Faculty of
Medicine, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
Introduction: Duplex Sequencing (DS) is a next generation
sequencing methodology capable of detecting ultra-low1634mutation frequencies by exploiting the fact that genetic
information is stored on complementary DNA strands.
Therefore, DNA fragments are ligated to adapters contain-
ing a double stranded degenerate sequence. Currently, fork
adapters consisting of two partially complementary oligo-
nucleotides are being used in DS. However, it has beensuggested that adapters comprising a hairpin loop structure,
such as the NEBNext adapters, show improved performance
in library preparation and sequencing. Here, we proposedifferent synthesis methods for creating hairpin loop
adapters for DS in house.
Material and Methods: We have developed a synthesis
strategy for a hairpin adapter and for adapters containing a
phosphorothioate bond at the ligation site. Currently we use
an adapted protocol for DS library preparation with thoseloop adapters. Adapter synthesis and proper function has
been veri ﬁed by gel electrophoresis and sequencing.
Results: We have successfully synthesized the proposed
hairpin adapters and replaced the fork adapter used in the
original protocol by Schmitt et al. (2012) with our loop
adapters. Sequencing data con ﬁrm their experimental
feasibility.
Discussion: Our hairpin adapters might offer advantages
over previously used fork adapters due to structural differ-ences. Additionally, we integrated a phosphorothioate bond
into DS hairpin adapters which might increase the stability
of the ligation site, reduce removal of the 3 ’T-overhang and
thus, decrease potential adapter dimer formation between
blunt-ended sites.
Project funded by the Linz Institute of Technology
(LIT213201001) and FWF (FWF308667000).
M. Ivankovic: None. R. Salazar: None. J. Pröll: None.
I. Tiemann-Boege: None.
P14.043B
A gene-agnostic trio exome strategy maximisesdiagnostic yield by uncovering disease-causing variants
in newly discovered disease genes
J. Baptista
1,2, K. Stals1, E. De Franco2, L. Mallin1,
V. Fryer1, M. Wakeling2, A. Parrish1, A. Johnson1,
J. Settle1, R. Caswell2, C. Tysoe1, E. Baple1,2, S. Ellard1,2
1Royal Devon and Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,
2University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom
Rare genetic diseases in patients with non-speci ﬁc/hetero-
geneous disorders are dif ﬁcult to diagnose and many
patients go through a “diagnostic odyssey ”of several years
and multiple testing before a genetic diagnosis is con ﬁrmed.
Genomic testing holds the promise of timely diagnoses
but the choice between numerous gene panels versus
“whole ”exome sequencing (WES) as a ﬁrst line diagnostictest is not straightforward; cost, turnaround time, likelihood
of success and the possibility of uncovering unsolicited
ﬁndings are important considerations that leave many
clinicians favouring gene panels over WES.
We analysed 601 consecutive trios referred for diag-
nostic testing using an in-house pipeline to ﬁlter rare
potentially deleterious vari ants by mode of inheritance.
Variant classi ﬁcation was as according to the ACMG-
AMP guidelines and variants of interest were discussed inan MDT meeting.
A diagnosis was identi ﬁed in 38.4% of cases (231/601)
and in a further 4% (26/601) a candidate variant is underinvestigation. De novo variants explained 55% of the
diagnoses with the remaining cases having a recessive
(38%), X-linked (6%) or mitochondrial aetiology (1%).Parental mosaicism was rare (<1% of cases). A number of
the diagnoses were in newly discovered genes where
association with the disorder was published within <3 yearsof the referral.
We will discuss the limitations of a gene panel approach
which in our series would leave 5-10% of the diagnosesunidenti ﬁed. WES offers a higher diagnostic yield and
allows for future data re-analysis to include newly
discovered genes.
J. Baptista: None. K. Stals: None. E. De Franco: None.
L. Mallin: None. V. Fryer: None. M. Wakeling: None. A.
Parrish: None. A. Johnson: None. J. Settle: None. R.
Caswell: None. C. Tysoe: None. E. Baple: None. S.
Ellard: None.
P14.044C
Exome sequencing of pooled parental DNA: a cost-
efﬁcient “trio-like ”strategy to increase diagnostic yield
in developmental disorders
F. Tran Mau-Them
1,2, A. Vitobello1,2, Y. Duffourd1,2,
A. Bruel1,2, S. Moutton1,2,3, A. Sorlin1,2,3, S. Nambot3,
A. Denomme-Pichon1,2, C. Poe1, T. Jouan1,2,
M. Chevarin1, M. Bordessoules1, E. Tisserand1,2,
A. Mosca-Boidron1,4, P. Callier1,4, L. Faivre1,2,3,
C. Philippe1,2,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,5
1Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique des
maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,2Inserm
–UB UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du
Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,
3Centre de Référence Maladies rares « Anomalies du
Développement et syndromes malformatifs », Centre deGénétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,
4Laboratoire
de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, FHU-
TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,5Centre de Référence «
Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares », Centre de
Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, FranceAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1635Introduction: In intellectual disability and developmental
abnormalities (ID/DA), clinical exome sequencing (cES) is
efﬁcient for identifying variants in known disease-causing
genes with a diagnostic yield around 30% in singleton
strategies that can increase to 40-50% with a trio-basedstrategy. Indeed, trio-based strategy facilitates variants
interpretation thanks to parental segregation but increases
sequencing cost. We so explored an alternative cost-efﬁcient trio-like approach, based on parental DNA pooling.
Materials and Methods: We pooled 6 paternal and 6
maternal DNA into two separate mixes. ES was performedwith an average depth of 70X (TWIG) or 100X (Agilent
CREV2) and an expected allelic balance in the pool of 5.8%
and 8.3%, respectively.
Results: After a conclusive proof-of-concept in 6 positive
individuals, this pool strategy was initially applied in 29
individuals with DI and/or AD, as second-tier after normalsingleton cES. We so identi ﬁed candidate variants in 19
different genes. After datasharing, we con ﬁrmed causal
implication of 7 genes in 8/29 individuals (27%) including 3genes newly involved in human disorders. This high rate led
us to deploy this strategy as a ﬁrst-tier exam in 82 indivi-
duals without previous cES.
Conclusion: In ID/DA, parental pool strategy appears
very cost-ef ﬁcient by combining increased diagnostic yields
compared to singleton ES and decreased sequencing costs,compared to classical trio approach. This could represent an
interesting alternative to trio-based ES in molecular
laboratories performing exome routinely.
F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: None. Y.
Duffourd: None. A. Bruel: None. S. Moutton: None. A.
Sorlin: None. S. Nambot: None. A. Denomme-Pichon:
None. C. Poe: None. T. Jouan: None. M. Chevarin:
None. M. Bordessoules: None. E. Tisserand: None. A.
Mosca-Boidron: None. P. Callier: None. L. Faivre: None.
C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None.
P14.045D
Establishing high sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for exome
sequencing on Ion Proton
P. Gampawar
1, Y. Saba1, U. Werner1, R. Schmidt2,
B. Müller-Myhsok3, H. Schmidt1
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria,2Department of
Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria,
3Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany
Library preparation for whole exome sequencing is a
critical step serving the enrichment of the regions of
interest. For Ion Proton, there are only two exome librarypreparation methods available, AmpliSeq and SureSelect.
Although of major interest, a comparison of the two
methods is hitherto m i s s i n gi nt h el i t e r a t u r e .H e r ew e
systematically evaluate the performance of AmpliSeq and
SureSelect and present an improved variant calling pipe-
line. We used 12 in-house DNA samples with genome-wide and exome microarray data and a commercially
available reference DNA (NA12878) for evaluation. Both
methods had a high concordance (>97%) with microarraygenotypes and when validating against NA12878 a
sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) of >93%
and >80%, respectively. Application of our variant callingpipeline decreased the number of false positive variants
dramatically by 90% and resulted in PPV of 97%. This
improvement is highly relevant in research as well asclinical setting.
Grants: Austrian National Bank Anniversary Fund, Aus-
trian Ministry of Science under the aegis of the EU JointProgramme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research, PhD
program ‘Molecular Medicine ’and Franz-Lanyar Stiftung
of the Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
P. Gampawar: None. Y. Saba: None. U. Werner:
None. R. Schmidt: None. B. Müller-Myhsok: None. H.
Schmidt: None.
P14.046A
Reanalysis of exome sequencing data from an Estoniancohort of 85 families with suspected Mendelian
disorders
K. Õunap
1,2,3, K. Reinson1,2, K. Muru1,2, Ü. Murumets1,
T. Kahre1,2, M. H. Wojcik3,4, E. Seaby3, T. Reimand1,2,
S. Pajusalu1,2,5
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States,4Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
United States,5Yale University School of Medicine,
Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States
Exome sequencing (ES) is a proven powerful tool to
identify the molecular etiology of Mendelian disorders, with
a diagnostic yield of 25-40%, 29.3% in our lab after initial
diagnostic analysis. We performed reanalysis of ES dataand trio genome sequencing (GS) data in unsolved Estonian
families with suspected Mendelian disorders to increase the
diagnostic yield. ES reanalysis was performed in 85families (66 trios, 19 singletons) at Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard. Additionally, ten families with proband-only1636ES were expanded to trio ES, and 39 ES-negative families
were re-sequenced with trio GS at Broad Institute for
improved variant detection. We identi ﬁed a pathogenic
variant in a known disease gene in 14 (16%) cases; these
were mainly missed due to: limited ability to detect de novo
variants in proband-only ES; bioinformatics issues in earlyES studies; or analysis being executed before the relevant
disease gene discovery. In 15 (18%) families, we identi ﬁed
a pathogenic variant in a novel disease gene, of which someare already published via collaborations initiated through
the Matchmaker exchange ( RORA ,RAB11A , and CYFIP2 ).
In 27 (32%) families a candidate gene was found andfunctional studies are in progress for eight of these. The
remaining 29 (34%) patients are still unsolved. Using this
approach, we improved our diagnostic yield for previouslyundiagnosed cases by solving an additional 1/3 of the cases
(total 53%) and by having a promising gene candidate for
another 1/3 of the remaining families. Funding: EstonianResearch Council grants PUT355, PRG471, and
PUTJD827.
K. Õunap: None. K. Reinson: None. K. Muru: None.
Ü. Murumets: None. T. Kahre: None. M.H. Wojcik:
None. E. Seaby: None. T. Reimand: None. S.
Pajusalu: None.
P14.047B
Initiative for the harmonization of the qualityassessment for analyses performed by the Belgian
Centers for Human Genetics in the context of Rare
Diseases
J. Lantoine
1, V. Benoit2, A. Brysse3, K. Claes4,
A. Corveleyn5, M. De Rycke6, V. Dideberg3, E. Fastré7,
L. Van Laer8, M. Ravoet7, S. Rombout2, C. Rydlewski9,
S. Seneca6, S. Symoens4, K. Van Den Bogaert5,
F. Wilkin9, W. Wuyts8, P. Van De Walle1,
N. M. Vandevelde1
1Department of Quality of Laboratories, Sciensano,
Brussels, Belgium,2Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique,
Gosselies, Belgium,3Centre de Génétique Humaine - CHU
Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium,4Centrum Medische Genetica
- UZ Gent, Gent, Belgium,5Centrum menselijke erfelijkheid
- UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,6Centrum voor Medische
Genetica - UZ Brussel VUB, Brussels, Belgium,7Centre de
Génétique Humaine - Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc
UCL, Brussels, Belgium,8Centrum Medische Genetica - UZ
Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium,9Centre de Génétique
Humaine –ULB, Brussels, Belgium
The Belgian healthcare authorities want to support the
Belgian Centers for Human Genetics (BCHGs) in the
development of a Quality System and participation toExternal Quality Controls (EQAs). One of the objectives of
the Belgian Plan for Rare Diseases is to develop funding for
their participation to EQAs for genetic tests focused on
hereditary rare diseases.
A screening of quality controls focused on rare diseases
available in Belgium and abroad was ﬁrstly performed.
Based on this preliminary step, a survey was sent to the
BCHGs to collect information about their participation to
these inventoried quality controls, their provider and theirevaluation of the schemes. Then, a working group (WG)
composed of members from the BCHGs and the Belgian
institute for health has been set up.
This working group is selecting priority EQAs for which
participation fees should be covered by the Belgian
healthcare authorities according to clinical relevanceand costs.
Since there is no rules, the WG is also focusing on the
harmonization of the participation frequencies to EQAs bywriting guidelines on the minimal frequency of participation
to EQAs focused on hereditary rare diseases ’diagnosis.
These guidelines will provide recommendations on how
often it is necessary for the BCHGs to perform EQAs and
they will serve as basis for the reimbursement of the
selected EQAs. The proposed EQAs and the budget tocover participation fees will be submitted to the Belgian
National Institute for Health and Disability Insurance
(RIZIV-INAMI) for evaluation and approval.
Grant:
work funded by RIZIV-INAMI.
J. Lantoine: None. V. Benoit: None. A. Brysse: None.
K. Claes: None. A. Corveleyn: None. M. De Rycke:
None. V. Dideberg: None. E. Fastré: None. L. Van Laer:
None. M. Ravoet: None. S. Rombout: None. C. Rydle-
wski: None. S. Seneca: None. S. Symoens: None. K. Van
Den Bogaert: None. F. Wilkin: None. W. Wuyts: None.
P. Van De Walle: None. N.M. Vandevelde: None.
P14.048C
Development and characterization of a sample to answerFactor II/V assay
N. Pelte
1, S. A. Dunbar2, S. Morrison1
1Luminex Corporation, Toronto, ON, Canada,2Luminex
Corporation, Austin, TX, United States
Introduction: Prothrombin G20210A and Factor V Leiden
(G1691A) are dominant autosomal mutations that increase therisk of blood clots, including deep vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism. Here we present the development and
characterization of a Factor II/V real-time PCR genotypingassay compatible with Luminex ’sA R I E S
®System, a sample to
answer device capable of running laboratory developed tests.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1637Materials and Methods: Fluorescently labeled modi ﬁed
primers were designed to bind to wildtype and mutant
Factor II/V alleles with the 3 ’end of the primer located at
position 1691 for Factor V and 20210 for Factor II. DNA
extraction and real-time PCR were performed using the
ARIES®System, ARIES®Extraction Cassettes, and DNA
Ready Mix (an ARIES®compatible lyophilized master
mix). Performance was evaluated using EDTA-stabilized
human blood samples, banked nucleic acid with knowngenotypes, and synthetic DNA.
Results: All Factor II/V genotypes were correctly iden-
tiﬁed in a set of 98 fresh human blood samples and 43
previously characterized DNA samples. SNPs near the
mutations showed no impact on assay performance. The
sample to answer assay required only 5 minutes hands-ontime and tolerated common blood interfering substances and
variation in blood input volumes from 50 to 500 μL.
Conclusions: The Factor II/V assay presented here is
both highly speci ﬁc and robust. The assay ’s compatibility
with the sample to answer ARIES
®System signi ﬁcantly
reduced the hands-on time required to perform the test.
N. Pelte: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Luminex Corporation. S.A. Dunbar: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Luminex Corporation. S. Mor-
rison: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Luminex Corporation.
P14.049D
Improved fetal fraction estimation by combining
estimators based on fragment lengths and fragmentcounts in non-invasive prenatal testing
R. Hekel
1,2,3, J. Gazdarica1,2,3, J. Budi š2,4,3, M. Kucharík2,
F.Ďuriš2,3, J. Radvánszky1,5, J. Tur ňa1,3, T. Szemes1,2,4
1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University,
Bratislava, Slovakia,2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,
3Slovak Center of Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information,
Bratislava, Slovakia,4Comenius University Science Park,
Bratislava, Slovakia,5Institute for Clinical and
Translational Research, Biomedical Research Center,
Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: The reliability of non-invasive prenatal
testing is highly dependent on the accurate estimation offetal fraction. Several methods have been proposed up to
date, utilizing different attributes of analysed genomic
material, for example length and genomic location ofsequenced DNA fragments. These sources of information
are relatively different, but so far, at least according to our
knowledge, there were no published attempts to combinethem to get an improved predictor.Materials and Methods: We propose several fetal frac-
tion estimation improvements with special focus on the
samples that are most prone to wrong diagnostic conclu-
sions. We introduced new method for estimating fetal
fraction (Non-linear regression model) and also compared
other statistical (Linear regression model) and machinelearning methods (Neural networks, Support vector
machines).
Results: We demonstrate, that although understudied,
prediction based on length of sequenced DNA fragments
may achieve nearly the precision as state-of-the-art methods
based on their genomic locations. Finally, we show thatcombination of several sample attributes leads to a predictor
that has superior prediction accuracy over any single
approach.
The presented work was supported by the “REVOGENE
- Research centre for molecular genetics ”project (ITMS
26240220067) supported by the Operational ProgrammeResearch and Development funded by the ERDF.
R. Hekel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budi š:A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. M. Kucharík:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. F.
Ďuriš:A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton
Ltd. J. Radvánszky: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Geneton Ltd.. J. Turňa:None. T. Szemes: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd..
P14.050A
Performance of rapid DNA extraction from buccal swab
using a new molecular system for the detection of a
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
B. Mombelli
1, M. Boles Savoldi1, S. Castriciano2
1Bioside SRL, San Paulo, Italy,2Society Copan Italia,
Brescia, Italy
Introduction: SNP genotyping measures genetic variations
ofsingle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). HPV infec-
tions immune-response have been implicated in cervicalcancer and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) develop-
ment associated to di SNP:rs 1800629. Bioside developed a
rapid DNA extraction and lyophilizate ready-to-use SNPssystems. The objective of this study was to validate the
Copan hDNA free FLOQSwab (hDNAFS) for buccal
samples (BS) collection with the Bioside rapid DNAextraction and new SNPs systems.
Materials and Methods: In this study DNA quantity/
quality of BS, collected with hDNAFS, cellulose, polyesterand rayon swabs, were compared. BS (N =50) were used for
this validation. Thermo Scienti ﬁc (TF) SAMPLE TO SNP1638system (ST-SNP-S) and Bioside DNA extraction system,
(equipment-free buffer that extracts DNA in 10min RT
incubation) analyzed with TF ST-SNP-S and the Bioside
ready- to-use SNP-rs 1800629 analysis system for the
detection of the TNF-A, A>G mutation. Genotyping was
performed by sequencing and quanti ﬁcation by
luminometer.
Results: Optimal DNA quantity/quality was obtained
with hDNAFS BS and Bioside extraction. In the 50 BSanalysed with both SNP systems, hDNA FS +Bioside
obtained an average DNA better yield of 0.5 log compared
to hDNAFS +TF ST-SNP-S. In the samples tested 50/50
were correctly genotyped by the Bioside-system and 49/50
by TF ST-SNP-S. Inhibition was detected in 2/50 by ST-
SNP-S and in 0/50 by Bioside-system.
Conclusions: Better DNA yield and genotyping without-
inhibition was obtained from BS collected with Copan
hDNAFS by both Biooside rapid nucleic acid extaction andready-to- use lyophilizate SNP-rs 1800629 analysis for
TNF-A, A>G mutations.
B. Mombelli: None. M. Boles Savoldi: None. S.
Castriciano: None.
P14.051B
CRISPR/Cas9-targeted enrichment and long-read
sequencing of a non-coding corneal dystrophy-
associated TCF4 triplet repeat
N. J. Hafford-Tear
1,Y .T s a i2, A. N. Sadan1, B. Sanchez-
Pintado1, C. Zarouchlioti1, G. J. Maher3, P. Liskova4,1,
S. J. Tuft5,1, A. J. Hardcastle1, T. A. Clark2,
A. E. Davidson1
1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom,2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United
States,3Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,4Department
of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, CharlesUniversity and General University Hospital in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic,
5Moor ﬁelds Eye Hospital,
London, United Kingdom
Introduction: More than 40 human diseases are caused by
expansions of simple nucleotide repeat sequences (micro-satellites). Diagnosis and prognosis of these conditions
relies upon accurate sizing of mutant alleles for which
current PCR-based sizing methods are insuf ﬁcient. Here we
demonstrate the custom application of an ampli ﬁcation-free
long-read sequencing method, termed ‘No-Amp Targeted
Sequencing ’, to characterise the Fuchs endothelial corneal
dystrophy (FECD)-associated intronic TCF4 triplet repeat(termed CTG18.1) at the nucleotide level within a FECD
patient cohort.
Materials and Methods: We applied an ampli ﬁcation-
free method, utilising the CRISPR/Cas9 system, in combi-
nation with PacBio single molecule real time (SMRT) long-
read sequencing, to study CTG18.1. FECD patient samples(n=11) displaying a diverse range of CTG18.1 allele
lengths and zygosity status (as determined by conventional
PCR-based methods) were analysed. A robust data analysispipeline was developed to effectively ﬁlter, align and
interrogate CTG18.1-speci ﬁc reads.
Results: CRISPR-guided SMRT sequencing of CTG18.1
provided accurate genotyping information for all samples
and phasing was possible for 18/22 alleles sequenced.
Repeat length instability was observed for all expanded(≥50 repeats) phased CTG18.1 alleles analysed. Further-
more, higher levels of repeat instability were associated
with increased CTG18.1 allele length (mode length ≥91
repeats) indicating that expanded alleles behave
dynamically.
Conclusions: CRISPR-guided SMRT sequencing of
CTG18.1 has revealed novel insights into CTG18.1 length
instability. Furthermore, this study provides a framework to
improve the molecular diagnostic accuracy for CTG18.1-mediated FECD, which we anticipate will become
increasingly important as gene-directed therapies are
developed for this common age-related and sight threaten-ing disease.
N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. Y. Tsai: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or
other in-kind support); Modest; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. A.N.
Sadan: None. B. Sanchez-Pintado: None. C. Zarou-
chlioti: None. G.J. Maher: None. P. Liskova: None. S.J.
Tuft: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. T.A. Clark: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences. C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment,receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Paci ﬁ
c
Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences. A.E. Davidson: None.
P14.052C
Challenges, warnings and recommendations for gene
panel testing in hereditary cancer
L. Feliubadaló1,2,3, J. del Valle1,2,3, E. Tornero1,2,3,
M. Menéndez1,2,3, X. Muñoz1,2, R. Cuesta1,2, O. Campos1,2,
E. Montes1,2, C. Gómez1,2, S. González1,2,3, J. Brunet1,2,3,
G. Capellá1,2,3, M. Pineda1,2,3, C. Lázaro1,2,3Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 16391Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of
Oncology (ICO-IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain,2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and
Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC),Madrid, Spain
Since the incorporation of NGS into genetic diagnostics, the
laboratories test-portfolio has broadened. However, the
analysis of multiple genes at once is not always paired with
enough knowledge regarding molecular pathology, geneticutility, associated risks and clinical management. Our aim is
to discuss some of the current challenges in hereditary
cancer testing.
Concerning special gene features:
-Not always truncating variants in tumour suppressor
genes are pathogenic, due to functional rescue by othertranscripts (i.e. BRCA1 ,TSC2 ).
-Several genes have nearly identical sequences and exist
in multiple locations as a result of segmental duplications.This fact can cause an important decrease in the accuracy of
variant detection, even reporting pseudogene variants as
pathogenic. We face this problem in PMS2 ,PRSS1 ,
BMPR1A ,CHEK2 ,BRCA1 ,NF1 andPTEN .
Concerning variant classi ﬁcation:
-Some hereditary cancer conditions are caused by acti-
vating variants, so the widely used ACMG/AMP classi ﬁ-
cation guidelines should be applied with caution.
-In the same gene, different pathogenic variants can
confer different cancer risk.
-Exon/gene duplications are not necessarily pathogenic. It
is mandatory to prove in each case that the variant damagesthe transcript.
-ClinVar clinical assertions should not be directly trans-
ferred to a diagnostic report since some are based oninsufﬁcient evidence.
In the “one-gene-at-a time ”era,ﬁnding a pathogenic
variant often led to stop the analysis. However, compre-hensive (sub)exomic analysis reveals numerous cases of
digenic, trigenic, and more complex inheritance patterns as
seen in the increasing number of patients with MultilocusInherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome (MINAS).
L. Feliubadaló: None. J. del Valle: None. E. Tornero:
None. M. Menéndez: None. X. Muñoz: None. R. Cuesta:
None. O. Campos: None. E. Montes: None. C. Gómez:
None. S. González: None. J. Brunet: None. G. Capellá:
None. M. Pineda: None. C. Lázaro: None.
P14.053D
Optimizing diagnostic sequencing to both improveclinical sensitivity and reduce con ﬁrmatory testing: An
interlaboratory approachS. Lincoln
1, M. Lebo2,3,4, J. Zook5, R. Truty1, C. Lin4,
J. Paul1, V. Ramey1, M. Salit5,6, H. Rehm2,4,7,
R. Nussbaum1,8
1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States,2Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,3Brigham and
Womens Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,4Partners
HealthCare Laboratory for Molecular Medicine,
Cambridge, MA, United States,5National Institute of
Standards, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,6Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, United States,7Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,8University of
California, San Francisco, CA, United States
Introduction: To reliably inform medical care, clinical
sequencing must provide high sensitivity for pathogenic
variants. This can be dif ﬁcult to achieve given the high
prevalence of technically challenging pathogenic varianttypes in patients
1. Unfortunately, the highest sensitivity
NGS methods can also produce false positives, necessitat-
ing the use of orthogonal con ﬁrmatory assays, a signi ﬁcant
cost and time burden. Optimizing both sensitivity and
speciﬁcity at minimal total cost may be aided by careful
analysis of large clinical data sets.
Methods: Thirteen validated genetic tests in two clinical
laboratories were applied to a suite of reference samples and
over 50,000 patients with orthogonal data. A novel opti-mization algorithm divided these variants into classes based
on NGS quality metrics, type and genomic context. Each
class was characterized using rigorous statistics.
Results: Most pathogenic variants (90%) could be placed
into classes having perfect observed accuracy (both sensi-
tivity and analytic PPV) with CIs 99.5% or better. Strongclaims regarding sensitivity for such variants would be
justiﬁed, and these variants do not bene ﬁt from con ﬁrma-
tion. The remaining variants require additional steps todetect (e.g. additional algorithms and low stringency ﬁl-
tering, to reduce false negatives) and often do require
conﬁrmation (to reduce false positives).
Conclusion: Our methods are applicable to panels,
exomes, and genomes. They described in detail and can be
applied by many laboratories
1,2. These methods and data may
inform emerging international guidelines on clinical NGS3.
References: [1] Lincoln ESHG 2018; Manuscript in
review; [2] Lincoln JMD in press; [3] Crooks AMP 2018;Manuscript in preparation
S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Illumina, Thermo Fisher. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-niﬁcant; Invitae. M. Lebo: None. J. Zook: None. R.
Truty: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;1640Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. C. Lin:
None. J. Paul: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Invitae. V. Ramey: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Invitae. M. Salit: None. H. Rehm: None. R. Nussbaum:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae.
P14.054C
Patient blood derived cell lines provide unlimited supplyof DNA
D. Blick, C. Wilson, A. Lual, S. Bahia, B. Bolton,
E. Burnett, J. E. Russell
European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures,
Salisbury, United Kingdom
Background: Advances in genomic pro ﬁling techniques
have enabled researchers to identify risk factor genes that
can contribute towards an individual ’s susceptibility to a
disease. The validity and reproducibility of research relieson access to ethically sourced, authenticated, quality
controlled samples. The UK MND Collections (formerly
the UK MND DNA Bank) is a biological resource,containing DNA, cell lines and epidemiological data for
MND research.
Objectives: To collect and make available samples, and
associated clinical data, from cohorts of patients, their
parents/siblings and controls, representing cases of sporadic
and familial MND for research into genetic risk factors.
Methods: Over 3000 patient and control blood samples
were collected and sent to the European Collection of
Authenticated Cell Cultures for storage and Epstein-Barrvirus (EBV) transformation into lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCL). EBV transformation had been demonstrated to be an
efﬁcient, cost-effective method for immortalising patient
samples, allowing for a potentially unlimited supply of
DNA. The LCL underwent authentication testing to ensure
that they matched the original patient blood sample and therespective DNA.
Results: LCL were generated from all blood samples and
in 2017, the MND Association selected 193 samples to bemade available to researchers. Gene mutations present in
this sub-set of cell lines include C9orf72, SOD1, FUS and
TARDBP.
Discussion: To support MND research the patient and
control cell lines are available from ECACC followingapproval from the MND Association. We would like to
thank the MND Association, and the Wellcome Trust for
funding the formation of the cell line collection.
D. Blick: None. C. Wilson: None. A. Lual: None. S.
Bahia: None. B. Bolton: None. E. Burnett: None. J.E.
Russell: None.
P14.055B
GenoinVar: an end-to-end solution to the discovery ofcausal variants
H. Froufe
1, D. Martins1, S. Magalhães1, C. Barroso1,2,
C. Egas1,2, M. J. Simões1
1Genoinseq, Next-Generation Sequencing Unit, Biocant,
Cantanhede, Portugal,2Center for Neuroscience and Cell
Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Genetic diagnosis is crucial information for clinical practice
in many cases. The untargeted solutions based on next-
generation sequencing have proved to be cost-effective inthe diagnosis of a wide range of conditions and have also
led to a signi ﬁcative reduction in time to diagnosis.
We developed GenoinVar, an integrative end-to-end
solution from the biological sample to exome sequencing
and variant analysis to the discovery of causal genetic
variants. The solution involves Illumina whole exomesequencing using a capture procedure from IDT, with uni-
form and above speci ﬁcations sequencing metrics.
Sequencing data is processed using an in-house pipeline,and an encrypted database of variants with the corre-
sponding annotations is created. Candidate variants are
prioritized in our ExomeLoupe platform, an intuitive anduser-friendly Windows software for variant selection and
interpretation. ExomeLoupe interacts directly with the
encrypted database enabling users to securely store, analyzeand share this sensitive genetic information in compliance
with the GDPR.
This end-to-end solution was developed in the framework
of In2Genome, a multidisciplinary project to integrate
exome sequencing in clinical practice, with experts of
Genoinseq, Coimbra Genomics and the Genetics Unit of theCoimbra Pediatric Hospital (CHUC). GenoinVar validation
included 13 molecular diagnosed patients selected by clin-
ical geneticists. The GenoinVar sequencing results wereanalyzed by two independent blinded specialists using
ExomeLoupe that successfully identi ﬁed the previously
reported causal variants in all 13 cases.
GenoinVar represents a true end solution for identifying
causal variants in clinical and research contexts.
Funding: In2Genome (CENTRO-01-0247-FEDER-
017800), GenomePT (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-022184) and
Strategic Project (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007440).Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1641H. Froufe: None. D. Martins: None. S. Magalhães:
None. C. Barroso: None. C. Egas: None. M.J.
Simões: None.
P14.056C
A new diagnostic approach to calling CNVs from lowread-depth genome sequencing data
B. Wild
1, K. Mann2, C. Donaghue2, D. Bonthron3,
C. Watson3, J. W. Ahn1
1Genetics Laboratories, Guy's Hospital, London, UK,
London, United Kingdom,2Genetics Laboratories, Viapath,
London, UK, London, United Kingdom,3MRC Medical
Bioinformatics Centre, Leeds Institute for Data Analytics,University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, Leeds, United Kingdom
Low read-depth genome sequencing (GS) has been
demonstrated to detect CNV and proposed as a cost-
effective, resilient alternative to cytogenomic microarrays
(CMA). We aimed to assess this technology in comparisonto the current standard of care.
GS data with an average read depth of 5X was processed
with a number of CNV callers to evaluate performance.These included: WisecondorX, Canvas, Lumpy, Manta,
Breakseq2, Breakdancer, Delly, and CNVnator. We also
investigated a CNV caller developed by the Leeds MRCMedical Bioinformatics Centre. Data was downsampled in
order to test these algorithms at a series of read depths.
After optimising the algorithms by modifying the seedlength or window size, we demonstrated detection of CNVs
down to 0.3Mb at a read depth of 0.05X. To determine
whether this method is a feasible and cost effective, sampleswith known CNV calls were prepared using the NEXT-
FELX Rapid DNA-Seq kit, sequenced on the Illumina
NextSeq platform and analysed using the re ﬁned pipeline.
To match the current cost of CMA analysis, each sample
can be sequenced to roughly 0.225X. Furthermore, tissue
samples were run to investigate the resilience of low readdepth GS for poor quality samples. In conclusion, low read-
depth GS performed similarly to CMA for CNVs >0.3Mb,
even at read depths as low as 0.05X. Although issues sur-rounding mapping repetitive regions and breakpoint accu-
racy need to be resolved, we have demonstrated that low
read-depth GS can offer an improved, low-cost service incomparison to CMA.
B. Wild: None. K. Mann: None. C. Donaghue: None.
D. Bonthron: None. C. Watson: None. J.W. Ahn: None.
P14.057D
Outcome of genomic testing in in South Australia:detection rate is not the same for all (virtual) panelsJ. Fletcher, K. Brion, E. Douglas, A. Dubowsky,
K. Friend, J. Geoghagan, S. Grist, M. Gurner, R. Hall,
D. Henry, G. McKavanagh, C. Nicholls, T. Pyragius,
L. Rawlings, J. Rossini, L. Sanchez, H. Scott, J. Soubrier,
C. Vakulin, A. Wells, S. Yu, K. Kassahn
SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia
Introduction: We audited our germline genomic testing in
South Australia using massively parallel sequencing from
2014 to 2018.
Method: Data were extracted from laboratory records.
Testing was initially performed on the Illumina Inherited
Disease™, Trusight Cancer ™ and Trusight One ™
sequencing panels, dependent on genes requested. Wecurrently use virtual panels on either a custom-designed
Roche 1228 gene panel or the Roche NimbleGen SeqCap
EZ MedExome. Libraries were sequenced on the IlluminaMiSeq or NextSeq sequencing systems. Results were clas-
siﬁed according to the ACMG standards. Pathogenic/likely
pathogenic results were con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: 3068 tests were performed. The highest diag-
nosis rate (98%) was for con ﬁrmation of a biochemical
diagnosis. High diagnosis rates were achieved for Duchennemuscular dystrophy (71%, 15% VUS), Alport syndrome
(55%, VUS 7%), neuromuscular (48%, VUS 38%) and
connective tissue (42%, VUS 32%) panel testing. Thelowest diagnostic rates were seen in Ehlers Danlos (9%,
VUS 55%), Noonan (27%, VUS 20%), Cornelia de Lange
(29%, VUS 43%), single gene/small panel (28%, VUS21%) and large gene panel testing (22%, VUS 24%). Sanger
sequencing con ﬁrmed 1460 of 1478 positive results (99%).
6 non-con ﬁrmations related to repeat regions, 4 each to
sample mix up, pseudogenes and “noisy ”regions.
Conclusions: We are now testing more exomes, with a
preference for phenotype-driven analysis. As expected,genes for which molecular testing has been performed
longer have more positive diagnoses and less VUS. There
was a high concordance for variant con ﬁrmation.
J. Fletcher: None. K. Brion: None. E. Douglas: None.
A. Dubowsky: None. K. Friend: None. J. Geoghagan:
None. S. Grist: None. M. Gurner: None. R. Hall: None.
D. Henry: None. G. McKavanagh: None. C. Nicholls:
None. T. Pyragius: None. L. Rawlings: None. J. Rossini:
None. L. Sanchez: None. H. Scott: None. J. Soubrier:
None. C. Vakulin: None. A. Wells: None. S. Yu: None. K.
Kassahn: None.
P14.058A
Advantages of genotype imputation with ethnically
matched reference panel for rare variant associationanalyses1642K. Mart1,2, T. Nikopensius1, K. Läll1,3, K. Pärn2,
T. T. Sikka1,4, J. Suvisaari5, V. Salomaa5, S. Ripatti2,6,
A. Palotie2,6, A. Metspalu1, T. Esko1,6, P. Palta1,2,
R. Mägi1
1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,2Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland,3Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,4Department of Biotechnology,
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,5National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland,6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, United States
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been
widely used for detecting genetic biomarkers in a wide
range of traits. Typically, GWASs are carried out usingchip-based genotyping data, which are then combined with
a more densely genotyped reference panel to infer untyped
genetic variants in chip-typed individuals. Publicly avail-able and ethnically heterogeneous imputation reference
panels (IRPs) such as 1000G are suf ﬁciently accurate for
imputation of common and low-frequency variants.Population-speci ﬁc IRPs have demonstrated great improve-
ment in imputation accuracy of rare variants, but their effect
to the downstream analysis is not very well examined.
We systematically compared downstream association
analysis effects in ~37,000 Estonians imputed with ethni-
cally mixed 1000G and ethnically matched Estonian-Finnish IRPs. Firstly, variant-wise GWASs were per-
formed on eight complex traits (body mass index and seven
complex diseases of major public health importance).Although several previously reported common variant
associations were replicated in both imputed datasets, no
major differences were observed. Secondly, a gene-basedtests of rare (MAF < 1%) nonsynonymous and loss-of-
function variants were conducted and identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant
gene-trait associations were studied in the UK Biobankdata. Gene-based analysis demonstrated that ethnically
matched panel outperformed the 1000G-based imputation,
provided 10-fold increase in tested genes and signi ﬁcant
ﬁndings. Validation indicated that most of the signi ﬁcantly
associated genes were previously known, but there were
some which turned out to be worthwhile novel ﬁndings.
In conclusion, we observed that population-speci ﬁc panel
ensures a better imputation quality for rare variation and
captures more population-speci ﬁc variants, enabling more
efﬁcient discovery of disease-associated genes.
K. Mart: None. T. Nikopensius: None. K. Läll: None.
K. Pärn: None. T.T. Sikka: None. J. Suvisaari: None. V.
Salomaa: None. S. Ripatti: None. A. Palotie: None. A.Metspalu: None. T. Esko: None. P. Palta: None. R.
Mägi: None.
P14.061D
Identi ﬁcation of a novel germline BRCA2 duplication by
targeted gene enrichment and next generationsequencing
J. Bublitz, J. van Luttikhuizen, G. Schmidt, S. Morlot,
R. Buurmann, B. Auber, D. Steinemann
Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, GermanyIntroduction: About 70% of women with a pathogenic
germline variant in BRCA1 orBRCA2 (BRCA1/2 )w i l l
develop breast cancer by the age of 80. The identi ﬁcation of
BRCA1/2 mutations is required to estimate the cancer risk
for relatives, initiate preventive measures and determine the
best choice of treatment. Although multiple screening
techniques are routinely applied, genetic predispositions in
BRCA1/2 and other core risk genes are identi ﬁed in
approximately 40% of hereditary breast cancer cases.
Materials and Methods: By multiplex ligation-
dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) of BRCA2 ,a
duplicated region spanning exon 22 to 24 was detected in a
patient with bilateral breast cancer at age 35 and 44. To
determine the location and orientation of the duplicatedarea, targeted enrichment of the genomic BRCA2 locus
followed by NGS was performed. Its spatial properties were
identi ﬁed by the bioinformatic tool CNV-Hunter and vali-
dated by breakpoint spanning PCR and Sanger Sequencing.
Additionally, the probands ’four sisters were tested for the
duplication via Sanger Sequencing.
Results: Using NGS, we showed the tandem organization
of the BRCA2 exon 22 to 24 duplication, Chr13(GRCh37):
g.32951528_32960522dup, in the proband, but not in hersisters. Theoretically, the duplication causes a frameshift
and leads to a premature stop codon (p.Ala3088PhefsTer3).
This may lead to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and islikely to be pathogenic.
Conclusions: We demonstrate rapid and accurate identi-
ﬁcation of a genomic rearrangement using next generation
sequencing. This case study demonstrates the ability of
high-throughput sequencing to detect and characterize,
besides single nucleotide variants, large genomicrearrangements.
J. Bublitz: None. J. van Luttikhuizen: None. G.
Schmidt: None. S. Morlot: None. R. Buurmann: None. B.
Auber: None. D. Steinemann: None.
P14.062A
Copy number variant detection tool for targeted
sequencing dataAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1643T. Vold, A. K. Singh, L. A. S. Lavik, M. F. Olsen
St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, NorwayIntroduction: With the use of NGS genepanels in genetic
diagnostics, more genes are now being tested compared to afew years ago. Copy Number Variant (CNV) detection is
often done using MLPA, which is labor intensive,
expensive and limited to some speci ﬁc genes. As more
genes are being tested, the amount of MLPA testing has
become massive and unmanageable. Therefore, the Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics at St. Olavs Hospital (Norway)has developed an in-house CNV detection tool for targeted
sequencing data.
Materials and Methods: The “in-house ”tool calculates
CNV detection scores by comparing coverage depths of a
test-sample with a pool of normal samples. A sliding-
window approach is used for dynamic region selection.Validation of the tool included 36 positive controls with
CNVs in 12 genes and 11 negative controls.
Results: All the CNVs of the positive controls were
successfully detected resulting in a measured sensitivity of
100%. The speci ﬁcity was measured to be 91% were most
of the false positives were due to systematic errors inchallenging genomic regions (e.g. high GC –content, low
coverage, high homology).
Conclusion: Our CNV detection tool has been validated
and established in routine diagnostics of hereditary cancer at
our department. CNV detection using targeted NGS data
makes it possible to broaden our genetic testing services toalso include CNV detection of genes where there is no
MLPA analysis available. This tool is shown to be sensitive
and speci ﬁc in addition to time- and cost-effective.
T. Vold: None. A.K. Singh: None. L.A.S. Lavik: None.
M.F. Olsen: None.
P14.063B
Sample quality control of long read sequencing and low
input libraries
K. Luttgeharm
1, J. Molitor2, R. Nitsche2
1Agilent, Ankeny, IA, United States,2Agilent, Waldbronn,
Germany
Long-read sequencing and miniaturization of library pre-
parations are becoming increasingly common as new next-
generation sequencing work ﬂows are developed. Tradi-
tional quality control methods do not provide the required
sizing accuracy of DNA greater than 50kb or the sensitivity
allowing for sample conservation during the quality controlassessment steps. The Femto Pulse system by Agilent
Technologies works to streamline quality control byseparating genomic DNA up to 165kb in as little as
70 minutes, down from the 16 +hours required for
traditional agarose PFGE. The unparalleled single cell
gDNA sensitivity of the Femto Pulse allows for preparation
of low input NGS libraries from cfDNA, RNA, and
miniaturized traditional DNA NGS libraries. Quality controlmetrics such as the RNA Quality Number (RQN) and user
deﬁned Genomic Quality Number (GQN) aids in the
determination of sample quality/integrity. This poster showsthe unique use of the Femto Pulse System in high molecular
weight gDNA separation and low input library preparation
with subsequent analysis features highlighted.
K. Luttgeharm: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. J. Molitor: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. R. Nitsche: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent.
P14.064C
NeatSeq-Flow: A Friendly High-Throughput
Sequencing Work ﬂow Platform for Local Use by
Programmers and Non-Programmers Alike
M. Y. Sklarz
1, L. Levin1, M. Gordon2, V. Chalifa-Caspi2,1
1National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-
Sheva, Israel,2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-
Sheva, Israel
Genomic experiments involving High-throughput sequen-
cing usually produce large amounts of data, whose analysisrequires multi-step work ﬂows. Creating and executing these
workﬂows locally is often time consuming and error prone,
especially when considering projects with hundreds orthousands of samples, with many steps and plenty of
intermediate ﬁles, or when the same analysis has to be
repeated with different combinations of programs andparameters.
The NeatSeq-Flow platform allows for modular bioin-
formatics work ﬂow design and execution on a local com-
puter or, preferably, computer cluster, using either a
command-line interface or a fully functional graphical
user interface (GUI). Analysis programs can be anythingexecutable from the Linux command-line, thus enabling use
of cutting-edge (public, commercial or in-house) tools for
high-throughput sequencing data analysis. Creation andsharing of new work ﬂows is easy and intuitive. Further-
more, NeatSeqFlow provides ready-to-use work ﬂows for
common bioinformatics analyses.
To execute a work ﬂow, users only need to specify the
order and parameters of analysis steps and the location of
input ﬁle. Work ﬂow execution is parallelized on the cluster,
and progress can be tracked in real time. Work ﬂow results
are neatly organized in an intuitive directory structure. All1644workﬂow components and their order of execution are
stored in one ﬁle, which together with the shell scripts
produced by NeatSeq-Flow comprise a complete doc-
umentation of the work ﬂow and enable future execution of
the exact same work ﬂow or modi ﬁcations thereof.
All these features make NeatSeq-Flow an easy-to-use
workﬂow platform without compromising ﬂexibility,
reproducibility, transparency and ef ﬁciency. NeatSeq-Flow
is free available at https://neatseq- ﬂow.readthedocs.io
M.Y. Sklarz: None. L. Levin: None. M. Gordon: None.
V. Chalifa-Caspi: None.
P14.065D
Testing the use of Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)
terms for the identi ﬁcation of causal variants in clinical
exomes
C. Gómez Sánchez1, A. Romera1, J. Montoya1,
D. Cantalapiedra1, C. Moya1, C. Casañ1, A. Arilla
Codoñier1, S. Lois1, I. Valenzuela2, F. López-Grondona2,
A. Cueto-González2, A. Abulí2, C. Serra2, M. Codina2,
S. Santillán1
1Sistemas Genómicos (ASCIRES), Valencia, Spain,
2Hospital Vall d`Hebron, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Clinical utility of exome sequencing has
been well established during the last few years. In this
context, HPO terms provides an important source of
information that allows to correlate phenotypes, diseasesand genes.
Methodology: Exome data from 188 patients were
evaluated retrospectively. Primitively, these patients wereanalyzed using 7165 disease associated genes, that was
considered as the gold standard. Performance of three dif-
ferent gene prioritization strategies was compared: candi-date genes, genes associated to HPO terms provided by the
physician and genes associated to prioritized HPO terms.
Results: Clinical exome allowed the diagnosis of 35%
(66/188) of the patients. The candidate gene strategy was
positive in 15% of the patients (29/188), while the strategy
based on the selection of genes through the combination ofHPOs reached a 29% diagnosis (54/188). Using HPOs
terms, an average of 796 genes was evaluated. The selection
of genes based on the combination of prioritized HPOterms, obtained a diagnostic rate of 25% (45/188). A
detailed analysis of positive cases not identi ﬁed under any
of these prioritization strategies (12/66), showed that the useof less speci ﬁc HPO terms would help detect the affected
gene in 8/12 cases.
Conclusion: The use of HPO terms is a strategy that
allows the diagnosis in a high percentage of cases, but its
efﬁcacy depends signi ﬁcantly on the selection andprioritization of this terms. The use of a genotype-
phenotype strategy allows greater diagnostic rate since
there may be cardinal symptoms not identi ﬁed during the
clinical evaluation of the patients.
C. Gómez Sánchez: None. A. Romera: None. J. Mon-
toya: None. D. Cantalapiedra: None. C. Moya: None. C.
Casañ: None. A. Arilla Codoñier: None. S. Lois: None. I.
Valenzuela: None. F. López-Grondona: None. A. Cueto-
González: None. A. Abulí: None. C. Serra: None. M.
Codina: None. S. Santillán: None.
P14.066A
Phenotero: annotate as you write
S. Köhler, D. Hombach, J. Schwarz, E. Knierim,
M. Schuelke, D. Seelow
Charité Universtätsmedizin, Berlin, GermanyIn clinical genetics, the Human Phenotype Ontology as well
as disease ontologies are often used for deep phenotyping ofpatients and coding of clinical diagnoses. However,
assigning ontology classes to patient descriptions is often
disconnected from writing patient reports or manuscripts inword processing software. This additional workload and the
requirement to install dedicated software may discourage
usage of ontologies for parts of the target audience.
Here we present Phenotero, a freely available and simple
solution to annotate patient phenotypes and diseases at the
time of writing clinical reports or manuscripts. We adoptZotero, a citation management software to create a tool
which allows to reference classes from ontologies within
text at the time of writing. We expect this approach todecrease the additional workload to a minimum while
ensuring high quality associations with ontology classes.
Standardised collection of phenotypic information at thetime of describing the patient allows for streamlining the
clinic work ﬂow and ef ﬁcient data entry. It will subsequently
promote clinical and molecular diagnosis with the ultimategoal of better understanding genetic diseases. Thus, we
hope that Phenotero eases the usage of ontologies and
controlled vocabularies in the ﬁ
eld of clinical genetics.
S. Köhler: None. D. Hombach: None. J. Schwarz:
None. E. Knierim: None. M. Schuelke: None. D.
Seelow: None.
P14.067B
Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) - analyticalvalidation of NGS assays for con ﬁrmative diagnostics
T. Simakova
1, M. Glushkova1, A. Slepchenkov1,
Y. Churyumova2, S. Shliaga2, N. Vokhmianina2,
L. Porcaro3, V. Caporale3, A. Pavlov1Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 16451Parseq Lab, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation,2Medical
Genetic Diagnostics Centre, St. Petersburg, Russian
Federation,3Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan,
Italy
Introduction: MS/MS is routinely used for newborn
screening nevertheless, it requires fast accurate and
inexpensive con ﬁrmatory method due to high rate of
false-positive results. We aimed to develop and validate 5
NGS assays for several IEM groups: organic aciduria (AO),
fatty acid oxidation defects (FAO), aminoacidopathy (AA),vitamin B defects (AAVB) and carbohydrate disorders
(GH). Material and methods: 5 IEM panels (4-37 genes, 15-
158kbp) were designed for multiplex PCR targetedenrichment and evaluated in-silico before production. In-
vitro assessment was performed on NIST RM-8398, 1000G
reference materials and dried blood spot samples. Librarieswere prepared with Parseq protocol based on targeted
enrichment followed by adapter ligation, barcoding and
sequencing on MiSeq and IonTorrent platforms. Alignmentand variant calling were performed using VariFind ™
Software. Analytical characteristics were calculated within
all targeted regions (all variants and wild-type positions).Clinically relevant variants from ClinVar database were
evaluated.
Results: Analytical performance of 5 IEM panels were
established: sensitivity - 95.5-100%, speci ﬁcity - 97.0-
99.4%. Assays limitations and clinically relevant variants
within regions with low quality were described.
Conclusions: 5 assays for con ﬁrmative IEM diagnostics
are validated on Parseq protocol and pipeline, using MiSeq
and IonTorrent (data not shown) platforms. IEM panelscould be mixed in a single run. Assays are suitable for dried
blood spot samples. Analytical performance of assays is
sufﬁcient for the further clinical trials. Diagnostic perfor-
mance of assays as a second-tier test following MS/MS
newborn screening is studied at the St.Petersburg ’s Medical
Genetic Diagnostics Centre (Russia) and Medical GeneticsLaboratory, Policlinico, Milan (Italy).
T. Simakova: None. M. Glushkova: None. A. Slep-
chenkov: None. Y. Churyumova: None. S. Shliaga:
None. N. Vokhmianina: None. L. Porcaro: None. V.
Caporale: None. A. Pavlov: None.
P14.068C
The power of 16kb Long-Read Circular Consensus
Sequencing for the homologous OPN1 genes
K. Neveling, A. den Ouden, R. C. Derks, M. Tjon-Pon-
Fong, H. G. Yntema, M. R. Nelen, L. E. L. M. Vissers,D. Lugtenberg, L. Haer-WigmanDepartment of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Pathogenic variants in the red and green cone opsins,
encoded by OPN1LW andOPN1MW respectively, lead to
visual impairment. The genes are located in tandem on
Xq28 and show 98% homology. Current routine diagnosticsuses gene-speci ﬁc long-range (LR-)PCRs, followed by
shearing and short-read sequencing, combined with MLPA,
which are hampered by the high homology, variable copynumbers and occurrence of hybrid OPN1 genes. We
therefore investigated the power of long-read sequencing
compared to standard short-read sequencing. Hereto,OPN1LW and OPN1MW of 47 known clinical samples
were ampli ﬁed using gene-speci ﬁc LR-PCRs of ~16kb, and
sequenced as 2x 8kb fragments. In addition, a subset was
also sequenced as 16kb fragments. Library preparation,
sequencing, and circular consensus sequence (CCS) analy-
sis were performed according to PacBio protocols using theSequel system.
All pathogenic variants and hybrid genes were con ﬁrmed
using the 8kb read length, with the advantage of decreasedhands-on time for data analysis and interpretation. Mapping
of the 8kb fragments was however still hampered by high
sequence homology. The latter was overcome by 16kb frag-ment long-read sequencing data, which showed improved
quality and mapping compared to the 8kb reads. We therefore
conclude that long-read sequencing can detect both pointmutations and hybrid OPN1 genes. With 8kb reads having the
power to accelerate OPN1 data analysis and interpretation in
comparison to standard short-read sequencing, we expect thatwith further improvements using 16kb CCS reads, it will
become possible to also detect OPN1 copy number variants
and point mutations using a single test.
K. Neveling: None. A. den Ouden: None. R.C. Derks:
None. M. Tjon-Pon-Fong: None. H.G. Yntema: None. M.
R. Nelen: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. D. Lugtenberg:
None. L. Haer-Wigman: None.
P14.069D
Molecular diagnostic challenges of repeat expansion
disorders in the era of genome scale DNA sequencing:
the myotonic dystrophy example
J. Radvanszky
1,2,3, J. Budis2,3, M. Kucharik2, L. Kadasi1,4,
T. Szemes2,3,4
1Institute for Clinical and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Centre, Bratislava, Slovakia,
2Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,3Comenius University
Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,4Department of
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, ComeniusUniversity, Bratislava, Slovakia1646Introduction: In general, molecular testing of repeat-
expansion-disorders (REDs) require two complementing
methods, while sequencing has no special place among
them. Because of this, REDs patients yet have not bene ﬁted
from the advent of massively parallel sequencing (MPS), a
method that otherwise revolutionised differential diagnos-tics of the majority of monogenic and complex disorders.
Materials and Methods: We developed an alignment-
free bioinformatics tool to characterize clinically relevantattributes of STR loci from MPS data sets. It was tested on a
commercial targeted MPS panel, using different disease-
associated STR loci. Validation was extended to sampleshaving expansions in the myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
associated DMPK gene. Results were validated by gold
standard methods such as conventional and repeat-primedPCR. We then characterized aspects of MPS based REDs
testing in routine practice.
Results: We were able to reliably genotype ampli ﬁable
STR alleles, determine their sequence structure, to phase
individual alleles, and also to identify the presence of
expanded alleles exceeding the ampli ﬁcation limit of the
used MPS assay, overcoming thus the conventional ampli-
ﬁcation derived limitations of MPS. When compared to
using MPS for more common variation types, such as singlenucleotide variants, we found several practical problems,
especially connected to automated annotation of identi ﬁed
repeat alleles.
Conclusions: Beyond technological questions, to fully
beneﬁt from MPS based differential diagnostics there are
several aspects of testing which requires modi ﬁcations
when compared to current practice, from nomenclature of
alleles, through database feeding, up to automated annota-
tion of alleles. Supported by: APVV_-17-0526,VaV_MZSR_2018/46-SAV-5 and VEGA_ 1/0433/19.
J. Radvanszky: None. J. Budis: None. M. Kucharik:
None. L. Kadasi: None. T. Szemes: None.
P14.070A
Consecutive medical exome analysis at a tertiary center:Diagnostic and health-economic outcomes
R. Kosaki
1, M. Kubota1, T. Uehara2, H. Suzuki2,
T. Takenouchi2, K. Kosaki2
1Divisions of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan,2Center for
Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan
Background: The utility of whole exome analysis has been
extensively demonstrated in research settings, but itsclinical utility as a ﬁrst-tier genetic test has not been welldocumented from diagnostic and health economic stand-
points in real-life clinical settings.
Methods: We performed medical exome analyses
focusing on a clinically interpretable portion of the genome
(4813 genes) as a ﬁrst-tier genetic test for 360 consecutive
patients visiting a genetics clinic at a tertiary children ’s
hospital in Japan, over a 3-year period. Bioinformatics
analyses were conducted using standard software including
BWA, GATK, and SnpEff.
Results: A molecular diagnosis was made in 171 patients
involving a total of 107 causative genes. Among these 107
causative genes, 57 genes were classi ﬁed as genes with
potential organ-speci ﬁc interventions and management
strategies. Hence, clinically relevant results were obtained
in approximately a quarter of the patients. A cost-effectiveness analysis indicated that the overall cost would
have been less expensive by 330 euros if a medical exome
analysis had been performed at the time of the initial visit toa tertiary center, rather than after multiple visits to various
specialists, a brain MRI examination, and G-banded chro-
mosome analysis.
Conclusions: The present study demonstrated a high
diagnostic yield (47.5%) for singleton medical exome ana-
lysis as a ﬁrst-tier test in a real-life setting. From a public
health policy standpoint, genomic testing can be more
efﬁcient for diagnosis with a cost that is comparable or less
to that of currently used tests with lower diagnostic poten-tial, including brain MRI and chromosome testing.
R. Kosaki: None. M. Kubota: None. T. Uehara: None.
H. Suzuki: None. T. Takenouchi: None. K.
Kosaki: None.
P14.071B
Detection of IL-1 family rare genetic variants in
metabolic disorders using single-molecule Molecular
Inversion Probes (smMIPs)
A. Mirea
1,2, R. C. van Deuren2, E. J. M. Toonen3, P. Arts2,
M. Steehouwer2, I. van den Munkhof2, K. Schraa2,
M. Jaeger2, F. L. van de Veerdonk2, C. A. Dinarello4,
M. G. Netea2, N. P. Riksen2, C. J. Tack2, A. Hoischen2,
L. A. B. Joosten2,1
1Iuliu Ha ţieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania,2Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Hycult Byotechnology, Uden, Netherlands,
4University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States
Introduction: The role of rare genetic variants has been
neglected in obesity-associated metabolic disorders. In this
study we investigated whether rare genetic variation inInterleukin-1 (IL-1) cytokine family members in ﬂuences the
development of obesity-associated metabolic disorders,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1647using an exon re-sequencing technology called single-
molecule Molecular Inversion Probes (smMIPs).
Material and methods: We developed a unique MIP-
panel for 48 genes encoding proteins involved in pathways
related to IL-1 processing or -signaling. All coding exons
were sequenced by smMIPs in two well-characterizedDutch cohorts of in total 703 obese patients with different
metabolic complications (a.o. cardiovascular diseases, type
2 diabetes, and liver steatosis) and in a control cohort of 520healthy individuals.
Results: Rare variants were de ﬁned as those with a minor
allele frequency less than 1% in the exome-sequencingGenome Aggregation Database. In the obese cohorts ±62-
68% of the total identi ﬁed variants were rare, compared to
±73% in the healthy individuals. Among these rare variants10-20% were newly described and 5-10% had a predicted
deleterious effect on protein structure. In the obese patient
cohort we observed an enrichment of rare variants in ATG7 ,
IL33 andCASP1 as compared to healthy individuals; sug-
gesting that rare variants in these genes may play an
important role in metabolic diseases.
Conclusion: Here we show that smMIPs are a valuable
technology for identifying rare variants possibly involved in
metabolic diseases. This is a ﬁrst step towards a better
understanding of the role of rare genetic variation in
metabolic disease.
Funding sources: Else- Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung,
Interleukin Foundation.
A. Mirea: None. R.C. van Deuren: None. E.J.M.
Toonen: None. P. Arts: None. M. Steehouwer: None. I.
van den Munkhof: None. K. Schraa: None. M. Jaeger:
None. F.L. van de Veerdonk: None. C.A. Dinarello:
None. M.G. Netea: None. N.P. Riksen: None. C.J. Tack:
None. A. Hoischen: None. L.A.B. Joosten: None.
P14.072C
MethylCal: Bayesian calibration of methylation levels
E. Ochoa
1, V. Zuber2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez3,
J. R. Bilbao3,4, G. Clark1, E. R. Maher1, L. Bottolo1,2,5
1Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,2MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,3Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology
and Animal Physiology, Leioa, Spain,4CIBER Diabetes
and associated metabolic disorders-CIBERDEM, Madrid,
Spain,5The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom
Background: The identi ﬁcation of clinically relevant
epigenetic biomarkers and the translation to clinical
diagnostics require reliable and accurate methylation assays.Targeted bisul ﬁte sequencing has become the primary
choice for single-base methylation quanti ﬁcation ofmultiple targets in parallel. Ef ﬁcient bisul ﬁte conversion is
a critical aspect of this technique and incomplete conversion
or the preferential ampli ﬁcation of an allele and strand can
lead to inaccurate results. To avoid the cost and time of
redesigning new assays, calibration methods based on
standard controls have been suggested to correct PCR bias.
Methods: We have developed a novel Bayesian calibra-
tion tool, MethylCal, which analyses jointly all CpGs within
a CpG island or a differentially methylated region (DMR)avoiding “one-at-a-time ”CpG calibration.
Results: Compared to existing methods, MethylCal is
more ﬂexible and ﬁtted the data better and provided a more
accurate prediction of the methylation levels. We success-
fully tested MethylCal on six imprinting DMRs and two
CpG islands and bene ﬁts of the new method, including the
ability to detect outliers and impute missing values.
Conclusion: MethylCal with the speci ﬁcation of different
random effects adequately accounts for the patterns ofvariances and correlations of the methylation levels across
actual methylation percentages better than existing
calibration tools.
EO is funded by/supported by/receives funding from the
National Institute for Health Research [Cambridge Bio-
medical Research Centre at the Cambridge UniversityHospitals NHS Foundation Trust]. The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS,
the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care .
E. Ochoa: None. V. Zuber: None. N. Fernandez-
Jimenez: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. G. Clark: None. E.R.
Maher: None. L. Bottolo: None.
P14.073D
Effective faeces and vaginal, cervical, rectal and earswabs preparation for metagenomic analyzes
K. Jaskiewicz
1,2, P. Gutaj3, D. Kami ńska1, K. Tomela4,
M. Rydzanicz5,R .P łoski5, E. Wender-O żegowska3,
M. Gajecka1,2
1Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical
Microbiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland,2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland,3Department of
Reproduction, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland,4Chair of Medical Biotechnology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,
5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
Background: Genetic identi ﬁcation of different elements of
microbiome (bacteria, archaea, fungi, small eukaryotes,viruses) supports innovative personalized patients ’treat-
ment. Metagenome analyzes enable precise assessment of1648both microbial community composition and its function. As
biological material ’s variability (including physical features
and microbiota abundance), the storage and experimental
conditions cause biases, reliable and validated protocols are
required. Aim: Establishing the microbiota genome extrac-
tion protocols and procedures toward metagenomicsapplications.
Materials and Methods: Newborns' faeces and various
swabs types (auricle, vagina, cervix, rectum) stored at −80°
C, were proceeded using different kits for microbiota
extraction. The 16S rRNA sequencing has been performed
using Illumina ’s MiSeq.
Results: We established microbiota extraction protocols ’
based on the same consumables for all types of samples,
which enables adequate comparison analysis. The followingdifﬁculties were recognized: extremely low amount of
biological material (swabs from newborns ’auricle and
faeces), mechanical lysis, presence of reaction inhibitors,host genome contamination, false results of samples con-
centration including aspects of DNA input ’s quanti ﬁcation
for PCR reactions, and chimeras. Various extraction pro-tocols ’modiﬁcations were implemented: concentrating
samples, applying selective primers and high- ﬁdelity poly-
merase and carefully chosen numbers of PCR cycles. Toverify assumptions 16S rRNA sequencing was performed
and satisfying number of reads, % Reads Passing Quality
Filtering, % Reads PF Classi ﬁed to Genus and species
diversity in various biological materials were received.
Conclusion: The optimized protocols ensure appropriate
quality and quantity of material for downstream and high-throughput application in metagenomic studies. Support:
Polish Diabetes Association 2015, 2017 and PUMS Medi-
cal Faculty ’Scienti ﬁc Grant 502-01-01110142-05618.
K. Jaskiewicz: None. P. Gutaj: None. D. Kami ńska:
None. K. Tomela: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. R. P łoski:
None. E. Wender-O żegowska: None. M. Gajecka: None.
P14.074A
Detection of MSI in circulating cell-free DNA fromcolorectal cancer patients
S. Tug Bozdogan
1,2, C. Rencuzogullari2,
A. Rencuzogullari3, A. Bisgin1,2
1Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Balcali Hospital
and Clinics, Department of Medical Genetics, Adana,
Turkey,2Cukurova University AGENTEM (Adana Genetic
Diseases Diagnosis and Treatment Center), Adana, Turkey,
3Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Balcali Hospital
and Clinics, Department of General Surgery, Adana,
TurkeyIntroduction: The success rate of check point inhibitors in
the treatment of patients with colorectal cancers displaying
microsatellite instability (MSI) underscores the need for
novel techniques, because of the fact that serial tumor
specimens are usually not available. In our study, we
evaluated the liquid biopsy as an important source of cancerderived DNA for MSI detection.
Materials and Methods: Formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn-
embedded (FFPE) tumor tissue and liquid biopsy sampleswere collected from 23 colorectal cancer patients. Genomic
DNA and circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) were isolated
from blood samples, then concentrations and qualities werecompared.
Testing for MSI was performed using kits obtained from
Promega Corporation. Microsatellite alterations were scoredby comparing the electrophoretic pro ﬁles of each biomarker
(targeted gene regions of BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24,
MONO-27, Penta-C and Penta-D) in genomic DNA versusccfDNA.
Results: Of the 23 patients, the electrophoretic pro ﬁles of
microsatellite biomarkers tested in ccfDNA matched thosein the respective primary tumors in all cases with the higher
quality in liquid biopsy samples relatively.
Conclusions: There was an excellent concordance
between liquid biopsy samples and FFPE tumor samples to
detect MSI. Moreover, liquid biopsy might be useful in
colorectal patients undergoing treatment, that can be readilyobtained using minimally invasive procedure.
S. Tug Bozdogan: None. C. Rencuzogullari: None. A.
Rencuzogullari: None. A. Bisgin: None.
P14.075B
Nanopore sequencing via targeted enrichment formedical diagnostics
G. Schmidt
1, C. Davenport2, B. Auber1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Research Core Unit
Genomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany
Introduction: With nanopore sequencing rapidly evolving,
it is now possible to routinely sequence individual DNA
strands in the kilobase range, independent of their base
composition. However several aspects, like lower baseaccuracy and relatively high whole genome sequencing
costs have hindered nanopore sequencing from becoming
established in medical diagnostics. Here, we describe ourtargeted approach for the analysis of patient samples using
the MinION sequencing device (Oxford Nanopore Tech-
nologies, ONT), addressing several types of variantsrelevant in human genetics.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1649Materials and Methods: Long-range PCR was per-
formed for target enrichment, with high molecular weight
DNA or cDNA as input. Library preparation was performed
using the SQK-LSK108 sequencing kit (ONT) and either
R9.4 or R9.5 ﬂow cells were used for sequencing on a
MinION device. Base calling was carried out using Alba-core and BWA mem or minimap2 were used for alignment.
Results: A 2h MinION run on a long-range ACVRL1
product (cDNA) yielded over 300,000x coverage, with 50%of the reads showing the aberrant transcript. Even the reuse
ofﬂow cells yielded suf ﬁcient reads for the identi ﬁcation of
the genomic breakpoints of a large EPCAM deletion and
allowed the phasing of two NPC1 variants (one of them de
novo ) revealing that both variants are in trans .
Conclusion: Nanopore sequencing combined with long-
range PCR is a cost effective and rapid tool to address
complex variants. Traditional PCR limitations, such as loss
of base modi ﬁcations, enrichment of repeat expansions or
large regions (>20 kb), could be solved by application of
CRISPR-Cas enrichment techniques.
G. Schmidt: None. C. Davenport: None. B.
Auber: None.
P14.077D
Effective mitochondrial genome reconstruction from
total RNA sequencing
L. Strie šková
1, I. Gazdaricová2, M. Kajsik3,K . Šoltýs2,3,
J. Budi š1,3,4, O. Pös2,1,M .L i čková5, B. Klempa5,
T. Szemes1,2,3
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia,
3Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Slovak Centre of Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information,
Bratislava, Slovakia,5Institute of Virology, Biomedical
Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Slovakia
Introduction: Variants in mitochondrial genome have an
impact on several inherited diseases as well as they may
trigger the formation of a tumor or in ﬂuence the behaviour
of cancer. However, the analysis of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) and detection of mutations is problematic due to a
low portion of mtDNA in total cellular DNA andphenomenon of heteroplasmy that occurs in mitochondria.
Considering human mtDNA does not contain introns, the
reconstruction of whole mitochondrial genome throughRNA sequencing seems to be effective.
Materials and Methods: VERO E6 lineage of cells was
used as a material for molecular analysis. RNA isolationwas accomplished from the cell suspension and subsequent
reverse transcription were followed by preparation of DNAlibrary. DNA analysis processing was automated using
pipelines implemented in the SnakeLines framework run-
ning on the Snakemake work ﬂow engine.
Results: The data from sequencer were processed by de
novo assembly method to generate contigs from short
fragments without the aid of reference genome. We wereable to reconstruct total mtDNA by RNA sequencing where
the most problematic were RNA non-coding regions, par-
ticularly the D-loop region. However, using our method, wewere able to sequence also non-coding regions.
Conclusion: mtDNA represents a small but signi ﬁcant
segment of the total DNA of the individual. The very smallamount compared to genomic DNA is the enormous pro-
blem in its successful study. Therefore, our method is not
based on direct DNA sequencing for mitochondrial genomereconstruction, but on RNA sequencing of cell lysate.
L. Strie šková: None. I. Gazdaricová: None. M. Kajsik:
None. K.Šoltýs: None. J. Budi š:None. O. Pös: None. M.
Ličková: None. B. Klempa: None. T. Szemes: None.
P14.078A
Evaluation of two molecular methods to detect CALR
mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms
T. Er
1,2, T. Chan3
1Division of Laboratory Medicine, Asia University
Hospital, TAICHUNG, Taiwan,2Department of Food
Nutrition and Health Biotechnology, Asia University,
Taichung, Taiwan,3Department of Food Nutrition and
Health Biotechnology, Asia University, TAICHUNG,
Taiwan
Background: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are
hematopoietic disorders characterized by abnormal prolif-
eration of the myeloid lineage. Three classic subtypes arepolycythemia vera (PV). Essential thrombocythemia (ET)
and primary myelo ﬁbrosis (PMF). These disorders are well
known for their association with the JAK2 V617F mutation,in addition to mutations on MPL exon10, and JAK2 exon
12. CALR mutations were detected in approximately 20%
to 25% of patients with ET and PMF and not in patientswith PV. Most CALR mutations were deletions and
insertions in exon 9, which cause frameshift mutations.
Methods: This study included 60 patients with MPN in
Taiwanese population. We identi ﬁed CALR mutation in
patients with MPN by high-resolution melting (HRM)
analysis. Additionally, HRM analysis was compared withipsogen CALR RGQ PCR. To con ﬁrm the results of HRM
and ipsogen CALR RGQ PCR, sequencing analysis was
also carried out for all samples.
Results: Up to 6.25% of the CALR mutation was suc-
cessfully detected in patients with MPN using HRM1650analysis. Four out of 60 patients (6.67%) were positive for
the presence of CALR mutation including p.L367fs*46 and
p.K385fs*47. The results proved 100% comparable to those
obtained by ipsogen CALR RGQ PCR.
Conclusions: The HRM analysis and ipsogen CALR
RGQ PCR are feasible and reliable technique for thedetection of CALR mutation. Furthermore, the HRM offers
several bene ﬁts including saving of time, non-expensive,
fast and lower workforce.
T. Er: None. T. Chan: None.
P14.079B
Nanoliter-scale automation of library prep solutions for
RNA sequencing
C. Kubu, J. Alipaz, J. Brockman, S. Chamnongpol,
N. Gopi Devaraju, B. Fowler, J. A. Geis, T. Goralski,
B. Lacar, C. Park, M. Phelan, C. Stolarczyk, J. Wang,D. A. King
Fluidigm Corporation, South San Francisco, CA, United
States
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) provides a more precise
measurement of transcript levels and their isoforms than
other expression pro ﬁling methods. We have developed an
elegant micro ﬂuidics-based work ﬂow and chemistry for
RNA-seq library prep (LP). This method performs bead-
based sample capture and elutes polyadenylated RNA from
total RNA samples. The work ﬂow supports reverse transcrip-
tion, adapter addition and sample indexing PCR. The entire
workﬂow is automated within a compact nanoscale integrated
ﬂuidic circuit (IFC) in a microtiter plate format. The work ﬂow
supports simultaneous processing of up to 48 samples. We
developed two LP methodologies that use similar chemistry
and work ﬂow, one for the 3 ′-end of transcripts and the other
for full-length transcripts enabling detection of alternatively
spliced isoforms.
To demonstrate performance, we processed samples con-
taining 10 ng and 100 ng of UHRR RNA +E R C CM i x1a n d
Human Brain RNA +ERCC Mix 2. We loaded samples and
sample barcodes into their corresponding inlets along withreagents on the IFC. After a single button push to initiate the
workﬂow, the bead af ﬁnity column was formed, polyA RNA
were enriched and template RNA was converted into cDNA,which was ampli ﬁed with sample indexes. Finally, we pooled,
puriﬁed, quanti ﬁed and sequenced harvested libraries on an
Illumina ®NextSeq™system.
Results show that the performance of this work ﬂow sur-
passes conventional methods in the diversity of detected
transcripts across the full range of input amounts. Our IFCtechnology automates the RNA-seq library prep work ﬂow
and reduces reagent use while improving performance.C. Kubu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Fluidigm Corporation. J. Alipaz: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. J. Brockman:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi
ﬁcant; Fluidigm
Corporation. S. Chamnongpol: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. N. Gopi Devaraju:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm
Corporation. B. Fowler: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. J.A. Geis: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. T.
Goralski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Fluidigm Corporation. B. Lacar: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. C. Park: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Cor-
poration. M. Phelan: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. C. Stolarczyk: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Cor-
poration. J. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. D.A. King: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation.
P14.080C
The development of a fast newborn screening method
for common neonatal metabolic disorders based onnanopore sequencing technology
H. Onay
1,2,3, B. Akgun4, T. Yalcinkaya2, E. Dilsizoglu2,
A. B. Kaya2, O. Tasar3,5, I. Turkoglu3,5, T. Atik2,4
1Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty
of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey,2MULTIGEN Sag.Hiz.Tic.Ltd.
Sti., Izmir, Turkey,3Gene2Info Tic.Ano.Sti., Istanbul,
Turkey,4Subdivision of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey,5IDEA
Teknoloji Tic.Ano.Sti., Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Inherited metabolic diseases (IEM) are
usually devastating, and caused by single gene defects. In
newborns, for the differential diagnosis of IEM, a numberof laboratory tests must be performed. During these
intensive investigations, a vast majority of severely ill
patients die without a de ﬁnite diagnosis. Recently, a number
of newborn screening tests based on next-generation
sequencing (NGS) have been develop to replace expensive
and time consuming conventional laboratory tests. In thisstudy, we describe a rapid and effective screening test for
3 severe metabolic diseases (maple syrup urine disease,
biotinidase de ﬁciency and mucopolysaccharidosis type-1)
based on Oxford Nanopore Technology (ONT).
Materials and Methods: PCR based target enrichment
was performed on all exons of the 5 genes ( DBT, BCKDHB,
BCKDHA, IDUA, BTD ) responsible for the 3 diseases.
Multiplex PCR studies were performed using super-fastAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1651thermal cyclers and fast polymerases. The ampli ﬁed regions
were then sequenced with the ONT MinION device. Results
were veri ﬁed with the Illumina Miseq platform. Based on
the data obtained, the appropriate bioinformatic tools were
selected and their parameters were optimized.
Results: Using ONT, satisfactory molecular genetic
screening results were obtained for in a far shorter time
period (below 4 hours), than is currently available utilizing
NGS. Despite the protocol being highly successful forsingle nucleotide variations, for insertions and deletions
artifacts were present.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst study developed using ONT
for the screening of metabolic disease. The development of
speciﬁc bioinformatic tools is necessary to further improve
the speed and accuracy of the results.
H. Onay: None. B. Akgun: None. T. Yalcinkaya: None.
E. Dilsizoglu: None. A.B. Kaya: None. O. Tasar: None. I.
Turkoglu: None. T. Atik: None.
P14.081D
Medical costs of children admitted to the NeonatalIntensive Care Unit; the role and possible value of rapid
Whole Exome Sequencing
R. A. C. M. Olde Keizer
1, A. C. Deden2, W. A. G. van
Zelst-Stams3, W. P. de Boode4, L. Henneman5, J. K. Ploos
van Amstel6, L. E. L. M. Vissers7, G. W. J. Frederix1,6
1Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands,3Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center,Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,
4Department of Neonatology, Radboud
University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for HealthSciences, Amalia Children ’s Hospital, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,
5Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam
UMC, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
6Department of Genetics, Utrecht University Medical
Center, Utrecht, Netherlands,7Department of Human
Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition andBehaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Introduction: Novel genetic technologies are promising
but often come at high costs. To adequately quantify the
impact of their introduction in patient care, it is essential to
have detailed insight in current costs of diagnosticprocedures. We provide an overview of average healthcare
costs for patients admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit (NICU) to facilitate discussion on the possible impactof rapid Whole Exome Sequencing (rWES) on total
healthcare costs.Methods: We retrospectively collected postnatal health-
care data of 1,423 children admitted to the NICU at the
Radboudumc between October 2013 and October 2015. We
distinguished between children with a conclusive molecular
diagnosis found within the ﬁrst 30 days of life (for com-
parison to rWES) and those genetically diagnosed after thisperiod.
Results: Overall, the average costs spent were €24,357
per patient. Of the 1,423 patients, 149 (10.5%) underwentgenetic diagnostic testing. In 13 (8.7%) a genetic diagnosis
was obtained during the ﬁrst 30 days of life and for 35
(22.8%) thereafter. For patients with a genetic diagnosis<31 days of life, total costs spent on genetic diagnostics
accounted for 3.4% of all costs ( €1.842 per patient),
whereas for those receiving a genetic diagnosis >30 days,costs for genetic testing were 5.0% ( €3.495 per patient) of
total costs.
Conclusions: Genetic diagnostic testing in a NICU
patient cohort accounts for a small fraction of total costs.
With an anticipated increase in genetic diagnoses, a shorter
time-to-diagnosis, and reduction of sequencing costs,implementation of rWES for this patient cohort may be
warranted.
R.A.C.M. Olde Keizer: None. A.C. Deden: None. W.A.
G. van Zelst-Stams: None. W.P. de Boode: None. L.
Henneman: None. J.K. Ploos van Amstel: None. L.E.L.
M. Vissers: None. G.W.J. Frederix: None.
P14.082A
Phenotypic characterization and functional analysis ofcases suspect for Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1
R. van Minkelen, B. van Ommeren, H. Douben, M. Kroos-
de Haan, M. van Vliet, A. Wagner, M. Nellist, Y. van
Ierland, ENCORE Expertise Center for
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Background: Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) mutation
detection and variant interpretation is challenging. We
compared clinical characteristics of patients with NF1-variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) or no mutation
identi ﬁed (NF1-NMI) to those with pathogenic NF1
variants. Secondly, we performed in vitro functional
assessment to reclassify NF1 VUS.
Methods: Clinical characterization Clinical and genetic
information of clinically suspected NF1 patients wasextracted from the departmental NF1 database (1993-2016).
Characteristics of the NF1-VUS and NF1-NMI groups were
compared to the NF1 pathogenic variant group. Functional
characterization of NF1-VUS Expression constructs
encoding NF1 VUS were derived by site-directed1652mutagenesis. By in vitro assays, we estimated the RAS
GAP activity of the neuro ﬁbromin variant proteins using a
RAS-GTP pull-down assay. Secondly, we used coimmu-
noprecipitation to investigate whether the interaction
between neuro ﬁbromin and SPRED1 was affected.
Results: We identi ﬁed 417 (68%) pathogenic NF1 var-
iants, 33 (5%) VUS and 167 (27%) NF1-NMI individuals.
The percentage of patients in each group who met the
clinical NF1-NIH criteria was 64%, 67% and 34% respec-tively. In the NF1-NMI group 45% of the individuals only
had one NF1-NIH criterion identi ﬁed. Functional assess-
ment on 27 NF1-VUS resulted in reclassi ﬁcation of 6 VUS
as pathogenic and 10 as likely pathogenic.
Conclusions: Clinically, the NF1-VUS group was largely
comparable to the pathogenic variant group. Functionalanalyses were useful to further classify NF1 VUS. Due to
the clinical and familial consequences of an NF1 diagnosis,
future studies should focus on optimizing assays of neuro-ﬁbromin function to facilitate establishing an accurate
molecular diagnosis.
R. van Minkelen: None. B. van Ommeren: None. H.
Douben: None. M. Kroos-de Haan: None. M. van Vliet:
None. A. Wagner: None. M. Nellist: None. Y. van
Ierland: None.
P14.083B
Targeted next generation sequencing for genetic testingof inherited diseases with NEBNext Direct
B. Textor
1, A. B. Emerman2, K. M. Patel2, S. K. Bowman2,
S. M. Adams2, B. S. Desmond2, J. S. Dunn2, A. Barry3,
S. E. Corbett2, C. D. Elfe2, E. Mauceli2,
C. L. Hendrickson2
1New England Biolabs GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany,
2Directed Genomics Inc., Ipswich, MA, United States,3New
England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, MA, United States
Next generation sequencing is increasingly being adopted
for the screening of inherited disorders. A patient ’s genetic
information is useful for the diagnosis, prognosis, and
management of disease as well as factors impactingexpanded familial screening. To demonstrate the applic-
ability of NEBNext Direct target enrichment for genetic
screening of germline variants, we have developed target-enrichment panels speci ﬁc to inherited disease. Spanning
from a single-gene panel for cystic ﬁbrosis screening to a
comprehensive panel for screening an array of cardiac-related diseases, the NEBNext Direct technology can be
applied to a wide range of genomic targets, using a novel
hybridization-based, single-day work ﬂow. The approach
rapidly hybridizes both strands of genomic DNA to
biotinylated baits, captures the targets on streptavidin beads,enzymatically removes off-target sequence, and directly
converts captured molecules into Illumina-ready libraries.
The sequencing reads have highly de ﬁned start sites and
produce uniform coverage across a given target. The
NEBNext Direct CFTR Panel consists of a single pool of
baits targeting both strands of DNA across 27 exons and 7intronic sites, for a total captured territory of 6.751
kilobases. The panel enables screening and detection of
over the 2,000 variants that have been recorded worldwide.The NEBNext Direct Cardiogenomics Panel covers 160
genes associated with a range of cardiomyopathies as well
as Brugada, Noonan, Marfan, and Long QT syndromes.Here, we will demonstrate the utility of these panels for
producing highly speci ﬁc, highly uniform enrichment of
gene targets prior to next-generation sequencing.
B. Textor: None. A.B. Emerman: None. K.M. Patel:
None. S.K. Bowman: None. S.M. Adams: None. B.S.
Desmond: None. J.S. Dunn: None. A. Barry: None. S.E.
Corbett: None. C.D. Elfe: None. E. Mauceli: None. C.L.
Hendrickson: None.
P14.084C
Comparison of molecular inversion probe versus
Truseq ®custom methods for targeted next-generation
sequencing in peripheral neuropathy
R. Almomani
1,2, M. Marchi3, E. Salvi3, S. Magri4,
I. D'Amato3, P. Lindsey1, M. Sopacua5, H. Smeets1,
S. Santoro6, F. Martinelli Boneschi7,8, S. Dib-Hajj9,10,
S. G. Waxman9,10, I. S. J. Merkies5,11, M. M. Gerrits1,
C. G. Faber5, G. Lauria3,12, PROPANE Study Group
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University
Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands,2Department of
Medical Laboratory Sciences, Jordan University of Science
and Technology, Irbid, Jordan,3Neuroalgology Unit,
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta,
Milano, Italy,4Unit of Medical Genetics and
Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto NeurologicoCarlo Besta, Milano, Italy,
5Department of Neurology,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht,
Netherlands,6Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Neurological Disorders, Institute of Experimental
Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San
Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milano, Italy,7Laboratory of
Genetics of Complex Disorders and Department of
Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy,
Milano, Italy,8Department of Biomedical Sciences for
Health, University of Milan, Milano, Italy,9Department of
Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, United States,10Center for Neuroscience and
Regeneration Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
West Haven, CT, United States,11Department ofAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1653Neurology, St Elisabeth Hospital, Willemstad, Curaçao,
12Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi
Sacco, University of Milan, Milano, Italy
Introduction: Resolving the genetic architecture of painful
neuropathy, a disabling feature of peripheral neuropathy(PN), will lead to better disease management. Several
targeted Next-generation sequencing (NGS) approaches are
currently available. Aim of this study was to develop areliable technique to rapidly and accurately re-sequence
multiple genes in a large cohort of PN patients at a low cost.
Materials and Methods: We compared the sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, ef ﬁciency, reproducibility and cost-effectiveness
of TruSeq ®Custom Amplicon (TSCA, Illumina) and
Molecular Inversion Probes (MIPs) NGS methods. To tar-get nine sodium channel genes, capture probes were
designed using their respective informatics pipelines. One-
hundred-sixty-six patients with PN were tested by bothmethods, 70 samples were also validated by Sanger
sequencing.
Results: Approximately 39kb were sequenced. 95% of
the targeted regions showed an average coverage of ≥20x in
TSCA, and 96% in MIPs. Sanger sequencing showed a
100% agreement with MIPs and TSCA. Sensitivity, speci-ﬁcity, performance of the two techniques were comparable,
showing user -friendly software to design probes and similar
on-target ef ﬁciency. MIPs has a more versatile assay design,
ﬂexible, allowing probes re-placement and integration.
TSCA results less ﬂexible, but probes dosage adjustment
was unnecessary. The per-sample price for MIP was about10x less than TSCA.
Conclusions: MIPs approach is more suitable for wide
NGS panels on high sample numbers, reducing single-sample pricing if processed on a high-performance plat-
form, whereas TSCA seems to be very time-effective and
could represent the best solution to analyze smaller samplesizes on a cheaper ﬂow-cell. (FP7-PROPANE Grant
n.602273)
R. Almomani: None. M. Marchi: None. E. Salvi: None.
S. Magri: None. I. D'Amato: None. P. Lindsey: None. M.
Sopacua: None. H. Smeets: None. S. Santoro: None. F.
Martinelli Boneschi: None. S. Dib-Hajj: None. S.G.
Waxman: None. I.S.J. Merkies: None. M.M. Gerrits:
None. C.G. Faber: None. G. Lauria: None.
P14.086A
Innovative method for reducing uninformative calls in
non-invasive prenatal testing
J. Budi š
1,2,3, J. Gazdarica1,2,4, J. Radvanszky5,2, G. Szucs3,
M. Kucharík2, L. Strie šková2,4, I. Gazdaricova4,
M. Har šányová4,2,F .Ďuriš1,2, G. Minárik6, M. Sekelská6,
B. Nagy7, J. Tur ňa1,4,8, T. Szemes4,2,81Slovak Centre of Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information,
Bratislava, Slovakia,2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,
3Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia,4Faculty of
Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava,
Slovakia,5Institute for Clinical and Translational
Research, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia,6Medirex a.s., Bratislava,
Slovakia,7Department of Human Genetics, University of
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,8Comenius University
Science park, Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Non-invasive prenatal testing or NIPT is
currently among the top researched topic in obstetric care.
While the performance of the current state-of-the-art NIPTsolutions achieve high sensitivity and speci ﬁcity, they still
struggle with a considerable number of samples that cannot
be concluded with certainty. Such uninformative results areoften subject to repeated blood sampling and re-analysis,
usually after two weeks, and this period may cause a stress
to the future mothers as well as increase the overall cost ofthe test.
Materials and Methods: We propose a supplementary
method to traditional z-scores to reduce the number of suchuninformative calls. The method is based on a novel ana-
lysis of the length pro ﬁle of circulating cell free DNA which
compares the change in such pro ﬁles when random-based
and length-based elimination of some fragments is
performed.
Results: Although the proposed method is not as accurate
as the standard z-score, the combination of these two inde-
pendent methods correctly resolves a substantial portion of
healthy samples with an uninformative result. Also themethod can be used to identify maternal aberrations, thus
reducing the risk of false positive and false negative calls.
Conclusions: Reliability of traditional NIPT tests based
on low coverage sequencing can be improved by closer
analysis of lengths of sequenced DNA fragments.
The presented work was supported by the “REVOGENE
- Research centre for molecular genetics ”project (ITMS
26240220067) supported by the Operational Programme
Research and Development funded by the ERDF.
J. Budi š:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Radvanszky: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. G.
Szucs: None. M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. L. Strie šková: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. I. Gaz-
daricova: None. M. Har šányová: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. F.Ďuriš:A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. G. Minárik: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex a.s.1654M. Sekelská: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Medirex a.s.. B. Nagy: None. J. Turňa:None. T.
Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd..
P14.087B
Simultaneous detection of CNVs and SNVs by Oneseq
technique: a retrospective study of 21 cases
V. Malan1,2, M. Egloff1,2, H. Haj Abdallah1,M .L e
Lorc’h1, N. Elkhartou ﬁ1, L. Boutaud1, A. Jeanniard3,
D. Goidin3, F. Lozach3, S. Romana1,2, T. Attie-Bitach1,2
1Histology-Embryology-Cytogenetics Department, Necker-
Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France,2Paris Descartes
University,Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris,
France,3Life Sciences and Diagnostics Group, Agilent
Technologies France, Les Ulis, France
Introduction: Congenital malformations are found in
approximately 3% of newborns. While improvement offetal imaging allows their detection during pregnancy,
genetic investigations carried out in the prenatal setting are
most often limited to search for a genomic imbalance bykaryotyping and/or chromosomal microarray analysis
(CMA). Presently, molecular genetic analysis is rarely
proposed due to the time and the cost needed to sequence agene by Sanger, and the genetic heterogeneity of many
syndromes. The objective of our study is to test a combined
approach detecting Copy Number Variants (CNVs) andSingle Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) in one experiment.
Materials and Methods: In partnership with Agilent, we
adapted OneSeq ®product for the prenatal diagnosis by
selecting panels of genes involved in developmental dis-
orders and using a similar strategy to our “custom chip ”for
the detection of CNVs. Validation was performed on aseries of 21 fetuses or patients with known CNVs and/or
SNVs and compared to the results previously determined by
CMA and panels of genes.
Results: All the 10 CNVs larger than 500kb were iden-
tiﬁed by Oneseq ®technique. Regarding the SNVs, they
were all detected except one intragenic duplication in theLBMR1 gene.
Conclusions: Our study demonstrates the reliability of
the OneSeq ®technique and emphasizes the advantage of
having a simultaneous detection of CNVs and SNVs in the
prenatal setting. Thus, a more precise genetic counseling
can be provided to couples which can help them to make adecision on a possible termination of a pregnancy.
V. Malan: None. M. Egloff: None. H. Haj Abdallah:
None. M. Le Lorc ’h:None. N. Elkhartou ﬁ:None. L.
Boutaud: None. A. Jeanniard: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. D. Goidin: A. Employment(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. F. Lozach: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. S.
Romana: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None.
P14.088C
Gene expression pro ﬁling of peripheral blood treated
with different pretreatments and storage conditions
Y. Xing
1, X. Yang1, H. Chen1,S .Z h u2,J .X u1, Y. Chen1,
J. Zeng1, F. Chen1, H. Jiang1, W. Wang1
1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China,2Shenzhen Maternity and
Child Healthcare Hospital, Shenzhen, China
Introduction: Peripheral blood, as a type of liquid biopsy,
provides a source of non-invasive biomarkers for evaluation
of health and disease, and RNA-seq is a powerful method to
investigate genome-wide gene expression pro ﬁles. Various
factors, for example, pretreatments and storage conditions
of blood, which are critical in sample collection, could
affect gene expression detection. However, how thesefactors would actually in ﬂuence transcriptome remains
largely unknown.
Methods: We used RNA-seq to explore the differences of
expression pro ﬁles of samples from four pretreatments
including Whole Blood (WB), Buffy Coat (BC), White
Blood Cell (WBC) and Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell(PBMC) and the effects of storage conditions.
Results: Transcriptome of BC shows comparable globin
mRNA ratio and gene detection ability with that of WB,while lower globin mRNA ratio and higher expressed gene
number are observed in WBC and PBMC transcriptomes.
Granulocytes related genes are well characterized in WBC.Transcriptome changes along with blood stored at both
room temperature (RT) and 4°C, and more genes changes at
RT especially genes related to granulocytes, while muchfewer genes changed at 4°C. Reference genes such as
CHMP2A and PSMB4 are relatively stable, while the
expression of IL1RN, which is similar in both men andwomen, increases more in women than men after 24 hours
stored at RT.
Conclusion: Our study provides a full-scale ex vivo
change of peripheral blood expression pro ﬁle, and suggests
rigorous sample collection strategies to obtain authentic
transcriptome.
Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.81300075), Shenzhen Municipal Government of China
(No.JCYJ20170412152854656).
Y. Xing: None. X. Yang: None. H. Chen: None. S. Zhu:
None. J. Xu: None. Y. Chen: None. J. Zeng: None. F.
Chen: None. H. Jiang: None. W. Wang: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1655P14.089D
Phasing of de novo mutations using multiple amplicon
long read sequencing
G. S. Holt1, M. J. Xavier1,M .S .O u d2, B. Alobaidi1,
R. Smits3, H. Ismail1, A. Garcia-Rodriguez1,P .F .d e
Vries2, H. Sheth1, L. E. L. M. Vissers2, L. Ramos3,
J. A. Veltman1
1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom,2Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition andBehavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Division of
Reproductive Medicine, Radboud University, Nijmegen,Netherlands
De novo mutations (DNMs) play an important role in severe
genetic diseases with an impact on ﬁtness. Our research
focuses on the role of DNMs in severe male infertility by
studying unique cohorts of infertile patients and theirparents. To better understand DNMs and their role in
disease, it is important to determine the parent of origin and
timing of DNMs. This in turn requires phasing of DNMs,which is usually impossible from short-read sequencing
data as informative SNPs (iSNP) are often located 100-
1000s of bases from a DNM. Therefore, we developed andvalidated a low-cost long-read sequencing approach. First,
we identi ﬁed all DNMs present in exomes from 108 patients
with severe male infertility and their parents, using theIllumina Novaseq6000. Next, the short-read sequencing
data was used to collect the location and genotypes of all
iSNPs surrounding the DNMs. These target regions werethen sequenced using the Oxford-Nanopore MinION.
Several dif ﬁculties were addressed; DNA origin, amplicon
size, coverage, and high basecalling error. Depending onamplicon read length and based on coverage obtained thus
far, this approach can accurately phase ~100 de novo
mutations per MinION run. This analysis indicated that68% of the DNMs identi ﬁed in these infertile men occurred
in the paternal gamete pre-fertilization, not unlike what is
known for DNMs in the normal population. From furtheranalysis we identi ﬁed the timing of all DNMs, noting 26%
occurred postzygotically. Had these postzygotic DNMs
occurred earlier they could have negatively impactedgametogenesis and/or the reproductive success of the
parents.
G.S. Holt: None. M.J. Xavier: None. M.S. Oud: None.
B. Alobaidi: None. R. Smits: None. H. Ismail: None. A.
Garcia-Rodriguez: None. P.F. de Vries: None. H. Sheth:
None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. L. Ramos: None. J.A.
Veltman: None.P14.090A
Feasibility of amino-acid sensing on dried blood spot
using near infrared spectroscopy
G. Bonapace
1, M. Vismara2,3, O. Marasco4,
G. Scozzafava4, A. Michael5, M. Pittelli4, T. Greto4,
M. Moricca6, S. Vismara7, A. Valentini8, N. Perrotti9,10,
D. Concolino6
1Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Pediatric
Unit, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy,2PhD
school of medical genetics, Sapienza University, Rome,Roma, Italy,
3Pathological Anatomy Unit, University
"Magna Græcia", Catanzaro, Italy,4Centro Regionale di
Screening Neonatale, A.O.U. "Mater Domini", Catanzaro,Italy,
5Department of Health Sciences, Nephrology Unit.
"Magna Graecia" University, Catanzaro, Italy,
6Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Pediatrics
Unit, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy,7Ente
Ospedaliero Cantonale del Ticino, Istituto pediatrico della
Svizzera italiana, Ospedale Regionale “La Carità ”.,
Locarno, Switzerland,8“Caravaggio ”medical center,
Toxicology Unit, Roma, Italy,9Department of Health
Sciences, University of Catanzaro Magna Graecia,Catanzaro, Italy,
10Centro Regionale di Screening
Neonatale, A.O.U. "Mater Domini", Catanzaro, Austria
Introduction: We are developing a new, fast, non-
destructive method to sense phenylalanine in human blood
using Near Infra-Red (NIR) spectroscopy.
Methods: By using a sensor calibrated in the Near
Infrared spectrum (optical window: 700nm to 1000nm), we
acquired spectra from DBS card alone, DBS card with areference concentration scale for Phe alone, and Phe
plus Tyr.
Based on these data we selected the most sensitive
wavelength window within the NIR and exploited this
parameter to acquire spectra from DBS containing μblood
spiked with 0 to 1200 μM Phe, 0 to 1200 Tyr and with
different Phe/Tyr ratios.
An additional experiment using 100 calibrators with 5
data points for phenylalaninemia was performed. For eachsample, at least 20 scans in duplicate were acquired. Prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) was conducted.
Results: The analysis of the “scrubbed ”data both by a
speciﬁc spectrometry software and by data point algorithms,
clearly show that it is possible to correlate the nature of the
analyte and its relative concentration.
Acquired spectra present signi ﬁcative differences, and it
is possible to isolate a speci ﬁc Phe NIR ﬁngerprint.
These observations open the exciting possibility to design
a chemometric model to assay the amount of Phe in DBS1656without elution and the expensive chromatographic
procedures.
G. Bonapace: None. M. Vismara: None. O. Marasco:
None. G. Scozzafava: None. A. Michael: None. M. Pit-
telli: None. T. Greto: None. M. Moricca: None. S. Vis-
mara: None. A. Valentini: None. N. Perrotti: None. D.
Concolino: None.
P14.091B
Rapid clinical WES, 3 years of experience - challenges
and choices
R. Pfundt, K. Neveling, D. Lugtenberg, W. Steenhuis-
Hettema, E. Kamsteeg, I. Feenstra, C. Deden, S. de
Munnik, T. Hofste, W. van Zelst-Stams, A. Simons,C. Gilissen, L. Vissers, T. Rinne, H. Yntema, M. Nelen
Radboud umc, Nijmegen, NetherlandsThe high diagnostic yield of clinical whole exome
sequencing (cWES) has made this test the ﬁrst choice for
patients with (heterogeneous) genetic diseases. However,
turnaround times are traditionally too long to serve patients
who are in great need of a quick diagnosis. The demand forin house rapid cWES procedure increased swiftly from 1-2
trio samples a month in 2016 to 5-7 trio ’s per week in 2018.
We are continuously optimizing our procedures and work-ﬂow to increase capacity, to better ﬁt demands of patients
and referring clinicians, but also to improve data analyses
and diagnostic yield. This resulted in a very robustworkﬂow with little or no sample failure. Our present
setup, used for prenatal, neonatal and postnatal referrals, is
fully automated with respect to sample and data processing(combining both SNV and CNV analysis) and has a
turnaround time close to 7 days. To date we have processed
more than 800 rapid cWES samples, mostly patient-parenttrio’s. We will present overall results and discuss choices
and challenges with respect to patient inclusion, processing
steps, data interpretation, and reporting. The overall yield ofthe rapid cWES procedure is ~30% irrespective of the
patient group (prenatal - neonatal - postnatal). The
experience of the past three years clearly shows theexcellent clinical utility of a fast cWES track. It also shows
this fast track should be offered to anyone in urgent need for
a genetic diagnosis.
R. Pfundt: None. K. Neveling: None. D. Lugtenberg:
None. W. Steenhuis-Hettema: None. E. Kamsteeg: None.
I. Feenstra: None. C. Deden: None. S. de Munnik: None.
T. Hofste: None. W. van Zelst-Stams: None. A. Simons:
None. C. Gilissen: None. L. Vissers: None. T. Rinne:
None. H. Yntema: None. M. Nelen: None.P14.092C
Pathway based ﬁltering for rare variant analysis in
frontotemporal dementia
C. Koço ğlu1,2, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, J. van der Zee1,2
1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center for
Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium,2Department
of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp,Belgium
Genome-wide rare variant analysis has become a preferred
strategy for disease gene discovery. Several algorithms are
available to test association of these variants to disease in a
case-control study design. However, achieving the neces-sary power to detect exome-wide signi ﬁcance in rare variant
association studies is challenging due to variant number and
sample size limitations. Therefore, additional strategies areneeded to prioritize and interpret rare variants in under-
powered patient cohorts. Accumulating evidence indicates
that the endosomal-lysosomal system is a key mediator inthe neurodegenerative process. In search of novel disease
genes for unresolved frontotemporal dementia (FTD), we
applied a pathway-based approach to prioritize endo-lysosomal pathway related genes with rare variants from
in-house generated patient-control exome datasets. Starting
from a list of 49 seed genes genetically linked or associatedto FTD or related neurodegenerative diseases, we identi ﬁed
ﬁrst and second layer interaction partners of these known
dementia-related proteins. The raw interaction network wasthen ﬁltered for brain-expressed genes based on GTEx.
Following, we selected genes based on endo-lysosomal
pathway related Gene Ontology terms and KEGG path-ways. This step-wise ﬁltering resulted in 2236 endo-
lysosomal pathway related genes to be submitted to gene-
burden testing in search of novel candidate genes for FTD.In conclusion, pathway and interactome analysis is a useful
approach to mine for genes from high-throughput data.
C. Koçoğlu:None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None. J. van
der Zee: None.
P14.093D
Orangutan has all the variants you need: monitoring
speci ﬁcity and sensitivity of diagnostic next-generation-
sequencing by establishing orangutan DNA as referencestandard
A. Rump, F. Kuhlee, L. Gieldon, D. Abdin, K. Hackmann,
E. Schrock
Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Germany,
Dresden, GermanyAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1657Evaluating the performance of diagnostic sequencing
requires reference samples (RS) with validated genetic
variations. In human RS, there will always be numerous
exons in any given panel where a sequence variation will
not be available for quality control (QC). To overcome this
problem we tested orangutan (OrU) as donor for QCreference materials. Since OrU NGS reads have only been
obtained from whole genome sequencing (WGS) so far,
information of how OrU/human sequence divergenceeffects targeted enrichment by human capture probes is
limited. Here, we applied capture-based whole exome
sequencing (WES) panels from different suppliers to themale OrU cell line “EB185-JC ”(Sigma-Aldrich). As
positive control, the male HapMap sample NA12877 was
sequenced in parallel, along with a 1:1 gDNA mixture ofEB185-JC and NA12877. The reads were mapped to hg19,
to the OrU reference sequence and to a combined hg19/OrU
“mix”reference. Using this approach, we could show that
OrU performs just as good as the competing human DNA.
When mapped to the human reference, the OrU exome
provides 903.763 variants (average 4.4 variants/WEStarget), and many of these would be disease causing if
present in a human being. Therefore, OrU DNA can be used
to measure both analytical and diagnostic sensitivity foralmost every human exon and exceeds the variant variety of
NA12877 DNA (average 0.3 variants/WES target) by a
factor of 13.5 fold. Therefore, OrU DNA is especiallyvaluable for small, disease-focused NGS panels where
human RS fail to provide enough variants for a reliable QC.
A. Rump: None. F. Kuhlee: None. L. Gieldon: None.
D. Abdin: None. K. Hackmann: None. E. Schrock: None.
P14.094A
Detection of disease causing repeats by multi-locus
CRISPR-Cas enrichment and nanopore sequencing
M. G. Elferink
1, I. J. Renkens2, D. Dooijes1, M. J. van
Roosmalen2, E. Raimondeau3, R. Bowen3, A. J. Heron3,
J. E. Graham3, H. Ploos van Amstel1, W. P. Kloosterman2,
K. L. van Gassen1
1Genome Diagnostics, Department of Genetics, UMC
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,2Department of Genetics,
Center for Molecular Medicine, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands,3Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford,
United Kingdom
With the maturation of long-read sequencing technologies,
the applications of genome diagnostic tests in patient care
are expanding. A promising application is the sequencing of
clinically relevant repeat structures in disorders such asALS, Huntington's disease, fragile X syndrome, and
spinocerebellar ataxias. Increasing repeat units within sucha repeat locus are indicative of disease severity and age of
onset, and are therefore of clinical importance. Due to the
repetitive nature and length (up to several kilobases) it is
hard to determine the exact structure of repeats with
traditional sequencing technologies. Long-read nanopore
sequencing has the potential to overcome this problem bysequencing the entire disease locus including the full
(expanded) repetitive region and associated epigenetic
modiﬁcations.
We present our work on the development and testing of a
cost-effective and comprehensive diagnostic test that targets
clinically relevant repeat structures in one experiment. Thetest is based on multiplexed sequence enrichment of ten
repeat loci using CRISPR-Cas technology combined with
Oxford Nanopore sequencing. We used this approach tosequence controls and patients and demonstrate that our
approach is able to effectively enrich and sequence clini-
cally relevant genomic repeat structures. In comparison toour current diagnostic assays we show that the number of
repeat units within these loci can be detected with high
accuracy.
M.G. Elferink: None. I.J. Renkens: None. D. Dooijes:
None. M.J. van Roosmalen: None. E. Raimondeau: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nano-
pore Technologies. R. Bowen: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies. A.J.
Heron: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Oxford Nanopore Technologies. J.E. Graham: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nano-
pore Technologies. H. Ploos van Amstel: None. W.P.
Kloosterman: None. K.L. van Gassen: None.
P14.095B
Mosaicism in patients with sporadic bilateral
retinoblastoma detected by NGS using a RB1 gene panel
G. Gómez-Mariano
1, B. Baladrón1, A. Navarro1,
S. Ramos1, V. Aquino1, A. Damian1, C. Sábado2,
A. Fenandez-Teijeiro3, A. Sastre4, P. García-Miguel4,
B. Martinez-Delgado1
1Genetic Diagnostic Unit. Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Vall d´Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain,3Hospital Infantil La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
4Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain
Introduction: Retinoblastoma is an embryonic tumor of the
retina diagnosed in children under 4 years of age.Conventional techniques (Sequencing of Sanger and
MLPA) allow the detection of 40% of the cases that are
carriers of inactivating mutations in heterozygosis in theRB1 gene. It is described that between 10-15% are mosaics
for the disease. These techniques are not sensitive enough to1658identify variants in low proportion present in these cases.
Our objective was to study patients with sporadic bilateral
retinoblastoma using massive sequencing techniques (RB1
panel).
Materials and Methods: We designed a RB1 panel
(Roche-NimbleGen) with 148,330 bp target sequence cov-ered (83.2% of the RB1 gene) and performed genetic ana-
lysis of 10 patients with sporadic bilateral retinoblastoma in
whom the mutation has not been identi ﬁed by conventional
techniques.
Results: Genetic analysis with the RB1 panel allowed us
to detect mosaicism in the RB1 gene of 3 patients in dif-ferent percentages: 16.28% (RB1:NM_000321:c.1363C>T:
p.R455*), 7.09% (RB1:NM_000321:c.1390 +2T>C) and
14.07% (RB1:NM_000321:c.2092_2093del:p.Arg698A-lafs*22). 30% of the retinoblastomas analyzed were mosa-
ics for the disease.
Conclusions: By conventional techniques, mutations
were identi ﬁed in 85.6% of patients with sporadic bilateral
retinoblastoma. RB1 panel allowed reaching 90% of
patients diagnosed and the identi ﬁcation of mosaicism of
some patients. The existence of mosaicism can modify the
risk of transmission to offspring, as well as the appearance
of other tumors in adulthood, its identi ﬁcation is a sig-
niﬁcant improvement in genetic counseling to families.
G. Gómez-Mariano: None. B. Baladrón: None. A.
Navarro: None. S. Ramos: None. V. Aquino: None. A.
Damian: None. C. Sábado: None. A. Fenandez-Teijeiro:
None. A. Sastre: None. P. García-Miguel: None. B.
Martinez-Delgado: None.
P14.096C
A RNA work ﬂow designed for routine clinical
diagnostics
A. Jemt, J. Eisfeldt, A. Lindstrand, A. Wedell,
H. Stranneheim
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SwedenIntroduction: Next generation sequencing (NGS) is
commonplace in today ’s clinical practice. Whole exome
sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequencing (WGS) is
routinely used for the detection of a wide range of variant
types, including single nucleotide variants and copy numbervariations. Despite advances in the ﬁeld, most diagnostic
NGS work ﬂows suffer from a relatively low diagnostic
yield (30-50%). This is partly due to the dif ﬁculty of
predicting the pathogenicity of genetic variation. RNA
sequencing offers a wide range of analyses complementary
to WGS/WES: including differential expression analysis,and detection of alternatively spliced transcripts. These
analyses may be used to evaluate non-coding variants, aswell as to pinpoint affected genes and pathways. Herein we
describe an RNA sequencing work ﬂow designed to be used
in a routine clinical setting. Furthermore, we demonstrate its
usefulness on a wide range of patient cases.
Materials and Methods: The pipeline uses publicly
available software and databases to detect and presentfusion genes, monoallelic expression, alternative splicing
and differential expression. RNA was extracted from blood
samples, and neuronal stem cells from patients visitingClinical Genetics, and the Centre for Inherited Metabolic
Diseases at Karolinska University hospital. Paired-end
sequences were generated using Illumina technology.
Results: We present our pipeline, as well as our analysis
of a variety of patient cases, including down syndrome
patients and translocation carriers (germline and somatic).
Conclusions: RNA sequencing is a valuable tool in
clinical settings, herein we demonstrate a work ﬂow which
we aim to implement in routine diagnostics during 2019.
A. Jemt: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. A. Lindstrand: None.
A. Wedell: None. H. Stranneheim: None.
P14.097D
RNA sequencing solved the most common but
unrecognized pathogenic variant in Japanese nemalinmyopathy
N. Matsumoto, K. Hamanaka, S. MiyatakeYokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan
The diagnostic rate for Mendelian diseases by whole exome
sequencing (WES)is typically 20%-40%. The low rate ispartly because ES misses deep intronic or synonymous
variants leading to aberrant splicing. In this study, we aimed
to apply RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to ef ﬁciently detect
the aberrant splicings and their related variants. Aberrant
splicing in biopsied muscles from six nemaline myopathy
(NM) cases unresolved by WES were analyzed with RNA-seq. Variants related to detected aberrant splicings were
analyzed with Sanger sequencing. Detected variants were
screened in NM patients unresolved by WES. We identi ﬁed
a novel deep-intronic NEBvariant in one case, and another
novel synonymous NEBvariant in three cases. The former
variant was observed to be the most frequent among allNEBpathogenic variants in normal Japanese populations
with a frequency of 1 in 178 (20 alleles in 3,552
individuals), but was previously unrecognized. Expandedscreening of the variant identi ﬁed it in further four
previously unsolved nemaline myopathy cases. These
results indicated that RNA-seq may be able to solve a largeproportion of previously undiagnosed neurological/mucle
diseases. Acknowledgements: We appreciate Drs. ErikoAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1659Koshimizu, Yoshinori Tsurusaki, Satomi Mitsuhashi,
Kazuhiro Iwama, Ahmed N. Alkanaq, Atsushi Fujita,
Nozomu Tawara, Yukio Ando, Yohei Misumi, Mariko
Okubo, Aritoshi Iida, Ichizo Nishino for their contribution
to this study.
N. Matsumoto: None. K. Hamanaka: None. S.
Miyatake: None.
P14.098A
Evaluation of the QuantSeq method for transcriptome
analysis using a cohort of genome clinic patients
L. G. Kyriakopoulou, K. Yuki, Z. Zhang, Dustin
Sokolowski, Huayun Hou, Rebecca Jobling, Stephen
Meyn, Dimitri James Stavropoulos,, D. Sokolowski,H. Hou, R. Jobling, S. Mayen, D. J. Stavropoulos,
R. Hayeems, S. Shuman, G. Costain, N. Monfared,
M. Snell, M. Curtis, R. Khan, R. Mendoza, R. D. Cohn,S. Pereira, S. W. Scherer, C. R. Marshal, A. Shlien,
M. Wilson
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
Objectives: Several studies have shown that analysis of the
transcriptome by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) can improve
our ability to interpret the functional and clinical importance
of the genetic variants identi ﬁed by Whole Exome
Sequencing (WES) and Whole Genome Sequencing
(WGS). Our aim is to develop an RNA-seq method that
can be used in a clinical diagnostic laboratory and identifygenetic variants affecting RNA isoforms and gene. To this
end, we have been comparing a number of RNA-seq
platforms to determine key aspects of their performance.
Methods: T h eQ u a n t S e q3 ' m R N A - s e qk i tb yL e x o g e nw a s
used to develop an RNA-seq method. The UTR-seq was
applied to 134 pediatric clinical blood samples collectedthrough the Genome Clinic (Centre for Genomic Medicine).
The samples were collected as part of a cohort of patients who
h a dp r e v i o u s l yb e e nt e s t e db yg e n es p e c i ﬁc panels and
microarray and were subsequently analyzed by WGS.
Results: Using our UTR-seq platform, we successfully
generated high quality libraries from RNA samples. Wedetermined that 33 of the genes with causative variants were
expressed in blood and in 3 of those genes RNA levels may
differ signi ﬁcantly in the patient compared to RNA levels
from all other patients.
Conclusions: We have developed an automated, scalable
and high-throughput RNA-seq platform that can generaterobust and reproducible result. Having established our ﬁrst
automated clinical RNA-seq pipeline suitable for gene
expression analysis we are now setting up full length RNA-seq that will allow us to capture structural changes in RNA
(splice junctions and gene fusions).L.G. Kyriakopoulou: None. K. Yuki: None. Z. Zhang:
None. D. Sokolowski: None. H. Hou: None. R. Jobling:
None. S. Mayen: None. D.J. Stavropoulos: None. R.
Hayeems: None. S. Shuman: None. G. Costain: None. N.
Monfared: None. M. Snell: None. M. Curtis: None. R.
Khan: None. R. Mendoza: None. R.D. Cohn: None. S.
Pereira: None. S.W. Scherer: None.
C.R. Marshal: None.
A. Shlien: None. M. Wilson: None.
P14.099B
PCR based target enrichment for variant con ﬁrmation,
gene panels and multiplex PCR sample tracking in awhole exome sequencing work ﬂow
C. Frauke
1,2, T. Van Laethem3, M. De Smet2, P. Coucke2,
E. De Baere2, K. Claes2, B. Menten2, J. Vandesompele1,3,
L. Steve1,3
1pxlence, Dendermonde, Belgium,2Center for Medical
Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium,3Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium
Targeted PCR-based resequencing is an important applica-
tion in clinical diagnostics. Using primerXL, we have
designed one million PCR assays for high-quality and
fragmented DNA, covering the entire human exome. Over6200 assays for hundreds of clinically relevant genes were
wet-lab validated. In addition, over 5000 patient-speci ﬁc
variants were con ﬁrmed using pxlence assays. All single-
plex PCR assays work under universal conditions and result
in equimolar sequencing coverage. Here, we present the
compatibility of pxlence assays with multiplex PCRapplications. As a ﬁrst product, we designed and validated
a cost-effective and ﬂexible sample tracking test. This
primer pool enables fast identi ﬁcation of sample swapping
or contamination which may occur in laborious library
preparation work ﬂows.
Thirty SNPs were selected based on their minor allele
frequency, exonic location and overlap with the capture
region of exome enrichment kits. We evaluated three dif-
ferent PCR mastermixes and two library preparation meth-ods, followed by 150 bp paired-end sequencing (MiSeq,
Illumina).
The SsoAdvanced PreAmp Supermix (Bio-Rad) resulted
in superior homogenous coverage following multiplex
PCR. No signi ﬁcant difference in coverage uniformity was
observed between the Nextera DNA Flex and the Nexter-aXT DNA library prep method (Illumina). In virtually all
tested DNA samples (n =393), 86.29% of the SNPs had a
uniform coverage within 2-fold of the mean. Based on theSNP genotypes, DNA samples could unambiguously be
discriminated.1660In conclusion, we designed and validated a novel sample
tracking test for whole exome or genome sequencing. In
principle, this strategy could also be used to design gene
panel-speci ﬁc sample tracking solutions.
C. Frauke: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; pxlence.
T. Van Laethem: None. M. De Smet: None. P. Coucke:
None. E. De Baere: None. K. Claes: None. B. Menten:
None. J. Vandesompele: E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-
niﬁcant; pxlence. L. Steve: E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-niﬁcant; pxlence.
P14.100C
A new tool CovReport generates easy-to-understand
sequencing coverage summary for diagnostic reports
S. Gorokhova
1,2, M. Gorokhov3, M. Bartoli1, M. Krahn1,2
1Aix Marseille University, INSERM, MMG U1251,
Marseille, France,2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics,
Department of Medical Genetics, La Timone Hospital, AP-
HM, Marseille, France,3JDotSoft, Germantown, MD,
United States
Gene panel sequencing has become the standard ﬁrst-tier
approach to identify the genetic cause of many diseases.
With increased use of these tests, there is a critical need to
make the resulting diagnostic reports extremely clear toavoid any misinterpretation. Target sequence coverage is a
key quality control information for any diagnostic sequen-
cing test, since important clinical decisions are made basedon this data. If coverage is not suf ﬁcient even for a small
region of a highly suspected candidate gene, a complemen-
tary sequencing test is needed to make sure that thepathogenic variant is not missed.
To facilitate the coverage data interpretation by test pre-
scribers, we designed a novel easy-to-use visualization tool,CovReport. The concise coverage data summary generated
by CovReport allows one-glance assessment of the
sequencing test performance. Moreover, exon-level cover-age information can be immediately appreciated and taken
into consideration for further medical decisions. CovReport
can be easily adapted by any diagnostic laboratory, since itdoes not require complex installation. The user friendly
interface generates a graphic summary of coverage data that
is directly amendable to the diagnostic report. In addition tothe stand-alone version, we also provide the command line
version of CovReport that can be integrated in any bioin-
formatics pipeline. CovReport is now part of the routineanalysis pipeline for all diagnostic tests by gene panels in
our Department.In conclusion, CovReport is a new easy-to-use tool to
generate graphic and understandable summary of sequen-
cing coverage data that can be directly amended to the
diagnostic report.
S. Gorokhova: None. M. Gorokhov: None. M. Bartoli:
None. M. Krahn: None.
P14.101
Didentifying SMN1 intragenicmutations usinga newly-
developed allelic-speci ﬁc rt-PCR(as-rt-PCR)method
Y. Xu
1,2, B. Xiao1,2, Y. Liu1,2,X .Q u3, M. Dai1,2, X. Ying1,2,
J. Zhang1,2, X. Liu1,2, Y. Chen2,X .J i2
1Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai,
China,2Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China,3Shanghai First
Maternity and Infant Hospital Af ﬁliated to Shanghai Tongji
University, Shanghai, China
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by
homozygous deletions of the SMN1 gene in approximately
95% of patients. The remaining 5% of cases have
compound heterozygous mutations with one deleted/converted- SMN1 allele and one mutated allele. SMN1
mutation detection is complicated by the highly homo-
logous SMN2 gene, which remains a challenge in clinical
practice for diagnosing SMA patients with a mutated allele.
Methodologies: Nine unrelated families that received a
SMA molecular diagnosis during 2011-2016 were enrolledin this study. Heterozygous deletions of SMN1 were
detected by quantitative PCR, and suspected SMN muta-
tions were scanned through DNA sequencing. A newlydeveloped approach named as allelic speci ﬁc RT-PCR
method (AS-RT-PCR) was used to con ﬁrm whether the
identi ﬁed mutation occurred in SMN1 orSMN2 .
Results: SixSMN1 mutations (c.683T>A, c.22_23insA,
c.815A>G, c.19delG, c.551_552insA and c.401_402delAG)
were identi ﬁed in 8 families. The latter three are novel
mutations that have not been previously reported. Three
families carried the same mutation, c.22_23insA. A rare
variant c.84C>T in one family found in SMN2 .
Conclusions: This study demonstrated AS-RT-PCR to be
a relatively simple and reliable method for the identi ﬁcation
ofSMN1 subtle mutations. Mutation analysis revealed a
distinct ethnic speci ﬁcity in the SMN1 mutational spectrum
and enriched the SMN1 mutation database.
Y. Xu: None. B. Xiao: None. Y. Liu: None. X. Qu:
None. M. Dai: None. X. Ying: None. J. Zhang: None. X.
Liu: None. Y. Chen: None. X. Ji: None.
P14.102A
Individual assessment for Single Nucleotide VariantAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1661Classi ﬁcation using the Genomics Training, Assessment
and Competency Tool (G-TACT)
R. Treacy, F. Khawaja, Z. C. DeansGenQA, Edinburgh, United KingdomThe aim of this external quality assessment (EQA) was to
provide an online competency assessment for individualsroutinely performing interpretation and classi ﬁcation of
variants. Participants were required to apply their usual
processes to classify ﬁve single nucleotide variants (SNVs)
and to submit evidence supporting the assigned classi ﬁca-
tion. The variants ranged from class 3, uncertain signi ﬁ-
cance to class 5, pathogenic and included variants in thefollowing genes: COL4A4, ETFDH, GK, SHOC2 and
SPG7 . The submissions were scored, reported to each
participant and a summary report was issued. The reportdetailed the expected variant classi ﬁcations and provided an
overview of all submitted results. A follow up webinar
summarised the evidence assessed, the expected variantclassi ﬁcations and addressed participant queries. This trial
scenario was used by 142 individuals, with 82 participants
completing the classi ﬁcation of all variants. As G-TACT is
web-based then participation is global and 34 countries
were represented worldwide. None of the participants
provided the expected classi ﬁcation for all ﬁve variants,
with only 10% of participants providing the expected
classi ﬁcation for four variants. This clearly demonstrates the
challenges associated with variant classi ﬁcation and the
need for education, competency assessment and standardi-
sation worldwide.
R. Treacy: None. F. Khawaja: None. Z.C.
Deans: None.
P14.103B
Diagnostic implementation of RNA sequencing in
patients lacking a de ﬁnite molecular diagnosis
T. J. van Ham, J. J. Saris, M. Nellist, W. G. de Valk,
M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld, L. M. van Unen, P. Elfferich,
H. Douben, F. W. Verheijen, L. H. Hoefsloot
Department of Clinical genetics, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Whole exome sequencing (WES) identi ﬁes a causative
variant leading to a molecular diagnosis, in only 30-50 % ofcases. WES is not effective for the detection of deep,
intronic variants that affect pre-mRNA splicing. Further-
more, WES does not provide direct insight into the effectsof detected variants on pre-mRNA splicing. Recently,
massively parallel mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) wassuccessfully used to identify pathogenic variants in patients
lacking a molecular diagnosis (Kremer et al., 2017;
Cummings et al., 2017) and therefore we have implemented
RNA-seq in our clinical diagnostic laboratory to help (i)
identify pathogenic variants in WES mutation-negative
patients and (ii) investigate the effects of variants ofuncertain clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS) on pre-mRNA spli-
cing. We will report our results on an initial series of 9
cases. RNA isolated from cultured skin ﬁbroblasts and/or
blood was subjected to RNA-seq. In 3 cases we con ﬁrmed
that the identi ﬁed VUS affected pre-mRNA splicing,
resulting in a more accurate molecular diagnosis. Inaddition, in 2 cases we identi ﬁed splicing abnormalities
that had not been detected using other technologies. Both
cases involved insertions of mobile elements deep inintronic sequences, causing complex mapping issues.
Overall, our data suggest that RNA-seq is not only well
suited to the detection of intronic variants and rearrange-ments that are not covered by WES but is also useful for the
improved classi ﬁ
cation of VUS identi ﬁed using other
molecular screens. RNA-seq is a useful adjunct to standardmolecular screens, leading to improved diagnostic yields
and more accurate variant classi ﬁcation.
T.J. van Ham: None. J.J. Saris: None. M. Nellist:
None. W.G. de Valk: None. M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld:
None. L.M. van Unen: None. P. Elfferich: None. H.
Douben: None. F.W. Verheijen: None. L.H.
Hoefsloot: None.
P14.104C
Length and temperature dependent cleavage of
TaqMan-type probes
W. M. M. Echwald, S. M. Echwald
Anapa Biotech A/S, Hoersholm, DenmarkDue to its high speci ﬁcity and sensitivity, PCR remains the
cornerstone of clinical diagnostics. In particular, applica-tions utilizing a probe-based readout, offer a higher level of
speciﬁcity given the additional, speci ﬁc hybridization
required to generate a signal.
TaqMan probes are particularly useful for such applica-
tions and since their invention over 20 years ago, still
comprise the most used probe-type.
TaqMan probes comprise dual-labeled probes, typically
labeled with a 5 ’ﬂuorophore and a 3 ’located quencher. If
the target sequence is ampli ﬁed during PCR, the TaqMan
probe will bind and the 5 ’->3’exonuclease activity of the
progressing Taq polymerase will gradually degrade the
probe, releasing the ﬂurophore from the quencher and
generating a signal.1662Extensive data and design-rules exist for the design of
TaqMan probes, however, little emphasis has been put on
predicting the speci ﬁc process of degradation of TaqMan
probes. But with the advent of novel designs of TaqMan
probes, multiplexing formats and use of e.g. internal
quencher types, the length and temperature dependence ofthe TaqMan degradation process have become increasingly
important.
To investigate the dynamics of degradation, we have
designed and tested a large number of TaqMan and
TaqMan-like designs and show clear dependence on the
probe sequence and length as well as assay conditions onthe processing of the probes. By using a combination of
traditional designs and various internal labeling types we
present a set of comprehensive and useful design-ruleswhen the degradation parameters of a TaqMan probe is
required to occur within a speci ﬁc frame.
W.M.M. Echwald: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Anapa Biotech A/S. S.M. Echwald: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Anapa Biotech A/S.
P14.105D
Assessing variations in telomere length quanti ﬁcation
for epidemiological studies
W. Naw, O. Yim, R. Ebstein, P. Lai
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
Relative telomere length (RTL) has been used as a biomarker
for various disease conditions and studies involving telomere
biology, unhealthy lifestyle and behavioural choices, stress
reduction and mindfulness relaxation programmes, andgenetic epidemiology. However, intra- and inter-laboratories
inconsistencies in RTL measurements limit the comparison of
these values between studies. This study compared theinﬂuence of three commonly used DNA extraction kits from
Qiagen, namely Blood and Cell Culture Mini Kit (GT),
Gentra PureGene Blood Kit (PG) and QiaAmp DNA BloodMini Kit (QA) on RTL measurements using qPCR. DNA
extracted by GT, PG and QA methods show mean RTLs of
1.09 (range 0.67-2.15), 0.83 (range 0.20-1.50) and 0.97(range 0.64-1.47) respectively. The results indicate that the
type of extraction methods can in ﬂuence mean RTLs (n =65,
Wicoxon Signed Rank tests, p<0.05) and range of RTLsdetected. RTL variance ranged between 0.97 and 0.039
among the three methods. These differences could be
attributed to the different underlying principles in DNAextraction for each method. Nonetheless, there was high inter-
assay reproducibility in RTL measurements within samples
extracted by same method (n =18, PCC =0.846, p<0.000) and
two-tailed paired T-test showed no signi ﬁcant difference from
multiple RTL assays (n =18, T-test pval =0.65). This studyshows that while differences can exist between the telomere
lengths measured from different methods, it is important to
use the same method of DNA extraction for comparative
studies. Reliable and accurate RTL assessment is crucial for
epidemiological studies using this biomarker to avoid false
positive or negative associations.
W. Naw: None. O. Yim: None. R. Ebstein: None. P.
Lai: None.
P14.106A
Detection of low fraction mosaics in brain surgical
specimens of Type II Focal Cortical Dysplasia withMolecular Inversion Probes
P. Dimartino
1,V .M a r i a n i2,3,C .M a r c o n i1,M .A .B r a m e r i o4,
P. Magini5,R .M i n a r d i6, L. Licchetta3,6,M .C o s s u2,
M. Seri1,5, P. Tinuper3,6,L .T a s s i2, F. Bisulli3,6,T .P i p p u c c i5
1Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Claudio Munari Epilepsy
Surgery Center, Niguarda Hospital, Milan, Italy,3Unit of
Neurology, Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor
Sciences (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy,4Department of Pathology, Niguarda Hospital, Milan,
Italy,5Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic Sant'Orsola-
Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy,6IRCCS
Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, BellariaHospital, Bologna, Italy
Introduction: Focal Cortical Dysplasia Type II (FCDII,
MIM: 607341) is a localized malformation of cortical
development leading to drug-resistant epilepsy that can be
treated with surgical resection of the dysplastic area.Hyperactivated MTOR signaling is visible in FCDII,
associated in up to 40% of cases with low allele fraction
(AF) mosaic gain of function mutations in MTOR itself orother genes in the cascade. Here we describe the
implementation of single molecule Molecular Inversion
Probes (smMIPs) as an accurate and cost-effective proce-dure to detect somatic, brain-speci ﬁc pathogenic variants
with AF as low as 1%.
Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from For-
malin Fixed, Paraf ﬁn Embedded (FPPE) or Fresh Frozen
(FF) samples of forty- ﬁve surgically resected FCDII tissues.
Whenever possible, matched DNA from non-dysplasiaFFPE specimens (gliosis) or from the marginal area of FF
tissue were also obtained. We used smMIPS to capture
MTOR mutational hotspot (FFPE) or all (FF) exonicsequences and sent samples to Illumina sequencing and
bioinformatics analysis.
Results: smMIPs showed median per-base error rate
2.29e-03 (FFPE) and 1.16E-03 (FF). Thirty single or mat-
ched samples achieved adequate sequencing coverageAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1663threshold for low AF variant calling. In 23% of samples, we
identi ﬁed and validated hotspot mutations including recur-
rent p.Ser2215Phe (or p.Ser2215Tyr) and p.Leu1460Pro
with allele fraction ranging 3-6%.
Conclusion: smMIPs enable accurate detection of mosaic
mutations, yielding diagnostic rate in line with literature.We also highlight technical issues hampering adequate
sequence coverage in FFPE samples.
P. Dimartino: None. V. Mariani: None. C. Marconi:
None. M.A. Bramerio: None. P. Magini: None. R. Min-
ardi: None. L. Licchetta: None. M. Cossu: None. M. Seri:
None. P. Tinuper: None. L. Tassi: None. F. Bisulli: None.
T. Pippucci: None.
P14.108C
Variant re-interpretation in the context of familial
cascade testing
A. Schaffer
1, H. Elfarawi2, C. M. Chisholm1, L. Huang1,2,
O. Jarinova1,2, A. Smith1,2, L. Bronicki1,2
1CHEO, Ottawa, ON, Canada,2University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada
Rapid technological advances have led to a substantial
increase in the number of sequence variants detected in
probands. A direct consequence of this is increased requestsfrom providers to test family members. In familial cascade
testing, the targeted testing of a known sequence variant is
offered to relatives of the proband to determine their ownrisks of developing the pathology, and results may impact
clinical management. Consequently, a consistent approach
to maintain up-to-date variant classi ﬁcation in the context of
familial testing is fundamental to provide appropriate
patient care and management.
We surveyed 21 clinical laboratories across Canada and
the United States to identify variant re-interpretation
workﬂows when performing familial testing. We also ana-
lyzed internal data of all familial testing performed by ourlaboratory in one year.
While most laboratories agreed that ideally all variants
should be re-interpreted every time they are detected in apatient, that is not a feasible goal given limited resources.
Our survey of laboratories found no clear consensus on
when variant re-interpretation is performed; some variablesincluded the variant classi ﬁcation, whether the variant was
detected in the family member, and whether the original
proband had been tested by the performing laboratory. Thereview of our internal data showed that of the familial
variants re-interpreted (n =107), 11% had a clinically sig-
niﬁcant change in classi ﬁcation, highlighting the impor-
tance of continuing to re-interpret variants tested in this
context. We have developed protocols to selectively re-interpret the variants that are most likely to impact
patient care.
A. Schaffer: None. H. Elfarawi: None. C.M. Chisholm:
None. L. Huang: None. O. Jarinova: None. A. Smith:
None. L. Bronicki: None.
P14.109D
A third generation long-read sequencing approach for
the analysis of genomic duplication variants, atnucleotide resolution, using Cas9 target enrichment
C. M. Watson
1,2, L. A. Crinnion1,2, J. Bates1,2, S. Hewitt1,
R. Robinson1, I. M. Carr2, E. Sheridan1,2, J. Adlard1,
D. T. Bonthron1,2
1The Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United
Kingdom,2University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom
With the widespread use of low-cost genome-wide
diagnostic screening tests, unanticipated but possibly
pathogenic dosage changes affecting single genes arediscovered with increasing frequency. Clinical management
demands facile validation of such incidental ﬁndings, often
necessitating the design of custom variant-speci ﬁc assays.
Although deletion variants can be readily con ﬁrmed using a
range of next-generation sequencing strategies, characteris-
ing duplication variants, at nucleotide resolution, remainsdemanding. We have addressed this challenge by deploying
a novel Cas9 enrichment strategy combined with long-read
Oxford Nanopore MinIon sequencing. We used bulkgenomic DNA without the need for PCR ampli ﬁcation.
We present the diagnostic resolution of two problematic
cases in which incompletely characterised duplicationvariants had been identi ﬁed by array CGH. The ﬁrst patient
presented with learning dif ﬁculties and autism spectrum
disorder, but had been found to have an incidental 1.7-kbimbalance which included a partial duplication of VHL exon
3. This was inherited from the patient ’s father, who had
renal cancer aged 38 years. In the second case, we identi ﬁed
an incidental 200-kb duplication which included DMD
exons 30-44. Parental testing was consistent with this
variant having arisen de novo . In both cases, the single-
molecule sequencing yielded suf ﬁcient information to
deﬁne precisely the architecture of the rearranged region,
enabling Sanger sequencing assays across the integrationsites and surrounding homologous regions (that likely gave
rise to the duplicated sequences). Adoption of this approach
by diagnostic laboratories promises to enable rapid andcost-effective characterisation of challenging duplication-
containing alleles.
C.M. Watson: None. L.A. Crinnion: None. J. Bates:
None. S. Hewitt: None. R. Robinson: None. I.M. Carr:1664None. E. Sheridan: None. J. Adlard: None. D.T.
Bonthron: None.
P14.110A
Breakpoint detection of balanced and unbalanced
structural variants from low coverage WGS data
I. Miceikaite, M. J. Larsen, C. B. Andersen
Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Introduction: Structural variants (SVs) are known to be
associated with severe genetic disorders. Currently used
methods to identify SVs include conventional karyotyping,FISH and microarrays. Yet no method provides both high
resolution and identi ﬁcation of balanced variants. We
studied the potential of low coverage WGS for ﬁne-
mapping breakpoints of SVs by comparing different SV
analysis software.
Materials and Methods: Low coverage WGS was per-
formed on 8 samples with previously detected different SVs
using KAPA HyperPlus PCR-free library preparation kit
(Roche) and NextSeq 550 (Illumina) sequencing platform.Mean genome coverage was 8.5X. Breakpoint analysis was
done by manual genome exploration using IGV software
and by automatic SV callers: VarSeq (Golden Helix) andDelly2.
Results: Delly2 software predicted breakpoints for all 8
known SVs including complex variants. VarSeq aided inﬁnding better de ﬁned breakpoints than microarray for all
SVs with copy-number variations, however it was not sui-
table for balanced events. Furthermore, by manuallyexploring the region of interest using IGV we could provide
better characterization of known SVs and pinpoint break-
points at single-base precision.
Conclusion: Using currently available software, it is
possible to detect breakpoints at single-base level if the
approximate SV region is known. However, the best resultswere achieved when called breakpoints were manually
inspected on genome visualization software. For now, SV
analysis from low coverage WGS data could be used tosupplement conventional methods where identifying a pre-
cise breakpoint can provide clinically relevant information.
I. Miceikaite: None. M.J. Larsen: None. C.B.
Andersen: None.
P14.111B
Whole exome sequencing and parallel biochemical
analyses: an ef ﬁcient combination for the diagnosis of
genetic diseasesA. Bertoli-Avella
1, M. Calvo1, P. Guatibonza-Moreno1,
M. E. Rocha1, O. Paknia1, C. Cozma1, S. Oppermann1,
F. Hakami2, S. Alameer2, M. Alghamdi3, C. Beetz1,
P. Bauer1, A. Rolfs1
1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany,2King Abdulaziz
Medical City-WR, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,3King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Introduction: Whole exome sequencing is an ef ﬁcient tool
for the study of monogenic disorders. However, incon-
clusive results are often obtained due to the lack of speci ﬁc
clinical information and/or the identi ﬁcation of variants of
uncertain signi ﬁcance, which do not allow to con ﬁrm a
genetic diagnosis in the absence of further testing. As aresult, the "diagnostic odyssey" for patients may be
signiﬁcantly extended in time. This study focuses on the
validation of genetic results by means of biochemicalanalyses.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed for 24 patients coming from different geo-graphical regions. The results obtained by sequencing were
validated in parallel through biochemical analyses: quanti-
ﬁcation of the corresponding enzyme activity and/or
biomarker.
Results: Sequencing analyses revealed the presence of
variants with known clinical relevance (previously reportedin the literature) and previously undescribed variants in 14
genes associated with lysosomal storage disorders. The
combination of genetic and biochemical results con ﬁrmed
the pathogenicity of previously undescribed variants and the
pathogenicity of those variants previously known. In two
cases, the diagnosis was con ﬁrmed despite the lack of
speciﬁc clinical information and with only the detection of
intronic variants, which would have otherwise been classi-
ﬁed as variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance.
Conclusions: The whole exome sequencing approach can
be greatly reinforced by performing biochemical analyses in
parallel. The combination of these two methods increasesthe diagnostic yield of genetic disorders even at initial
stages in which the clinical signs are still unspeci ﬁc. This
may also allow starting early pharmacological/non-phar-macological treatments.
A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Calvo: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. P. Guati-
bonza-Moreno: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Centogene AG. M.E. Rocha: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. O. Paknia: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
C. Cozma: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. S. Oppermann: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. F. Hakami: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1665S. Alameer: None. M. Alghamdi: None. C. Beetz: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
P14.112C
Whole genome sequencing reveals complex chromosome
rearrangement disrupting NIPBL in infant with
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
M. Plesser Duvdevani
1, M. Pettersson2, J. Eisfeldt2,3,
A. Frumkin1, A. Lindstrand2,4, T. Harel1
1Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,Israel,
2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden,3Science for Life Laboratory,
Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna, Sweden,
4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: Routine diagnostic work-up of children with
suspected monogenic disorders often includes chromosomalmicroarray and next-generation sequencing, and foregoes
classical cytogenetic analysis that can detect balanced
translocations. We identi ﬁed an infant with Cornelia de
Lange syndrome (CdLS) who manifested with typical
dysmorphic facies and limb reduction defects, yet chromo-
somal microarray and exome sequencing from both wholeblood and buccal samples were noncontributory.
Materials and Methods: G-banding chromosome ana-
lysis was followed by PCR-free whole genome sequencing(WGS) at an average read depth of 30X. WGS data was
utilized to ﬁne map the rearrangement breakpoints. The
disease-associated breakpoint junction was validated bybreakpoint junction PCR.
Results: Chromosome analysis revealed a de novo com-
plex balanced translocation, 46,XY,t(5;7;6)(q11.2;q32;q13)dn. The reported cytogenetic breakpoints did not involve
any of the known CdLS-associated genes, prompting us to
perform breakpoint analysis by WGS. Twenty six break-points were identi ﬁed by WGS, delineating segments
derived from four chromosomes (5;6;7;21) in ancestral or
inverted orientation. One of the breakpoints disruptedNIPBL , on 5p13.2, providing molecular correlation for the
clinical diagnosis of CdLS.
Conclusion: WGS provides a unique opportunity to
unravel the basis of genetic disorders not resolved by rou-
tine laboratory methods, and to shed light on the genomicmechanisms involved in the pathogenesis. The rearrange-
ments identi ﬁed in this case were by far more complex than
what was suggested by traditional G-banding chromosome
analysis, allowing for identi ﬁcation of the underlying
molecular diagnosis and implicating chromothripsis and
chromoanasynthesis in the formation of the balancedtranslocations.
M. Plesser Duvdevani: None. M. Pettersson: None. J.
Eisfeldt: None. A. Frumkin: None. A. Lindstrand: None.
T. Harel: None.
P14.113D
From cytogenetics to cytogenomics: whole genome
sequencing as a comprehensive genetic test in rare
disease diagnostics
D. Nilsson
1,2,3, J. Eisfeldt1,2,3, J. Lundin1,4,
M. Pettersson1,5,3, M. Kvarnung1,3,5, A. Lieden1,3,5,
E. Sahlin1,3,5, K. Lagerstedt1,3,5, M. Martin6, S. Ygberg7,8,
O. Bjerin7, H. Stranneheim3,8,2, A. Wedell3,8,2,
M. Nordenskjöld1,3,5, M. Johansson Soller1,3,5,
A. Nordgren1,3,5, V. Wirta9,10, A. Lindstrand1,3,5
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,2SciLifeLab, Department of
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden,3Center for Molecular Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,4Department of
Women´s and Children´s Health and Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
5Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,6Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, National BioinformaticsInfrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory,
Stockholm University, Solna, Sweden,
7The Institution for
Women's and Children's Health, Neuropediatric Unit,Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
8Center for
Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,9SciLifeLab, School of
Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and
Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden,10SciLifeLab, Department of Microbiology, Tumor
and Cell biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Rare genetic diseases are caused by different types of
genetic variants, from single nucleotide variants (SNVs) to
large chromosomal rearrangements. Recent data indicates
that whole genome sequencing (WGS) may be used as acomprehensive test to identify multiple types of pathologic
genetic aberrations in a single analysis.
We present FindSV, a bioinformatic pipeline for detection
of balanced (inversions and translocations) and unbalanced
(deletions and duplications) structural variants (SVs). First,1666FindSV was tested on 106 validated deletions and dupli-
cations with a median size of 850 kb (min: 511 bp, max:
155 Mb). All variants were detected. Second, we demon-
strated the clinical utility in 138 monogenic WGS panels.
SV analysis yielded 11 diagnostic ﬁndings (8%). Remark-
ably, a complex structural rearrangement involving twoclustered deletions disrupting SCN1A ,SCN2A , and SCN3A
was identi ﬁed in a three months old girl with epileptic
encephalopathy. Finally, 100 consecutive samples referredfor clinical microarray were also analyzed by WGS. The
WGS data was screened for large (>2 kbp) SVs genome
wide, processed for visualization in our clinical routinearrayCGH work ﬂow with the newly developed tool
vcf2cytosure, and for exonic SVs and SNVs in a panel of
700 genes linked to intellectual disability. We also appliedshort tandem repeat (STR) expansion detection and dis-
covered one pathologic expansion in ATXN7 . The diag-
nostic rate (29%) was doubled compared to clinicalmicroarray (12%).
In conclusion, using WGS we have detected a wide range
of structural variation with high accuracy, con ﬁrming it a
powerful comprehensive genetic test in a clinical diagnostic
laboratory setting.
D. Nilsson: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. J. Lundin: None.
M. Pettersson: None. M. Kvarnung: None. A. Lieden:
None. E. Sahlin: None. K. Lagerstedt: None. M. Martin:
None. S. Ygberg: None. O. Bjerin: None. H. Stranne-
heim: None. A. Wedell: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None.
M. Johansson Soller: None. A. Nordgren: None. V.
Wirta: None. A. Lindstrand: None.
P14.114A
Detection of copy number variants using whole-exomesequencing improves diagnostic yield of patients with
rare Mendelian diseases
P. Silva
1,2, S. Sousa1,2, S. Barbosa1,2, S. Morais1,2,
A. Lopes1,2, A. Brandão1,2, R. Bastos1,2, P. Arinto1,2,
J. Sequeiros1,2,3, I. Alonso1,2
1CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2i3S–Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3ICBAS –Instituto
de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal
Copy number variants (CNVs) are commonly observed in
human populations and increasingly recognised as animportant aetiology of disease. Whole-exome sequencing
(WES) has become a robust and cost-effective approach for
clinical genetic testing of small sequence variants; detectionof CNVs within WES data became possible with thedevelopment of algorithms that enable comparing coverage
between probands and controls. In this study, we express the
challenges and feasibility of analysing CNVs using WES
data. We performed WES on patients with rare genetic
disorders and analysed SNVs, using an in-house pipeline,
and CNVs, using Golden Helix ’s VarSeq software. Probable
causative CNVs were con ﬁrmed by qPCR or MLPA. In
recessive disorders with a causative heterozygous SNV, ﬁne-
tuning of CNV analysis for each gene was performed on acase-by-case basis. During 2017, we detected 12 CNVs as
probably causative in 122 patients, but only one was
conﬁrmed by qPCR, a rate of 91.7% false positives (FPs).
After optimising regions of interest and using CNVs of
healthy controls, from public and internal CNV databases,
many common CNVs and FPs were ﬁltered. Then, over the
past year, we detected 123 CNVs in 1251 patients as likely
causative, 41 of which were con ﬁrmed by qPCR or MLPA
(66.7% FPs). We identi ﬁed probable disease-causing CNVs
using WES data in 3.3% of patients. Con ﬁrmation by
orthogonal methodologies validated the software analysis
pipeline and the CNVs detected, showing that combiningSNV and CNV analysis improves the molecular diagnosis of
patients with rare Mendelian diseases.
P. Silva: None. S. Sousa: None. S. Barbosa: None. S.
Morais: None. A. Lopes: None. A. Brandão: None. R.
Bastos: None. P. Arinto: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I.
Alonso: None.
P14.116C
Increased ef ﬁciency with a new SNP panel for zygosity
testing
A. Rönn
1, A. Fungmark1, C. Diaz Pohl1, G. Falk1,
P. Kiviluoma1, M. Linde1, M. Oladapo1, P. Magnusson2,
K. Duvefelt1, J. Kere1
1Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
A requirement for performing robust genetic and statistical
analyses on twins is correctly assigned zygosities. We have
developed a new and improved SNP panel for zygosityanalysis, genotyping 37 autosomal SNPs and 2 sex markers
on the zinc ﬁnger X/Y chromosomes, using the Agena
MassARRAY ®system. The 37 SNPs were previously
included in a larger panel, to date used for zygosity analysis
in 12800 twin pairs from the Swedish Twin Registry. The
goal for the new panel was to develop a one-reaction assay,to replace the larger three-reaction assay, containing targets
with the highest minor allele frequencies based on results
from 25000 investigated samples.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1667Saliva DNA from 310 twin pairs was analyzed using both
the new panel and the larger original panel. The genotypes
were 100% concordant between the two panels. The sex
markers scored 100% correctly in all runs. The zygosity
score was calculated using odds ratios of monozygosity
(MZ), taking into account an error rate of 0.1%. Odds ratiosfor MZ score using the new panel and the original panel was
greater than 6x10
6and 6x107, respectively. Odds ratios for
dizygotic score (DZ) was 0 for both panels. Using the newpanel, 308 of the 310 twin pairs could be analyzed while
304 twin pairs could be analyzed with the original panel.
We found that a new panel could replace a well-used
panel for zygosity analysis. The new panel is faster and
easier to run, since it only uses one well per sample.
A. Rönn: None. A. Fungmark: None. C. Diaz Pohl:
None. G. Falk: None. P. Kiviluoma: None. M. Linde:
None. M. Oladapo: None. P. Magnusson: None. K.
Duvefelt: None. J. Kere: None.
P15
Personalized/predictive medicine - Pharmacogenomics
P15.01D
CRISPR-Cas9 in Alport Syndrome: HDR in podocytes-
lineage cells as new therapeutic frontiers in an
untreatable disorder
S. Daga
1, F. Donati2,3, S. Croci1, K. Capitani2,3,
F. Ariani1,4, R. Tita4, M. Mencarelli4, M. Baldassarri4,
E. Benetti2, S. Furini2, M. Nabity5, A. Auricchio6,7,
S. Conticello3, E. Frullanti1, A. Pinto1,4, A. Renieri1,4
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
2Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy,3Core Research Laboratory - ISPRO,
Florence, Italy,4Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,5Department of
Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University College ofVeterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, College
Station, Texas, College Station, TX, United States,
6Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM),
Pozzuoli, Italy,7Department of Advanced Biomedicine,
Federico II University, Naples, Italy
Alport syndrome (ATS) is a clinically heterogeneous
nephropathy characterized by Glomerular Basal Membrane
abnormalities up to end-stage renal disease. ATS therapiesare currently only delaying the progression of symptoms.
We present here a stable approach using AAV-CRISPR/
Cas9 technology. We have recently proven that podocytes-lineage cells - the key cells in ATS pathogenesis, the only
ones to express COL4 α3-α4-α5 heterotrimer - can beisolated from urine samples of ATS patients. Taking
advantage of disease-relevant cell lines, we employed an
two-plasmid approach in order to achieve a mutation-
speciﬁc correction, suitable for AAV infection. The ﬁrst
plasmid carries a Donor DNA, the template for the cor-
rection, and a reporter system mCherry/GFP to track theactivity of Cas9 in the cells. The second plasmid carries a
self-cleaving SpCas9 and the mutation-speci ﬁc sgRNA. In
two stable podocytes-lineage cell lines, harboring a muta-tion in COL4A5 (p.(Gly624Asp)) and a mutation in
COL4A3 (p.(Gly856Glu)), we achieved a reversion of the
mutation greater than 30% and insertions/deletions, limitedto the mutated allele, lower than 40%. AAV2 turned to be
the most effective serotype for in-vitro infection using a
viral MOI of 10
5.In-vivo gene editing experiments, are
ongoing on a naturally occurring dog model. The described
approach, covered by patent 102018000020230, opens up a
new era in the treatment of ATS, through an AAV perso-nalized corrective approach speci ﬁcally designed for each
patient.
S. Daga: None. F. Donati: None. S. Croci: None. K.
Capitani: None. F. Ariani: None. R. Tita: None. M.
Mencarelli: None. M. Baldassarri: None. E. Benetti:
None. S. Furini: None. M. Nabity: None. A. Auricchio:
None. S. Conticello: None. E. Frullanti: None. A. Pinto:
None. A. Renieri: None.
P15.04C
A genome-wide functional genomics approach identi ﬁes
susceptibility pathways to fungal bloodstream infectionin humans
V. Matzaraki
1,2, M. Jaeger2, R. Aguirre-Gamboa1,
M. Gresnigt2, X. Chu1, M. Johnson3, M. Oosting2,
S. Smeekens2, S. Withoff1, I. Jonkers1, J. Perfect3, F. van
de Veerdonk2, B. Kullberg2, L. Joosten2,Y .L i1,
C. Wijmenga1,4, M. Netea2,5, V. Kumar1,2
1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Groningen (UMCG), Groningen, Netherlands,2Department
of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands,
3Division of Infectious Diseases, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA
and Department of Clinical Research, Campbell UniversitySchool of Pharmacy, Buies Creek, NC, United States,
4K.G.
Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, Department of
Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,5Human
Genomics Laboratory, Craiova University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania
Introduction: Candidaemia, one of the most common
causes of fungal bloodstream infection, leads to mortality1668rates up to 40% in affected patients. Understanding genetic
mechanisms for candidaemia susceptibility may aid in
designing host-directed therapies.
Materials and Methods: We performed the ﬁrst
genome-wide association study on candidaemia using the
largest patient cohort available today. By using apopulation-based cohort of 500 healthy volunteers, we
proﬁled cytokines in Candida -stimulated peripheral blood
mononuclear cells, whole blood, and macrophages. Byusing these cytokine pro ﬁles and genetic data, we mapped
Candida -response cytokine-QTLs, and tested if they are
associated with susceptibility. Finally, we tested if candi-daemia loci modulating cytokines have an impact on the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by using an
independent population-based cohort.
Results: We observed strong association between candi-
daemia and a genetic variant, which signi ﬁcantly affects the
expression levels of PLA2G4B in blood. We found that up
to 35% of the susceptibility loci affect in vitro cytokine
production in response to Candida . Furthermore, potential
causal genes located within these loci are enriched for lipidand arachidonic acid metabolism. We also showed that the
numbers of risk alleles at these loci are negatively correlated
with ROS and IL-6 levels in response to Candida . Finally,
there was a signi ﬁcant correlation between ROS and allelic
scores based on 16 independent candidaemia-associated
SNPs that affect monocyte-derived cytokines, but not withT-cell derived cytokines.
Conclusions: Our results prioritize the disturbed lipid
homeostasis and oxidative stress as potential mechanismsthat affect monocyte-derived cytokines to in ﬂuence candi-
daemia susceptibility.
V. Matzaraki: None. M. Jaeger: None. R. Aguirre-
Gamboa: None. M. Gresnigt: None. X. Chu: None. M.
Johnson: None. M. Oosting: None. S. Smeekens: None.
S. Withoff: None. I. Jonkers: None. J. Perfect: None. F.
van de Veerdonk: None. B. Kullberg: None. L. Joosten:
None. Y. Li: None. C. Wijmenga: None. M. Netea: None.
V. Kumar: None.
P15.05D
Genetic variants predisposing to common diseases inwhole exomes of Bulgarian healthy individuals
M. Mihaylova
1, L. Balabanski1,2, D. Nesheva1,
Z. Hammoudeh1, D. Serbezov1, V. Damyanova1,
S. Karachanak-Yankova1,3, R. Staneva1, O. Antonova1,
D. Nikolova1, S. Hadjidekova1, D. Toncheva1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty,
Medical University of So ﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave ”s, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Hospital “Malinov", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, So ﬁa
University “St. Kliment Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Common diseases are a serious cause of
mortality worldwide and in Bulgaria also. Centenarian ’s
genomes/exomes contain clues to clarify the role of thegenes with unambiguous clinical signi ﬁcance. The aim of
our study is to investigate and compare the frequencies of
variants in BG centenarians/controls predisposing tocommon diseases used in different panel tests in medical
genetic counseling.
Materials and Methods: Two pools were constructed:
one with DNAs from 31 centenarians and the other with
DNAs from 61 young and healthy Bulgarian individuals.
WES analysis was performed and 177 130 variants werefound. We selected 79 variants considered as predisposing
to common diseases: cardiovascular, in ﬂammation, dia-
betes, etc, from the commercially available genetic tests.
Results: From the 79 genetic variants 33 were identi ﬁed
in our samples. Seven variants are associated with sus-
ceptibility to common diseases (ClinVar and Marrvel):obesity ( UCP2 rs660339- 0,314 in centenarians and 0,460
in controls); apolipoprotein C-III de ﬁciency ( APOC3
rs5128 0,925 and 0,847); MTHFR thermolabile poly-morphism ( MTHFR rs1801131; 0,280 and 0,396); hyper-
tension, essential ( AGT rs699; 0,351 and 0,426); metabolic
syndrome, asthma, nocturnal ( ADRB2 rs1042713; 0,380
and 0,329); coronary artery spasm 1 ( NOS3 rs1799983;
0,713 and 0,676); neural tube defects, folate-sensitive ( MTR
rs1805087; 0,195 and 0,175).
Discussion: Тhe determination of predisposition to
common diseases requires analysis of the genetic pro ﬁle in
the context of the environmental impact. Further morecomprehensive research is needed to clarify the clinical
signiﬁcance of the remaining variants. Acknowledgment to
DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 - National Science Fund ofBulgaria
M. Mihaylova: None. L. Balabanski: None. D.
Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. D. Serbezov:
None. V. Damyanova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova:
None. R. Staneva: None. O. Antonova: None. D. Niko-
lova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P15.06A
Response to adalimumab: can a genetic predictionproﬁle differentiate between responders and non-
responders in Slovenian Crohn's disease patients?
M. Gorenjak
1, S. Jurgec1,2, K. Repnik1,2, G. Jezernik1,
P. Skok3,4, U. Poto čnik1,2
1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and
Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine University ofAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1669Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Laboratory for Biochemistry,
Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor,
Maribor, Slovenia,3Department of Gastroenterology,
University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,
4Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Maribor,
Slovenia
Introduction: Non-response to anti-TNF therapeutics such
as in ﬂiximab and adalimumab usually represents loss of
disease control in severe Crohn's disease (CD). We aimed to
investigated whether a previously reported gene pro ﬁle for
inﬂiximab could also be applied to adalimumab response.
Materials and Methods: Inﬂamed and non-in ﬂamed
colon biopsy samples from 47 Slovenian Crohn's diseasepatients indicated for adalimumab (ADA) were obtained
during routine colonoscopy prior to ADA treatment.
Response to adalimumab was determined using IBDQ. RT-qPCR was employed to measure gene expression in colon
biopsy samples. Genotypes were extracted from previously
available data. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSSsoftware. Bootstrap aggregated support vector machines
(SVM) were trained using R package e1071.
Results: Pooled, non-in ﬂamed colon tissue and in ﬂamed
colon tissue gene expression datasets were used to train the
SVM prediction models using IBDQ response after 4, 12,
20 and 30 weeks of ADA treatment as prediction target.Pooled and in ﬂamed datasets achieved an average of 75.5%
and 90.5% ADA response prediction accuracy, respectively.
Non-in ﬂamed tissue dataset achieved 100% ADA response
prediction accuracy. Moreover, SVM trained on selected
SNPs and LD mates from analyzed genes had an average
accuracy of 92.8%, con ﬁrming involvement of analyzed
genetic regions. Finally, combined expression and genotype
data showed 100% ADA response prediction accuracy for
all datasets.
Conclusions: Our results support the reported genetic
anti-TNF response pro ﬁle. Furthermore, it can be applied
for adalimumab prediction, warranting further targetedgenetic pro ﬁling for response to adalimumab therapy.
M. Gorenjak: None. S. Jurgec: None. K. Repnik:
None. G. Jezernik: None. P. Skok: None. U.
Potočnik: None.
P15.07B
Missense variant rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2 predicts
short-term nonresponse to anti-TNF inhibitor
adalimumab in Crohn ’s disease patients
K. Repnik
1,2, S. Jurgec1,2, S. Koder3, I. Ferkolj4,
U. Poto čnik1,21Center for human molecular genetics and
pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Laboratory for Biochemistry,
Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor,
Maribor, Slovenia,3University Medical Centre Maribor,
Maribor, Slovenia,4Department of Gastroenterology,
Division of Internal Medicine, University Medical Centre
Ljubljana, Maribor, Slovenia
Introduction: In several autoimmune complex diseases, an
increased secretion of proin ﬂammatory cytokine tumour
necrosis factor (TNF) plays an essential role in the initiation
and propagation of the disease. Therefore, anti-TNF
monoclonal antibodies have shown an increased ef ﬁcacy
over conventional therapies. However, therapy with TNF
inhibitors is ineffective in up to 30% of patients and the
variety of therapeutic effects may re ﬂect individual genetic
backgrounds of patients. The aim of our study was to ﬁnd
new pharmacogenetics markers and mechanisms of
response to anti-TNF inhibitor adalimumab in well-deﬁned cohort of Crohn ’s disease (CD) patients.
Materials and Methods: We enrolled 102 CD patients
on adalimumab for which response has been de ﬁned after 4,
12, 20 and 30 weeks of treatment. SNPs, previously asso-
ciated with response to anti-TNF treatment, were geno-
typed. Functional prediction has been performed forsigniﬁcantly associated genes.
Results: After four weeks of treatment, strong statistically
signiﬁcant association has been con ﬁrmed for SNP
rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2 . In a group of patients with
genotype AA or AG there were 59,6% of nonresponders
compared to 15,1 % of nonresponders in a group of patientswith genotype GG ( p=1,20E-05). Furthermore, after four
weeks of treatment, average IBDQ value in patients with
genotype AA or AG reached only 158,3 points compared to183,7 points in patients with genotype GG ( p=2,74E-04).
The difference remained signi ﬁcant also after 12 weeks of
treatment.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report that supports the
association of SNP rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2 with
response to adalimumab in CD patients.
K. Repnik: None. S. Jurgec: None. S. Koder: None. I.
Ferkolj: None. U. Potočnik: None.
P15.08C
Plasma circulating tumor DNA as a genomic biomarker
for ovarian cancer
Y. Nanki
1, A. M. George2, Y. Chen2, C. Brueffer2,
A. Hirasawa3, T. Chiyoda1, T. Akahane1, D. Aoki1,
L. H. Saal216701Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan,2Lund
University, Lund, Sweden,3Okayama University, Okayama,
Japan
Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) remains the most lethal
disease among gynecological malignancies as most patientsare diagnosed in an advanced stage. Circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) liquid biopsy analysis holds promise as a
minimally-invasive multipurpose biomarker. In this pilotstudy, we investigate ctDNA monitoring in OC.
Material and Methods: Twelve OC patients from Keio
Women ’s Health Biobank at Keio University School of
Medicine were studied: the histological subtypes comprised
eight serous, two clear cell, one mucinous and one endo-
metrioid. Diagnostic tumor and serial peripheral bloodsamples were collected. Following identi ﬁcation of tumor
mutations, we performed quantitative detection of ctDNA in
plasma from various timepoints using the ultrasensitiveIBSAFE method.
Results: Concordant mutations in tumor DNA and
plasma DNA were detected in eleven patients (91%); onlyone mutation in a non-recurrent patient was undetectable in
plasma. Among the ﬁve recurrent patients, all patients
detected positive ctDNA prior to or simultaneously to CTimaging. Positive ctDNA was detected earlier than high
CA125 in 3/5 patients with a median of 86 days. ctDNA
also had sensitive reaction to tumor burden during che-motherapy. ctDNA from all seven non-recurrent patients
turned negative after initial treatment and maintained
negative throughout the follow-up.
Conclusions: Detection of plasma ctDNA was feasible.
ctDNA has the potential of enhancing presence diagnosis by
shortening the lead time than CA125 or CT imaging.ctDNA may be a clinically useful biomarker for OC
patients.
Y. Nanki: None. A.M. George: None. Y. Chen: None.
C. Brueffer: None. A. Hirasawa: None. T. Chiyoda:
None. T. Akahane: None. D. Aoki: None. L.H.
Saal: None.
P15.09D
The CYP2D6 gene variation among three Croatian
Roma groups
A. Stojanovic Markovic, B. Puljko, Z. Tomas, M. Zajc
Petranovic, T. Skaric-Juric, M. Pericic Salihovic
Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, CroatiaIntroduction: CYP2D6 enzyme is involved in the
metabolism of approximately 25% of the most commonlyprescribed drugs metabolized in liver (opioids, beta-
blockers, antidepressants, antitumor agent, etc.). CYP2D6has the largest phenotypical variability among all CYP ’s
due to the substantial number of polymorphisms that impact
its activity. This gene shows population speci ﬁc variation.
Aim: to determine variation within CYP2D6 among three
socio-culturally and geographically distinct Croatian Roma
groups (Balkan Roma and Vlax Roma from Baranja andMedjimurje) since their speci ﬁc population history highly
inﬂuenced their gene pool.
Methods: NGS method Genotyping-in-Thousands by
sequencing was used to sequence whole CYP2D6 gene on
324 Croatian Roma DNA samples. Polymorphic positons
were phased using PHASE v2.1.1. Reconstructed haplo-types were translated into star alleles according to P450
Allele Nomenclature Database.
Results: Sequencing identi ﬁed 51 polymorphic positions.
Reconstructed haplotypes signi ﬁcantly differed among the
three Roma groups (p<0.05). The two most frequent hap-
lotypes in Balkan Roma belong to the groups of CYP2D6*4and CYP2D6*1 alleles (9.7% and 8.7% respectively), while
in Roma from Baranja the most frequent haplotypes belong
to groups of CYP2D6*1 and CYP2D6*2 alleles (18.8% and10.3% respectively). The most frequent haplotypes in Roma
from Medjimurje belong to the groups of CYP2D6*1 and
CYP2D6*4 alleles (14.4% and 7.4% respectively).
Conclusion: Our results provided basic information
about CYP2D6 polymorphisms, suggesting that the enzy-
matic activities of CYP2D6 might differ among Roma
groups. This ﬁnding may be helpful for better modulation of
pharmacotherapy in Roma population. The research was
funded by Croatian Science Foundation grant (HRZZ-IP-2014-09-4454) to MPS.
A. Stojanovic Markovic: None. B. Puljko: None. Z.
Tomas: None. M. Zajc Petranovic: None. T. Skaric-
Juric: None. M. Pericic Salihovic: None.
P15.11B
Exome sequencing allows detection of relevant
pharmacogenetics variants in epileptic patients
S. verdez
1,2, P. Garret2,3,4, E. Tisserant1,3, A. Vitobello1,3,
F. Tran Mau-Them1,2,3, C. Philippe1,3,2, M. Bardou5,
M. Luu5, A. Juliette6, C. Verstuyft7, P. Callier1,2,3,
C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3,8, L. Faivre1,2,3,8, D. Yannis1,3
1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, Dijon, France,2UF Innovation
en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France,3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France,
4Laboratoire CERBA, Saint-Ouen l ’Aumône, France,5CIC-
EC, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire et Université deBourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France,
6Georges
François Leclerc Cancer Center - UNICANCER, Dijon,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1671France,7INSERM UMR-1178, CESP, "Depression and
Antidepressants" team, Faculté de Médecine Paris-Sud,
Université Paris Sud, France; Service de Génétique
moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique et Hormonologie,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin Bicêtre,
France,8Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies
du développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de
génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital,
Dijon, France
Introduction: Beyond the identi ﬁcation of pathogenic
variants for the diagnosis of Mendelian disorders, sequen-cing of individual genomes can detect numerous variants
potentially relevant for clinical care. Clinical interventions
can thus be conducted to improve future health outcomes inpatients and their at-risk relatives, such as predicting late-
onset genetic disorders accessible to prevention or treat-
ment, or identifying differential drug ef ﬁcacy and safety.
Material and Methods: To evaluate the interest of
pharmacogenetics information, we designed an « in house »
pipeline to determine the status for 122 PharmGKB (Phar-macogenomics Knowledgebase) variants, including struc-
tural variations for the genes of interest. This pipeline was
applied in a cohort of 82 epileptic patients to determine thefrequency of pharmacogenetics variants of interest for
managing the treatment. Plasma concentrations and treat-
ment was retrospectively assessed by clinical history.
Results: For the PharmGKB class IA variants, the
CYP2C9 status for phenytoin ’s prescription was the only
relevant information. One low and twenty-three inter-mediate metabolizers were identi ﬁed respectively in our
cohort, nineteen patients were treated by phenytoin. While
being treated with a standard protocol (15mg/kg loadingdose followed by 5mg/kg maintenance dose), 3 out of the 4
identi ﬁed intermediate metabolizers had experienced
plasma concentration above the toxic range (30 mg/L).
Conclusion: Genotyping of CYP2C9 could have antici-
pated the risk of clinical toxicity caused by high phenytoin
plasma levels. Pangenomic sequencing can provide infor-mation about common pharmacogenetic variants in epilep-
tic patients likely to be useful for their pharmacological
management.
S. verdez: None. P. Garret: None. E. Tisserant: None.
A. Vitobello: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. C. Phi-
lippe: None. M. Bardou: None. M. Luu: None. A. Juli-
ette: None. C. Verstuyft: None. P. Callier: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. D.
Yannis: None.
P15.12C
Identifying undetected Familial Hypercholesterolaemia(FH) in the general population - perspectives of primary
health care professionals in the UKL. A. Condon, N. Qureshi, J. Kai
Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is one
of the most common inherited autosomal dominant
disorders, causing elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol levels. Left untreated this causes prematurecoronary heart disease and mortality yet most cases remain
undiagnosed. Early detection and effective preventive
intervention is a national priority in the UK and othercountries. This research formed part of a prospective
evaluation of the clinical utility and acceptability of a new
FH case ﬁnding tool (FAMCAT) applied to patient records
in routine clinical primary care practice.
Materials and Methods: Qualitative semi-structured
interviews (n =20) were carried out with a purposeful
sample of primary care health professionals (GPs, nurses,
heath care assistants) and practice managers selected from
10 UK primary care practices who had implemented andused the FAMCAT tool. Following case ﬁnding of patients
at highest risk of FH, practices either initiated genetic
testing on site or referred to other services. All interviewswere transcribed and analysed thematically.
Results and Conclusions: Primary care practitioners
recognised and welcomed the bene ﬁt of adopting a more
systematic approach to identi ﬁcation of patients with
undetected FH in their practice populations. They found
application of the FAMCAT tool was acceptable and fea-sible in practice, and that genetic testing could be realised
on site.
However, implementing more routine identi ﬁcation of,
and genetic testing for, FH in primary care should ensure
adequate provision is made for increases in workload and
resource use whilst taking into account the local organisa-tional infrastructure at each primary care practice.
Grant Reference: NIHR SPCR FR12-333
L.A. Condon: None. N. Qureshi: None. J. Kai: None.
P15.13D
Plasma levels of Lyso-Gb1 correlate with HPO term-based estimates of disease severity in Gaucher disease
P. Baue
r, C. Cozma, L. Demuth, S. Oppermann, M. Werber,
G. E. Oprea, V. Weckesser, C. Beetz, A. Rolfs
Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany
Introduction: Gaucher disease (GD) is a lysosomal storage
disorder which is highly variable as regards age at onset and
clinical manifestation. An enzymatic assay has long been1672used as a rather reliable diagnostic aid in GD, but we
recently revealed even better diagnostic performance of
dried bloods spot (DBS)-based quanti ﬁcation of the
sphingosine Lyso-Gb1. We were therefore interested in
determining whether this biomarker can also be used to
reﬂect disease severity.
Materials and Methods: A large cohort of individuals
with genetically con ﬁrmed GD was compiled from Cen-
togene ’s proprietary mutation database CentoMD ®. Free-
text clinical descriptions from the initial diagnostic requests
(i.e. before genetic diagnosis and before initiation of treat-
ment) were translated into human phenotype ontology(HPO) terms. Lyso-Gb1 levels in the corresponding sam-
ples were quanti ﬁed by mass-spectrometry.
Result: A median of 4 HPO terms (range 1 to 19) had
been assigned per patient. Biomarker levels were lowest in
patients with a single HPO term, and increased by ~15% per
additional term (up to n =5 terms). Strati ﬁcation of terms
according to clinical categories revealed that patients with
mild or sub-clinical corresponding signs (e.g. thrombocy-
topenia) had lower Lyso-Gb1 levels than patients with amore severe manifestation (e.g. thrombocytopenia +
excessive bleeding, thrombocytopenia +epistaxis).
Conclusion: In addition to its diagnostic value, Lyso-Gb1
accurately re ﬂects disease severity in GD. Considering
feasibility of DBS-based quanti ﬁcation, it thereby lends
itself as the ideal biomarker for long-term follow up andtherapeutic monitoring of GD patients.
P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG. C. Cozma: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. L. Demuth: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
S. Oppermann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Werber: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. G.E. Oprea: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
V. Weckesser: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Centogene AG. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG.
P15.14A
Genomic Variants and Precision Medicine (personalized
clinical Care) in Saudi Arabia
A. I. Al-Aqeel1,2,3
1Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
3American University of Beirut, Beirut, LebanonSaudi Arabia has high rate of consanguineous marriages
(around 60%) resulting in inherited disorders early in life
affecting ~8% of births. Common diseases including
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and others manifesting
later in life affect over 20-30% of the population. In our
experience in over 25 years using genomic variant hashelped in implementing prevention programs including pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis, prenatal diagnosis, newborn
screening and pre-marital screening. It has also helped us inestablishing personalized therapeutic strategies. The Saudi
Human Genome Program targets the sequencing of
100,000 samples. It has sequenced over 25,000 samplesfrom patients and family members with inherited diseases.
This has resulted in a large Knowledge Database of genetic
variants which identi ﬁes pathological and normal variants
present in the Saudi population. This database was used to
build two proprietary “custom microarrays ”. The ﬁrst is the
“Saudi Biobank Array ”which may be used to study rare
inherited diseases and common disorders. The second is a
“premarital screening array ”. These include diseases that
result in intellectual disability, inborn errors of metabolism,hearing and vision impairment, immunode ﬁciency, move-
ment disorders, among others. Based upon our experience
within the current pre-marital screening program, approxi-mately 60% of couples with pathological variants, choose
not to proceed with marriage. This save healthcare cost of
more than SAR 3 billion on an annual basis with reductionin social burden to the community. Therefore establishing
the SHGP was a must to provide the necessary infra-
structure to solve cases to implement prevention andtherapeutic strategies.
A.I. Al-Aqeel: None.
P15.15B
NEBNext Direct Custom Ready Panels overcome
challenges associated with targeted re-sequencing
A. J. Barry
1, K. Patel2, A. B. Emerman2, S. Adams2,
S. Bowman2, E. Mauceli2, B. Desmond1, J. S. Dunn1,
S. E. Corbett1, C. D. Elfe2, F. Stewart1, E. Dimalanta1,
S. Russello1, T. B. Davis1, C. L. Hendrickson1
1New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States,
2Directed Genomics, Ipswich, MA, United States
Efﬁcient utilization of targeted gene panels for clinical
research is challenged by the wide variation in gene
constituents speci ﬁc to a given study. While focused gene
panels ef ﬁciently provide the necessary depth of coverage
for low frequency variant detection, the high costs and
design challenges associated with panel design presentchallenges. NEBNext Direct Custom Ready Panels employ
a novel approach to selectively enrich nucleic acid targetsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1673ranging from a single gene to several hundred genes,
without sacri ﬁcing speci ﬁcity. The approach hybridizes
both strands of genomic DNA, prior to any ampli ﬁcation.
Following a 90-minute hybridization, captured molecules
are converted into Illumina sequencer compatible libraries
containing an 8 bp sample ID and a 12 bp UniqueMolecular Identi ﬁer (UMI). An optional dual index module
incorporates a second 8 bp sample ID for highly-
multiplexed sequencing or to mitigate effects of “pad-
hopping ”on certain Illumina instruments. The result is a 1-
day protocol that enables preparation of sequence-ready
libraries from puri ﬁed genomic DNA speci ﬁc to content
included in the panel. NEBNext Direct Custom Ready
Panels can be customized to include the full exon content of
human genes associated with cancer, neurological disorders,autism, cardiovascular disease, and other conditions. Baits
for these genes have been designed, balanced, and pooled
on a per gene basis, and can be combined into speci ﬁc
custom gene subsets. Here, we demonstrate the capability to
deploy custom gene panels across panel sizes and content,
while maintaining high speci ﬁcity, uniformity of coverage,
and sensitivity to detect nucleic acid variants from clinically
relevant samples.
A.J. Barry: None. K. Patel: None. A.B. Emerman:
None. S. Adams: None. S. Bowman: None. E. Mauceli:
None. B. Desmond: None. J.S. Dunn: None. S.E. Cor-
bett: None. C.D. Elfe: None. F. Stewart: None. E.
Dimalanta: None. S. Russello: None. T.B. Davis: None.
C.L. Hendrickson: None.
P15.16C
Cytotoxic and genotoxic evaluation of escitalopram
oxalate, a commonly used antidepressant
R. Valipour
1,M .B .Y ılmaz2, E. Valipour3, S. Kocaturk-
Sel2, H. Oksuz2, N. S. Ilgaz2
1University of Cukurova, Institute Of Natural and Applied
Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, Adana, Turkey,
2University of Cukurova Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey,3University of Bulent
Ecevit, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department ofMolecular Biology and Genetic, Zonguldak, Turkey
Introduction: Escitalopram oxalate (EO), is one of the
most prescribed antidepressants in Turkey and in several
other European countries, but there is not enough research
on the effects of EO at a cellular level, therefore, we aimedto investigate the effects of EO at the cellular and
DNA level.
Materials and Methods: The cytotoxic effect of EO was
determined by methylthiazolyl diphenyl-tetrazolium bro-
mide (MTT) test in a dose dependent manner. Thegenotoxic effect of escitalopram oxalate at DNA level was
investigated by UV-Vis spectrophotometer and agarose gel
electrophoresis employing Copper reduction test.
Results: In MTT assay, EO showed cytotoxic effect on
NIH3T3 cells at a concentration of 50 μM. The absorption
value of the UV-Vis spectrophotometer solution of EO at238 nm is increased by the addition of DNA and showed a
hyperchromic effect with DNA binding value (Kb) of 0.035
M
-1. Moreover, The CuCl 2/2 H 2O added to the DNA with
EO, and no fracture was observed in the double stranded
DNA compared to the control DNA.
Conclusion: In conclusion EO has a dose dependent
cytotoxic effect but no genotoxic effect. This study has been
supported by Cukurova University Scienti ﬁc Research
Fund. Project Number: FYL-2017-9464 (Adana, Turkey).
R. Valipour: None. M.B. Y ılmaz: None. E. Valipour:
None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. H. Oksuz: None. N.S.
Ilgaz: None.
P15.17D
Determining genetic predispositions usingCleanPlex ®Hereditary Cancer Panel for a rapid and
streamlined amplicon-based NGS work ﬂow
B. Simmons, K. Pendleton, L. Lee, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Lin,
G. Liu, Z. Liu
Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States
Introduction: Genetic testing being widely accepted;
medical professionals are increasingly interested in screen-
ing for hereditary conditions. Popularly, hybrid capture-
based sequencing methods are used for screening largenumber of targets, which tend to be tedious, laborious,
requiring trained operators with specialized equipment and
the complex protocols resulting in increased errors. Tosimplify screening, we developed amplicon-based Clean-
Plex®technology, which enables high-quality genomic
coverage using a fast, simple, and streamlined NGS librarypreparation work ﬂow. We present our Hereditary Cancer
panel to quickly detect mutations associated with increased
hereditary cancer risks, covering full exons of 37 targetedgenes in one reaction.
Methods: CleanPlex technology has a 3-step work ﬂow:
targeted multiplex PCR step, background cleaning step toremove by-products, and ﬁnally indexing PCR to add Illu-
mina ®adapter sequences and sample indexes. 10 ng of
input genomic DNA per pool (40 ng total) was used andlibraries sequenced at ~2,500 read depth using Illumina
NextSeq ®. After demultiplexing, mapping-rates and on-
target rates were calculated, and variants were identi ﬁed
using Paragon Genomics ’variant calling algorithm.1674Results: The results exhibit >96% uniformity at 0.2X
mean, and all exons were covered to provide accurate var-
iant calling. The assay is highly reproducible and sensitive,
with an R2 value of 0.95 between independently prepared
replicates, and a detection rate of >99% for single nucleo-
tide variants.
Conclusion: CleanPlex Hereditary Cancer Panel can be
used for rapid and accurate pro ﬁling of cancer risk with
very small DNA input. This panel, with an easy cost-effective work ﬂow and quick turnaround, can make genetic
monitoring ef ﬁcient.
B. Simmons: None. K. Pendleton: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.
L. Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc. C. Li: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. Y. Liu: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc. L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics,
Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics,
Inc.Z. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc..
P15.19B
African-speci ﬁc pharmacogene variants affect
rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics in Africans
N. D. Soko
1,2, E. Chimusa2, C. Masimirembwa3,
C. Dandara2
1University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe,2University
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa,3African Institute
of Biomedical Science and Technology, Harare, Zimbabwe
Introduction: Rosuvastatin is used in the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia. Elevated plasma levels of rosuvasta-
tin have been associated with increased risk of statininduced myopathy, leading to non-adherence and compro-
mising treatment and management of hypercholesterolemia.Pharmacogenetics plays a well-established role in both
interindividual and interethnic variation in rosuvastatin
plasma levels. Historically the pharmacogenetics of rosu-
vastatin has been dominated by the transporter genes, Solute
Carrier Organic Anion Transporter Family member 1B1
(SCO1B1 )ATP Binding Cassette G2 (ABCG2 ). The single
nucleotide polymorphisms SLCO1B1 c.521T>C
(rs4149056, p.Val174Ala) and ABCG2 c.421C>A
(rs2231142, p.Gln141Lys), in particular are associated withincreased plasma levels of rosuvastatin. However, these
pharmacogenetic studies had minimal representation from
individuals of African descent.
Materials and Methods: To investigate the pharmaco-
genetics of rosuvastatin in African populations; we ﬁrst
screened 785 individuals from nine ethnic African popula-tions for the SLCO1B1 c.521C and ABCG2 c.421CA var-
iants. We then sequenced whole exomes from individuals of
African Bantu descent, who participated in a 20mg rosu-vastatin pharmacokinetic trial in Harare Zimbabwe.
Results: Frequencies of SLCO1B1 c.521C ranged from
0.0% (San) to 7.0% (Maasai), whilst ABCG2 c.421A ranged
from 0.0% (Shona) to 5.0% (Kikuyu). Novel genetic var-
iants showing signi ﬁcant association with rosuvastatin
exposure were identi ﬁed in SLCO1B1, ABCC2, SLC10A2,
ABCB11, AHR, HNF4A, RXRA andFOXA3 and appear to
be African-speci ﬁc.
Conclusions: The variants SLCO1B1 c.521C and ABCG2
c.421CA may play a minor role in interindividual variation
in rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics in African individuals.
Instead, African speci ﬁc pharmacogenetic variants may play
a major role.
N.D. Soko: None. E. Chimusa: None. C. Masimir-
embwa: None. C. Dandara: None.
P15.20C
Novel polycistronic modi ﬁed mRNA for generation of
human induced pluripotent stem cells
B. Mahdavi
1,2, N. Rezaei1, M. Nasr-Esfahani1,
K. Dormiani1
1Royan Institute for Biotechnology, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,2ACECR Institute of Higher Education,
Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Cell biology and personalized regenerative
medicine are enormously in ﬂuenced by induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs). Modi ﬁed mRNAs (mmRNA) has shown
great potential to derive safe and high ef ﬁcient integration-
free iPSCs. However, low stability of mRNAs resulted in
daily transfection, to overcome this limitation, we haveconstructed a polycistronic mmRNA containing WPREAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1675element, which improves the half-life of the produced
mRNA in the target cells.
Materials and Methods: Four human pluripotency
transcription factors along with EGFP were developed as a
single expression cassette through using 2A peptide
sequence. WPRE was cloned in downstream of describedpolycistronic fragment, in a separate construct. These two
fragments were subcloned in an appropriate vector con-
taining T7 promoter, UTRs and poly-A tail for in vitro
transcription (IVT). Transcripts were produced by T7 RNA
polymerase, using modi ﬁed nucleotides and cap analogs.
mmRNAs were transfected into target cells and EGFPexpression was assessed by ﬂuorescent microscopy and
ﬂow cytometry. The expression level of reprogramming
factors was determined by Western blotting.
Results: Analysis of transfected cells showed signi ﬁcant
improvement in mmRNA stability in presence of WPRE,
which in turn gave rise to a higher level of proteinexpression. Western blot assay demonstrated an equivalent
stoichiometric expression of 2a-mediated factors.
Conclusions: We developed a stabilized polycistronic
mmRNA as a potential tool for safe and ef ﬁcient iPSCs
induction. The application of cap, modi ﬁed nucleotides and
poly-A tail in the structure of mRNA, besides, utilizedWPRE element in the expression cassette, enhanced the
mmRNA half-life and increased its translation ef ﬁciency.
B. Mahdavi: None. N. Rezaei: None. M. Nasr-Esfa-
hani: None. K. Dormiani: None.
P15.21D
New genetic variants and pathways associated with
healthy longevity in Bulgarian centenarians
L. Balabanski
1,2, D. Serbezov2, R. Vazharova1,3,
S. Karachanak-Yankova2, R. Staneva2, M. Mihaylova2,
V. Damyanova2, D. Nesheva2, Z. Hammoudeh2,
O. Antonova2, D. Nikolova2, S. Hadjidekova2,
D. Toncheva1,2
1Genomic Laboratory, Malinov Clinic, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University -
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Medical Faculty, So ﬁa University
“St. Kliment Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria
Around 25% of human longevity is attributed to genetic
factors. Studies have shown that complex interaction of
many variants with small effect and interplay of different
pathways predispose to healthy ageing. We performed deepwhole-exome sequencing of a pool of 32 centenarians and
61 young healthy controls from Bulgaria and after
bioinformatic and statistical analysis we discovered 91variants showing statistically-signi ﬁcant allele frequency
difference between the two pools (p-value<5.0 х10-8).Based on their molecular function we nominated three of
these variants for association with longevity - rs2526374 in
RNF43 (NP_060233.3:p.Leu418Met), rs956868 in WNK1
(NP_001171914.1:p.Thr1316Pro) and rs2276362 in NAD-
SYN1 (NM_018161.4:c.264-26A>G). RNF43 is a regulator
of WNT signalling - an important, highly-conservedpathway involved in cell proliferation, tissue homeostasis
and stem cell maintenance in adults. WNK1 is a serine/
threonine kinase that plays an important role in cellsignalling, survival and proliferation. This gene is a
downstream effector of insulin/IGF-1 signalling - a pathway
involved in the regulation of ageing in many organisms.Moreover, WNK1 modulates the activity of the pro-
longevity transcription factor FOXO4 . Splicing prediction
algorithms predict that this intronic variant in NADSYN1
would disrupt the consensus branchpoint between exons 3
and 4. This gene regulates NAD +metabolism - an
important cofactor involved in lifespan extension in somemodel organisms and essential for the activity of sirtuins
and FOXO3A associated with ageing. Our whole-exome
pool analysis discovered novel genes involved in longevitythat could serve as potential therapeutic targets for the
prevention or treatment of age-related physiological decline.
Grant reference: DN03/7(18.12.2016), NSF, BulgariaL. Balabanski: None. D. Serbezov: None. R. Vazhar-
ova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Staneva:
None. M. Mihaylova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D.
Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. O. Antonova:
None. D. Nikolova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D.
Toncheva: None.
P15.22A
Personalized approach to the prevention andmanagement of colorectal cancer illustrated on family
case of Lynch syndrome
M. M. Litvinova
1,2,3, D. A. Akhmedzyanova1,
G. V. Movsesyan1,2, T. S. Lisitsa2,4, N. A. Bodunova2
1Federal State Autonomus Educational Institution of Higher
Education I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2The Loginov Moscow Clinical
Scienti ﬁc Center of Moscow Health Department (MCSC),
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Federal Budget Institution
of Science "Central Research Institute of Epidemiology" ofThe Federal Service on Customers' Rights Protection and
Human Well-being Surveillance, Moscow, Russian
Federation,
4Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology of
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Lynch Syndrome (LS) is a hereditary
autosomal dominant disorder. Patients with LS have an
increased risk of cancer development. Estimated risk by the1676age of 70y.o. for non-polyposis colorectal cancer (CRC) is
up to 82%, endometrial cancer-60%, gastric cancer-13%,
etc. LS is caused by mutations in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
PMS2, EPCAM genes. Prevalence of LS is 1:1000. The goal
is to de ﬁne the role of molecular genetic testing and medical
genetic counseling in patients with CRC.
Materials and Methods: Case report of 36-year-old male
patient with Non-polyposis CRC. The bowel obstruction
had occurred in 4 generations of his family. Patient ’s
brother developed CRC at 27y.o., mother-at 49 and at 60y.
o. Grandmother and grand-grandfather died of CRC at 62
and 45 years respectively. Meanwhile, proband has 4 chil-dren (4-10y.o.). Basing on the clinical signs and pattern of
inheritance, LS was assumed. The patient was tested for
mutations in LS-associated genes by using targetNGS panel.
Results: Sequencing of proband ’s DNA revealed non-
sense mutation p.Arg100Ter in the exon 3 of MLH1 gene in
heterozygous state. The genetic test results proved LS in the
proband. Prophylactic genotyping was carried out in all
proband ’s relatives. 3 out of 4 proband ’s children, brother
and most of his children (3 out of 4), sister and mother
appeared to be carriers of the same mutation.
Conclusions: Personalized medicine and molecular
genetic testing, nowadays, allow to determine precisely the
cause of cancer and also to ﬁnd effective treatment and to
develop preventing program for presymptomatic proband ’s
relatives.
M.M. Litvinova: None. D.A. Akhmedzyanova: None.
G.V. Movsesyan: None. T.S. Lisitsa: None. N.A.
Bodunova: None.
P15.23B
Genomic restricted maximum likelihood (GREML)
analysis to estimate the heritability of response/
resistance in major depressive disorder (MDD)
M. Shoaib
1, E. Giacopuzzi2, C. Magri1, A. Minelli1,
M. Gennarelli1,2
1University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy,2IRCCS Istituto
Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy
Introduction: MDD is the leading cause of disability
worldwide and lack of response to treatment is reported in~30% of subjects. Pharmacogenomics studies performed so
far failed to identify single SNPs with a replicable effect on
anti-depressants response (AD). Instead of focusing onsingle SNPs, our study aims to evaluate the aggregated
contribution on AD response for genome-wide variants and
currently known genetic variants from pharmGKB, themain catalog of known pharmacogenetic variations.Methods: We used GREML-LDMS (LD- and MAF-
Strati ﬁed) analysis to estimate the heritability of Citalopram
response and treatment-resistant status (TRD) in MDD
patients from the STAR*D anti-depressants pharmacoge-
netic trial. We estimated the overall genetic contribution for
genome-wide SNPs present in the dataset, as well as fordifferent groups of candidate SNPs from pharmGKB.
Results: We detected a small, but signi ﬁcant, proportion
of variance explained by SNPs associated with Citalopramin pharmGKB when including those with the lower level of
evidence (V(G)/Vp 0.04; SE 0.02; p 2.23E-05). High her-
itability emerged when considering genome-wide SNPs forCitalopram response (V(G)/Vp 0.76; SE 0.23; p 0.026),
Citalopram symptoms improvement (V(G)/Vp 0.82; SE
0.22; p 0.046) and TRD phenotype (V(G)/Vp 0.81; SE0.24; p 0.022).
Conclusions: Our preliminary results con ﬁrm a little
effect of single SNPs and suggest that taking into accountthe overall genetic variability of pharmGKB AD-related
SNPs and, even more, of genome-wide SNPs could improve
antidepressant response/resistance prediction.
M. Shoaib: None. E. Giacopuzzi: None. C. Magri:
None. A. Minelli: None. M. Gennarelli: None.
P15.24C
Plasma detection of androgen receptor variant 7 in
metastatic prostate cancer
P. Vázquez Cárdenas
1,2,3, M. Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3,
F. Gómez-Veiga4,2, J. García-Hernández3, I. Misiewicz-
Krzeminska3, Á. Vírseda4, R. García5, R. González-
Sarmiento1,2,3
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Salamanca, Spain,2Institute of
Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Cancer (IBMCC), Salamanca, Spain,4Deparment of
Urology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain,5Oncology Service, University Hospital of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
Introduction: Liquid biopsy has the potential to provide
information about cancers without invasive biopsy, using
circulating biomarkers. In metastatic PCa, progression from
a hormonesensitive state to castration resistance underandrogen deprivation therapy marks the transition to the
lethal phenotype of the disease. Previous studies suggested
the presence of AR-V7 transcripts in CTCs, in exosomesand as cell-free RNA in plasma. The aim of the present
study was to determinate the presence of Arv-7 in plasma
using capillary nano-immunoassay in metastatic PCa and tocorrelate with clinical and analytical data.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1677Methods: The study included 31 patients with diagnostic
of metastatic PCa. Whole blood (10 mL) was collected in
EDTA tubes. Plasma was removed after centrifugation at
1,600 rpm at 4ºC, previously to determinate the presence of
ARV-7 in plasma, Albumin and IgG depletion was per-
formed using the Pierce ™Top 2 columns. Capillary
Electrophoresis Immunoassay or SimpleWestern analyses
were performed using the WES ™according to the manu-
facturer ’s protocol.
Results: AR-V7 signal was detected in 11 cases (36%).
Twenty samples (71%) were considered negative. All
patients with AR-V7 expression, showed a Gleason score≥7, higher PSA and was associated with higher values
for FA.
Conclusions: Assessing the presence of AR-V7 in
plasma from PCa patients is feasible by a novel capillary
nano-immunoassay. AR-V7 was observed in 36% of the
PCa metastatic patients. These ﬁndings lay the foundations
for liquid biopsy as a means of obtaining biological data.
This study was funded by AECCSal16/002.
P. Vázquez Cárdenas: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez:
None. F. Gómez-Veiga: None. J. García-Hernández:
None. I. Misiewicz-Krzeminska: None. Á. Vírseda: None.
R. García: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P15.26A
PTEN expression and mutations in TSC1 ,TSC2 and
MTOR are associated with response to rapalogs in
patients with renal cell carcinoma
J. Roldán-Romero
1, B. Beuselinck2, M. Santos1,
J. Rodriguez-Moreno3, J. Lanillos1, B. Calsina1,
A. Gutierrez4, K. Tang5, E. Caleiras1, C. Montero-Conde1,
A. Cascón1,6, M. Robledo1,6, J. Garcia-Donas3,
C. Rodriguez-Antona1,6
1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
Madrid, Spain,2University of Leuven, Laboratory of
Experimental Oncology, Leuven, Belgium,3HM Hospitales
–Centro Integral Oncológico HM Clara Campal, Madrid,
Spain,4Hospital HM Puerta del Sur, Madrid, Spain,
5Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain,
6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain
mTOR pathway inhibitors are key drugs for the treatment of
many tumor types, however, no predictive biomarkers have
been identi ﬁed so far. Here, we performed a molecular and
immunohistochemical characterization of key mTOR path-
way components in a series of 113 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) patients treated with everolimus or temsirolimus,aimed at identifying markers of treatment response.Mutational analysis in MTOR ,TSC1 and TSC2 was
performed through targeted next-generation sequencing
(NGS), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed
for PTEN, pAKT, pS6K1, pS6 and p21. Among 89 patients
with NGS data, 13.5% had mTOR pathway mutations (9%
MTOR ,1 % TSC1 ,3 % TSC2 ), with the mutation rate
decreasing to 8% when only considering pathogenic
variants, and with a multiregion NGS analysis in 14
patients giving homogenous results. When comparing themolecular data with the RECIST response of the patients,
we found that partial response was more frequent in cases
with mTOR pathway mutations than in those withoutmutations (67% versus 21%, P =0.020). Regarding IHC,
negative PTEN staining was detected in 58% of the tumors,
and it was more frequent in rapalog responder patients(P=0.024). Mutations and PTEN IHC were not mutually
exclusive events and its combination improved response
prediction (P =0.013). The staining of other proteins did not
show and association with response and no association with
PFS was observed for none of the markers analyzed. In
conclusion, our study supports mTOR pathway mutations,negative PTEN IHC, and their combination, as markers of
rapalog response, proving a step forward the personalization
of RCC treatment.
J. Roldán-Romero: None. B. Beuselinck: None. M.
Santos: None. J. Rodriguez-Moreno: None. J. Lanillos:
None. B. Calsina: None. A. Gutierrez: None. K. Tang:
None. E. Caleiras: None. C. Montero-Conde: None. A.
Cascón: None. M. Robledo: None. J. Garcia-Donas:
None. C. Rodriguez-Antona: None.
P15.27B
Comprehensive genetic characterization and evaluationof clinical response in a neuro ﬁbromatosis type 2 patient
treated with bevacizumab
E. Basenach
1, A. Förster1, P. Raab2, S. Alzein3,
G. Schmidt1, J. K. Krauss4, F. Heidenreich5,
C. Hartmann6, B. Auber1, B. Wiese4,5, R. G. Weber1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Department of Diagnostic
and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,3RVZ Ostwestfalen GbR,
Minden, Germany,4Department of Neurosurgery,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,
5Department of Neurology, Henriettenstift, Diakovere
Krankenhaus gGmbH, Hannover, Germany,6Division of
Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany1678Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a tumor predisposition
syndrome characterized by the development of schwanno-
mas, especially bilateral vestibular schwannomas (VS), and
meningiomas. Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the NF2
gene are known to cause NF2, whereby somatic mosaicism
is present in ~25% of simplex patients. In schwannomatosis,a disorder phenotypically similar to NF2, heterozygous
SMARCB1 orLZTR1 variants may be causative. Recently,
bevacizumab has shown ef ﬁciency as therapy for VS in
some NF2 patients. We report on a thirty-three-year-old
patient with bilateral VS, fourteen additional schwannomas
and one intracranial meningioma. Next generation sequen-cing using the TruSight Cancer Panel and Sanger sequen-
cing of LZTR1 on blood and oral mucosa DNA revealed no
pathogenic variants in NF2,SMARCB1 orLZTR1 . Sanger
sequencing on DNA from three schwannomas identi ﬁed the
known nonsense variant c.784C>T;p.(R262*) of NF2
(NM_000268.3, GRCh37/hg19) in all tumors, leading tothe diagnosis of NF2 mosaicism. Because of hearing
impairment and tumor progression the patient underwent
an off-label therapy with 5mg/kg bevacizumab. Here, weevaluated MRI scans from ﬁve pre-therapeutic and two
therapeutic years and pure-tone audiometry. After
25 months of treatment, the pure-tone average decreasedby 7.5dB, indicating a hearing bene ﬁt. Four of seven non-
vestibular schwannomas showed volume reduction of ≥20%
after 24 months of treatment while the growth rate of themeningioma decreased. In conclusion, in a patient with
NF2 somatic mosaicism, an off-label therapy with bev-
acizumab was ef ﬁcient with respect to hearing improvement
and tumor shrinkage of some non-vestibular schwannomas
over a period of two years. (EKFS
2014_Promotionskolleg.22)
E. Basenach: None. A. Förster: None. P. Raab: None.
S. Alzein: None. G. Schmidt: None. J.K. Krauss: None.
F. Heidenreich: None. C. Hartmann: None. B. Auber:
None. B. Wiese: None. R.G. Weber: None.
P15.29D
Cardio Diabesity: Could genetics help us to raise
awareness of the obesity-related risks?
L. Walczer Baldinazzo, S. Caporilli, L. Gualdi, C. Lapucci
Synlab Italia SRL, Castenedolo, ItalyOne of the leading causes of death in the west world is
linked to obesity. The world health organization hasestimated that in 2016 over 650 million adults were obese.
Those people are more inclined to develop cardiovascular
diseases (CVD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) which aregenetic and chronic multifactorial diseases. We performed a
genetic screen over 3000 patients tested in 2018 from theMediterranean area by using the MassARRAY ®method
that simultaneously analyses 30 genes variations per
sample. The genes investigated in our study were previously
established to increase the likelihood of developing obesity,
CVD and T2D. Three groups of genes were then created
from disease-related genes variants with at least one high-risk allele (12 for obesity, 5 for T2D and 4 for CVD). Our
ﬁnding suggests that risk-alleles frequency for obesity-
dependent genes such as FTO,SH2B1 andADRB2
have a
higher incidence within the tested population with respect to
the WT allele. CVD and T2D-related genes such as
MnSOD2 and TCF7L2 showed a similar incidence. We
additionally ﬁnd that 65% of tested samples for FTO high-
risk allele had at least one high-risk allele for either or both
MnSOD2 and TCF7L2 . Thus, people genetically predis-
posed to develop obesity can be also inclined to develop
CVD or/and T2D. The incidence of those diseases could be
decreased in the future by combining the genetic screenswith balanced diets and physical activity. Speci ﬁcally, the
genetic screen can raise awareness of developing deadly
diseases especially in high-risk people.
L. Walczer Baldinazzo: None. S. Caporilli: None. L.
Gualdi: None. C. Lapucci: None.
P15.31B
Genetic polymorphisms in dopaminergic pathway
inﬂuence the occurrence of adverse events of
dopaminergic treatment in Parkinson ’s disease
S. Reden šek
1, M. Tro št2, V. Dol žan1
1Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,Slovenia,
2Department of Neurology, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Defects in dopaminergic pathway are the
characteristic underlying processes of Parkinson ’s disease
(PD). Genetic variability in this pathway may in ﬂuence the
outcome of dopaminergic treatment (DT), especially in
terms of adverse events (AEs). We have used pathway-
based approach to comprehensively evaluate the in ﬂuence
of selected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of key
dopaminergic pathway genes on the occurrence of AEs of
DT in PD.
Material and Methods: We recruited 231 PD patients on
DT and collected data on their AEs: sleep attacks, visual
hallucinations, nausea/vomiting, orthostatic hypotension,peripheral oedema, impulse control disorders, motor ﬂuc-
tuations and dyskinesia. We genotyped patients for the
following SNPs: COMT rs4680, rs165815, DDC rs921451,
rs3837091, MAOB rs1799836, DRD2 rs1801028,
rs1799732, DRD3 rs6280, SLC6A3 rsrs393795, rs6347,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1679rs104209, SLC22A1 rs628031, SLC18A2 rs14240, and
SV2C rs1423099. In logistic regression analysis, results
were adjusted for signi ﬁcant clinical parameters.
Results: COMT rs165815 C allele decreased odds for
visual hallucinations (OR =0.34, 95%CI =0.16-0.72,
p=0.004), while DRD3 rs6280 CC genotype increased the
risk for this AE (OR =3.31, 95%CI =1.37-8.03, p =0.008).
DDC rs921451 CT genotype, DDC rs3837091 AGAGdel
genotype, and SLC22A1 rs628031 AA genotype increased
odds for orthostatic hypotension (OR =2.30, 95%CI =1.26-
4.20, p =0.007; OR =1.94, 95%CI =1.07-3.51, p =0.028,
OR=2.57, 95%CI =1.11-5.95, p =0.028, respectively).
SLC22A1 rs628031 AA genotype increased odds for per-
ipheral oedema and impulse control disorders (OR =4.00,
95%CI=1.62-9.88, p =0.003, OR =3.16, 95%CI =1.03-
9.72, p=0.045, respectively). SLC22A1 rs628031 GA gen-
otype protected patients against dyskinesia (OR =0.48, 95%
CI=0.24-0.98, p =0.043).
Conclusion: We have identi ﬁed a few new potential
predictive genetic biomarkers of AEs of DT in PD.
Grant: ARRS, grant P1-0170
S. Reden šek:None. M. Tro št:None. V. Dol žan:None.
P15.32C
Allele and genotype frequencies of pharmacogenomic
markers in a latino population: ﬁndings from the Latin
American Personalized Medicine Association
B. Esquivel1,2, T. Koep1, M. Donaldson1
1OneOme, MINNEAPOLIS, MN, United States,2Latin
American Personalized Medicine Association, Mexico City,
Mexico
Introduction: Latin Americans represent one of the largest
admixed populations in the world. They also represent~18% of the total US population
1. While pharmacogenomic
(PGx) markers have been well characterized for certain
ethnicities, little has been published on the frequency ofrelevant PGx genotype and phenotype rates in latinos.
Materials and Methods: Attendees of the 2018 ALAMP
conference were asked to participate in this study andsubsequently consented to receiving pharmacogenomic
testing using the RightMed ®Comprehensive test (OneOme,
USA). 146 predominantly latino participants completed thestudy. Participants were tested for 27 pharmacogenes and
received genotype-derived recommendations for more than
360 medications as well as a genotype and phenotypesummaries. Medications on each report were binned into
red (major drug-gene interactions), yellow (moderate) and
green (minimal).
Results: Participants averaged 8 red medications (major
interaction), and every participant had at least 1 major ormoderate drug-gene interaction identi ﬁed. Of interest, 20%
of participants were intermediate metabolizers of clopido-
grel, indicating a loss of function allele in CYP2C19. In
addition, 34% carried the SLC6A4 S/S genotype, associated
with lowered tolerability of SSRIs, and 45% were carriers
of UGT1A1 variants, posing a severe risk of neutropeniaand toxicity for those with certain chemotherapy regimens.
Conclusion: For PGx to become standard of care in
medicine, it is imperative that different ethnic groups berepresented in the literature and ultimately, in professional
guidelines. Through this study, we have made strides to
characterize the latino pharmacogenomic pro ﬁle, which will
in turn help to stratify patients for PGx testing.
B. Esquivel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Oneome. T. Koep: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; OneOme. M. Donaldson: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; OneOme.
P15.33D
Implementational insights from AZ/Medimmune ’s
Genomics Initiative
H. E. Stevens
Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and
Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, Astrazeneca, Melbourn,
United Kingdom
Introduction: In 2016 AstraZeneca launched a company-
wide genomics initiative aiming to integrate genomicsthroughout the drug discovery and development pipelines.
The initiative will analyse up to 2 million genomes,
including sequencing of 500,000 patients participating incompany sponsored clinical trials.
To achieve this, novel processes and documentation had
to be rapidly embedded across therapeutic areas, replacingrestricted, study speci ﬁc pharmacogenetic samples with
broadly consented genomic samples allowing use across
health-related research.
Methods: Three steps were employed to enable this
strategy: 1) a novel role was created to operationally support
study teams and monitor implementation; 2) a dedicatedmailbox was set-up as a primary point of contact for
genomics queries and advice; 3) training material, face to
face “working groups ”and training sessions were rolled-out
across the organisation. To assess the impact of these
measures, the inclusion of genomic sample collection across
clinical studies was audited.
Results: During 2018 over 1400 email items, addressing
queries from 53 different study teams were received and
resolved in the genomics mailbox and 13 formal trainingsessions were held with more than 250 attendees from
multiple company functions including clinical teams,1680operational leads, data managers and process owners.
Implementation of these measures resulted in 150%
increase in the number of studies collecting genomic sam-
ples (60% of all AZ studies) with over 14,000 patients
approached.
Conclusion: A genomics initiative, collecting broadly
consented samples, can be successfully embedded within a
global organisation by dedicating resources that raise
awareness and provide a robust support structure forstudy teams.
H.E. Stevens: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Astrazeneca.
P15.35B
Implementing pharmacogenetics by repurposing nextgeneration sequencing data on a personalized card
M. A. Santcroos
1, J. K. Vis1, M. van der Lee1,
S. Y. Anvar1, M. Kriek1, L. Grandia2,D .L .S .S i e3,
M. C. Cornel3, P. M. Bet3, J. J. Swen1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,
2Z-Index, The Hague, Netherlands,3Amsterdam UMC,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Pharmacogenetics is one of the ﬁrst clinical
applications of personalized medicine. However, in currentclinical practice it is often used retrospectively, while
patients may bene ﬁt most from preemptive testing [1].
Increasing use of Next Generation Sequencing offers newopportunities for large scale implementation of pharmaco-
genetics in clinical practice.
Materials and Methods: Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES) for children and their parents is routinely performed
for diagnosis of certain medical conditions. We created a
post-processing procedure that phases all variants based ontrio analysis. The pharmacogenetics pro ﬁle is extracted
from approximately 200 phased variants in 12 genes.
Patients are offered a personal card with a QR code thatcontains the pro ﬁle. On access of their personal page, the
drug metabolizer phenotype is predicted, and individual
drug recommendations are generated based on the monthlyupdated national drug database G-Standaard [2].
Results: In this multicenter project we developed a sys-
tem that reuses diagnostic WES data for pharmacogenetics.The systems consists of a platform to deliver pharmacoge-
netic pro ﬁles extracted from diagnostic WES data, together
with a website that provides personalized drug recommen-dations established by the Dutch Pharmacogenetics Work-
ing Group. Preliminary analysis yields pharmacogenetic
recommendations for 1321 out of 1845 pro ﬁles (72%).
Conclusions: Our system allows for large scale imple-
mentation of clinical pharmacogenetics for patients thatundergo WES. The recommendation system is agnostic of
the genotyping method and designed to work with other
methods.
References
[1]“Beneﬁt of Preemptive Pharmacogenetic Information
on Clinical Outcome ”, Roden et. al., Clinical Pharmacology
& Therapeutics, 2018
[2]https://www.z-index.nl/english
M.A. Santcroos: None. J.K. Vis: None. M. van der
Lee: None. S.Y. Anvar: None. M. Kriek: None. L.
Grandia: None. D.L.S. Sie: None. M.C. Cornel: None. P.
M. Bet: None. J.J. Swen: None.
P15.37D
TNFAIP2 upregulation and VAMP8 downregulation
may be genetic biomarkers of metabolic Adverse Drug
Reactions of antipsychotic treatments as detected by
RNA-seq expression analysis on a healthy volunteers ’
study
M. Ruiz-Rosario
1, P. Lopez-Garcia2,3, R. Yildiz4,
D. Koller5, M. Monsalve4, F. Abad-Santos5,6,7,
J. C. Cigudosa1
1Scienti ﬁc & Innovation Department, NIMGenetics,
Madrid, Spain,2Department of Psychiatry. Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain,3Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental.
CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain,4Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain,
5Clinical Pharmacology Department, Hospital
Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto Teó ﬁlo Hernando,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto deInvestigación Sanitaria la Princesa (IP), Madrid, Spain,
6UICEC Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Plataforma
SCReN (Spanish Clinical Reseach Network), Instituto deInvestigación Sanitaria la Princesa (IP), Madrid, Spain,
7Pharmacology Department, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Schizophrenia affects up to 2% of the
European population. Being a chronic and disablingdisorder, it requires lifelong medication, that subsequently
triggers metabolic Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs). This
project aims to identify novel biomarkers that maycontribute to the short-term prediction of metabolic
dysfunctions associated with antipsychotic treatments.
Materials and Methods: A clinical trial with healthy
volunteers was carried out to evaluate the short-term effect
(5 days) of olanzapine and aripiprazole. Each volunteer
received both treatments separated by one month of wash-out. Blood samples were collected before and after the
treatment. A total of 16 samples were analysed withAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1681Illumina total RNA-Seq technology, followed by a differ-
ential expression analysis.
Results: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed
that aripiprazole upregulated TNF α/NFKB signalling (p
<0.001), that controls in ﬂammatory response, which also
became upregulated (p <0.05). Chronic in ﬂammation is
associated with obesity, a feature of the metabolic syn-
drome. TNFAIP2 that is regulated by proin ﬂammatory
molecules, increased its expression with aripiprazole (p =
0.0001, Wald test). Olanzapine treatment repressed SNARE
proteins (p <0.005), that facilitates glucose uptake, which
disruption is also affected by insulin resistance. Amongthem, VAMP8 was the most downregulated gene (p =0.01,
Wald test). Other validations are ongoing.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that aripiprazole could
be related to the upregulation of chronic in ﬂammatory
response, while olanzapine may induce insulin resistance
through SNARE proteins repression. TNFAIP2 andVAMP8
could be candidate biomarkers for the short-term prediction
of metabolic ADRs. This project was funded by the EU
Framework Horizon 2020 under GA 721236.
M. Ruiz-Rosario: None. P. Lopez-Garcia: None. R.
Yildiz: None. D. Koller: None. M. Monsalve: None. F.
Abad-Santos: None. J.C. Cigudosa: None.
P15.39B
Genomics as a personalized medicine approach indisease risk prediction - P5. ﬁFinHealth
H. Marjonen
1, M. Marttila1, T. Paajanen1, N. Kallio1,
A. Haukkala2, H. Kääriäinen1, K. Kristiansson1,
M. Perola1,3
1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland,2Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland,3Research Program for Clinical and
Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: In P5. ﬁwe utilize polygenic risk scores to
provide personalized information on the individual disease
risk related to three common diseases (coronary heartdisease, type 2 diabetes and venous thromboembolism) for
3.400 volunteering participants. We hypothesize that
genetic risk information would improve prevention, diag-nosis and treatment.
Materials and Methods: We validated the polygenic risk
scores in whole genome genotyped population based FIN-RISK cohorts (N =20.000) using Cox regression models.
Follow up data from national health care registers allowed
us to model the impact of genetic and traditional risk factorssuch as smoking, cholesterol, blood pressure and BMI on a
person's risk of disease within the next 10 years.Results: We observed that type 2 diabetes (T2DM) PRS
signiﬁcantly associates with the T2DM disease risk (HR:1.5
per 1 sd PRS, p-value:<2*10
-16). Also the top 8% of the
FINRISK population who had inherited the highest PRS
had fourfold increased risk for T2DM. Moreover, people
with >35 BMI and the highest PRS tend to get diabetes atyounger age.
Conclusions: FINRISK cohorts produced estimates on
the impact of PRS and selected covariates on risk of T2DM.We use these estimates to assess the future risk of T2DM in
P5.ﬁFinHealth participants. Participants will receive this
disease risk information including genetic risk via a webportal. We will monitor the reception of the information by
questionnaires and follow the participants for disease end
points using registry data.
Grants:
The Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra
The Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular ResearchYrjö Jahnsson Foundation
H. Marjonen: None. M. Marttila: None. T. Paajanen:
None. N. Kallio: None. A. Haukkala: None. H. Kääriäi-
nen: None. K. Kristiansson: None. M. Perola: None.
P15.40C
Partial polygenic scores for individuals of mixed
ancestries
D. Marnetto
1, K. Pärna1,2, L. Molinaro1, T. Haller1,
R. Mägi1, K. Fischer1,3, L. Pagani1,4
1Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
2Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen,
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands,3Institute of Mathematics
and Statistics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
4epartment of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Polygenic Scores (PS) are a combined measure describing
an individual ’s genetic component for a quantitative
phenotype or his susceptibility for a disease with a geneticbasis. PS rely on contributions of many associated alleles
extrapolated from GWAS, which are partly population-
dependent. This poses serious limitations to the applic-ability of PS to admixed individuals, where at least one of
the mixing ancestry comes from an understudied popula-
tion. In this case, different portions of the genome should betreated differently, to account for the population-speci ﬁc
nature of the association signals.
Here we introduce Ancestry Speci ﬁc Partial-PS, a novel
approach that computes partial PS on ancestry-speci ﬁc
chromosomal segments, obtained through local ancestry
deconvolution. We ﬁrst assess what are the effects of taking
only a fraction of the genome to compute a PS, how to take
into account the uncertainty deriving from the missing part,1682and Partial-PS behavior across populations. Then we apply
this method on populations with admixed African and West
Eurasian ancestry where, with a standard whole genome
approach, no reliable PS can be computed for the reasons
mentioned above. Using Partial-PS we could retrieve in
simulated individuals part of the total PS predictivity inproportion to the European ancestry fraction and up to 80%
in modern Egyptians, whose West Eurasian component is
close to 80%. These results may inform the applicability ofPS to subjects that are currently left out of the personalized
medicine revolution due to their complex, individual history
of admixture.
Funding: ERDF 2014-2020.4.01.16-0024, MOBTT53
D. Marnetto: None. K. Pärna: None. L. Molinaro:
None. T. Haller: None. R. Mägi: None. K. Fischer: None.
L. Pagani: None.
P15.41D
Identifying genetic variants associated with ritodrine
induced pulmonary edema
S. Lee
1, Y. Park2, Y. Kim3, H. Hwang4, H. Seo2, B. Min2,
S. Kim1, Y. Jung1, J. Kim2, J. Park1
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,
2Division of Biomedical Informatics, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,
3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ewha Womans
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,
4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Konkuk
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of
Introduction: Ritodrine is one of the most commonly used
tocolytics in preterm labor, as a ß2-adrenergic agonist
which reduces intracellular calcium levels and preventsmyometrial activation. Ridotrine infusion can result in
serious maternal complication, and pulmonary edema is a
special concern among the complications. The cause ofpulmonary edema following ritodrine treatment is multi-
factorial, but the contributing genetic factors remain under-
studied. This study investigates the genetic variantsassociated with ritodrine induced pulmonary edema.
Materials and Methods: In this case-control study, 16
patients who developed pulmonary edema during ritodrineinfusion [case] and 16 pregnant women who were treated
with ritodrine but did not develop pulmonary edema [con-
trol] were included. Control pregnant women were selectedafter matching for plurality and gestational age at use of
tocolytics. Maternal blood was taken at the time of admis-
sion for tocolytics, and whole exome sequencing was per-formed with stored blood samples.Results: A total of 71 candidate genes were selected by
comparing the cumulative effects of multiple coding var-
iants between patients with pulmonary edema and matched
controls for 19729 protein-coding genes. Subsequent data
analysis selected only statistically signi ﬁcant and deleter-
ious variants with a role compatible with ritodrine-inducedpulmonary edema. Two ﬁnal candidate variants located in
CPT2 (carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2) and ADRA1A
(Alpha-1A adrenergic receptor) were selected.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed new potential variants in
genes that play a role in cAMP/PKA regulation, which
supports their putative involvement in predisposition toritodrine-induced pulmonary edema in pregnant women.
S. Lee: None. Y. Park: None. Y. Kim: None. H.
Hwang: None. H. Seo: None. B. Min: None. S. Kim:
None. Y. Jung: None. J. Kim: None. J. Park: None.
P15.42A
Association between self-rated general health and
telomere length may be modi ﬁed by genetic variants
associated with telomere length
E. Ryu
1, M. Lundberg2, B. R. Druliner1, P. Y. Takahashi1,
C. Lavebratt2, M. Schalling2, J. M. Biernacka1,
M. A. Frye1, L. A. Boardman1
1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States,2Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: Self-rated general health is an important
predictor of various aging-related adverse health outcomes
such as comorbidities, mortality, and healthcare utilization.
Telomere length (TL) is a biomarker of accelerated aging.We aimed to assess whether TL is associated with self-rated
general heath and whether this association differs by genetic
predisposition to short TL.
Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood leukocyte
samples from 99 subjects enrolled in the Mayo Clinic
Biobank were used to measure TL and three TL-associatedSNPs (rs7726159 [TERT]; rs1317082 [TERC], and
rs2487999 [OBFC1]). Self-rated general health (excellent,
very good, good, and fair/poor) was collected using aquestionnaire. Adjusting for age and sex, linear regression
models were used to test association of TL with self-rated
general health and its interaction with the three SNPs.
Results: The cohort was relatively young (median age: 45
years) with 65% females and 100% Whites. The median TL
was 1.40 (25
th-75thpercentiles: 1.39-1.42). TL decreased
with worse self-rated health in a dose-response manner
(e.g., 0.017 shorter TL in poor/fair health vs. excellent
health; p =0.002). The association may be modi ﬁed by TL-
associated SNPs (interaction p =0.001 with rs7726159, and
0.006 with rs287999).Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1683Conclusions: Our pilot study demonstrates that TL is
associated with self-rated general health, implying that TL
may serve as a biomarker for self-rated general health. Our
study also suggests that this association may differ by
genetic predisposition for shorter TL. Given that this study
lacks statistical power due to a small sample size, furtherinvestigation of these ﬁndings in a larger sample is
encouraged.
E. Ryu: None. M. Lundberg: None. B.R. Druliner:
None. P.Y. Takahashi: None. C. Lavebratt: None. M.
Schalling: None. J.M. Biernacka: None. M.A. Frye:
None. L.A. Boardman: None.
P15.43B
Diagnosis of over one third of heterogeneous raredisease cases from the BBMRI-LPC 800 WES call using
the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform
S. Laurie
1, L. Matalonga1, D. Piscia1, M. Bayes1,
B. Fusté1, M. Gut1,2, J. Dawson3, R. Thompson3,
E. López-Martín4,5, M. Posada de la Paz4,5, M. Wang6,
L. Monaco6, G. B. van Ommen7, S. Sims8, E. Zeggini9,
H. Lochmuller1,10, I. Gut1,2, S. Beltran1,2, BBMRI-LPC
Consortium
1Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), The
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona,Spain,
2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,
3Institute of Genetic Medicine, MRC Centre for
Neuromuscular Diseases, Newcastle University,,Newcastle, United Kingdom,
4Institute of Rare Diseases
Research, IIER-ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,5Centre for
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases,CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,
6Fondazione Telethon, Milan,
Italy,7Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,8Twist Bioscience,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,9Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany,10Childrens Hospital of
Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada
We report the outcome of the BBMRI-LPC WES Call,
undertaken in collaboration with RD-Connect ( https://rd-
connect.eu/ ) and EuroBioBank ( http://www.eurobiobank.
org/). Over 800 whole exomes were sequenced free-of-
charge in seventeen distinct projects, each focusing on aparticular rare disease and involving PIs from at least two
different countries. A requirement of the call was that a
specimen from each case be deposited within the Euro-BioBank network, to be available to the wider rare disease
research community. Phenotypic information for each
affected case was collated with PhenoTips using standardssuch as the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO), OMIM and
Orpha codes. Variant ﬁltration and prioritisation wasundertaken using the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Ana-
lysis Platform (GPAP, https://platform.rd-connect.eu ).
All samples were processed using the RD-Connect stan-
dard analysis pipeline (Laurie et al, Human Mutation,
2016), and reliable variants uploaded into the GPAP.
Analysis and interpretation of cases was undertaken by aclinical genomics specialist and relevant disease-domain
experts. Advanced GPAP tools such as on-the- ﬂy gene-lists
based upon gene-HPO relationships, Exomiser, homo-zygosity mapping, pathway associations, and matchmaking
helped facilitate causative variant identi ﬁcation.
Despite the heterogeneous nature of the different pheno-
types under investigation e.g. neuromuscular disorders,
albinism, inborn errors of metabolism, the molecular diag-
nostic rate was over 33% overall. This is in line with similarstudies which have focussed on a more restricted range of
phenotypes. Furthermore, ten novel gene-disease relation-
ships are currently undergoing functional validation, and weanticipate more cases will be resolved through inclusion in
the SolveRD project ( http://solve-rd.eu/ ).
S. Laurie: None. L. Matalonga: None. D. Piscia: None.
M. Bayes: None. B. Fusté: None. M. Gut: None. J.
Dawson: None. R. Thompson: None. E. López-Martín:
None. M. Posada de la Paz: None. M. Wang: None. L.
Monaco: None. G.B. van Ommen: None. S. Sims: None.
E. Zeggini: None. H. Lochmuller: None. I. Gut: None. S.
Beltran: None.
P15.44C
Diagnosis of neurological rare disease patients throughgenomic reanalysis within the URD-Cat project on
personalised medicine
G. Bullich
1, L. Matalonga1, M. Pujadas2, D. Ovelleiro1,
G. Parra1, R. Tonda1, S. Laurie1, C. Luengo1,
A. Papakonstantinou1, D. Piscia1, M. Gut1, A. Macaya3,
F. Palau4,5, A. Ribes4,6, L. Pérez-Jurado2,4,7, S. Beltran1,8,
URDCat Consortium
1CNAG ‐CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona,
Spain,2Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques
(IMIM), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona,
Spain,3Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall
d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Universitat Autònomade Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain,
4Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras,
CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,5Department of Genetic and
Molecular Medicine, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and
Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain,6Secció d ’Errors
Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquimica i
Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,1684IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain,7Women ’s and Children ’s
Health Network & University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
Australia,8Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona,
Spain
The Undiagnosed Rare Disease Program of Catalonia
(URD-Cat) is a pilot project aiming to facilitate implemen-
tation of personalised medicine for rare diseases within the
Catalan Health System, focusing on rare neurologicalconditions as a use case. Genotypic and phenotypic data
is collated, integrated and analysed using the URD-Cat
platform, based on the RD-Connect Genome-PhenomeAnalysis Platform. The URD-Cat platform integrates
previously available and newly generated clinical and
genomic data from 1,454 individuals (835 probands).
Two-hundred and forty-eight probands (421 individuals
including relatives) for whom genomic data was available in
7 hospitals across Catalonia were reanalysed between 2-8years after initial data generation (mean 4 years). Standar-
dised phenotypic and clinical information were collected
using the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) and theOrphanet Rare Disease Ontology (ORDO). Genomic data
(63 gene panels, 356 whole exomes and 2 whole genomes)
were processed with the URD-Cat pipeline, includingdetection of Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and runs of
homozygosity (RoHs). Clinical and genomic data were
shared and reanalysed through the URD-Cat platform.
Reanalysis of genomic data revealed causative mutations
in 9.7% of probands (24/248) and candidate pathogenic
variants in 4.4% (11/248). Most new diagnoses were due tonovel gene-disease associations (n =8), technical improve-
ments in variant calling (n =3), detection of CNVs (n =2)
and RoHs (n =1), and URD-Cat platform functionalities
such as ﬁlter by HPO-related genes or pathogenic variant
prioritisation (n =2). Identi ﬁcation of causative variants also
enabled the diagnoses of three newly sequenced casesthanks to internal patient matchmaking enabled by sharing
data across the network.
G. Bullich: None. L. Matalonga: None. M. Pujadas:
None. D. Ovelleiro: None. G. Parra: None. R. Tonda:
None. S. Laurie: None. C. Luengo: None. A. Papakon-
stantinou: None. D. Piscia: None. M. Gut: None. A.
Macaya: None. F. Palau: None. A. Ribes: None. L.
Pérez-Jurado: None. S. Beltran: None.
P15.45D
Genotype ﬁrst female breast cancer risk-based screening
and management, initial lessons from a national pilotproject
N. Tõnisson
1,2, L. Roht2, M. Palover1, L. Leitsalu1,
K. Läll1, K. Fischer1,3, K. Kruuv-Käo1,4, E. Eelma5,
J. Lehtsaar5, H. Jürgens5, R. Kütner6, V. Valvere6,T. Nikopensius1, A. Reigo1, M. Tammesoo1, T. Esko1,7,
A. Metspalu1, P. Padrik5,8
1Institute of Genomics / Estonian Biobank, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,2Dept. of Clinical Genetics, United
Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,
3Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,4Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,
5Hematology-Oncology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital,
Tartu, Estonia,6Oncology-Hematology Clinic, North-
Estonian Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia,7Broad
Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States,8Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Breast cancer screening and management will move from
age- to risk-based management. The genetic component of
breast cancer risk originates from monogenic variants, as
well as polygenic risk. In 2018, Estonian Biobank,University of Tartu, Estonia, together with two central
hospitals in Estonia, Tartu University Hospital and North
Estonia Medical Center have initiated a pilot study forgenetics-based breast cancer screening and follow-up
management in female participants of the biobank.
The study consists of monogenic and polygenic arms. We
aim to estimate the possible impact of genetic risk for breast
cancer prevention and early detection, as well as to test the
subject compliance, psychosocial aspects, data transferlogistics from research to clinical setting, etc. In monogenic
arm, cascade screening of relatives will maximise the
impact of existing genetic data. The study group consists offemale participates 22-74 years. In monogenic arm,
128 subjects with class 4 and 5 variants in 11 genes
recurrently associated with moderate to high risk of breastcancer were identi ﬁed. The clinical follow-up is based on
adapted international guidelines. In polygenic arm, the
participants with top 5% threshold were selected as high-risk group (HR 2.73, 95% CI 1.92-3.9). The females (n
~1300) will receive information about their genetic risk and
biennial mammography will be initiated from age 40.
We will present the data on study progress and com-
pliance, as well as discuss the ethical and communication
lessons learned, along with perspective on publichealthcare.
The study is funded from RITA1/01-42-01 grant from
Estonian Research Council.
N. Tõnisson: None. L. Roht: None. M. Palover: None.
L. Leitsalu: None. K. Läll: None. K. Fischer: None. K.
Kruuv-Käo: None. E. Eelma: None. J. Lehtsaar: None.
H. Jürgens: None. R. Kütner: None. V. Valvere: None.
T. Nikopensius: None. A. Reigo: None. M. Tammesoo:
None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None. P.
Padrik: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1685P15.46A
Importance of SLC6A4 promoter Short and Long
Allelle in predisposition and in determining the optimal
drug dosage in patients with majör depression
C. S. Do ğan1, S. Kapici1, K. Ulucan1, M. Konuk1,
N. Tarhan2
1Uskudar University, Faculty Of Engineering And Natural
Sciences, Department Molecular Biology And Genetics,
Istanbul, Turkey,2Uskudar University, Faculty Of
Engineering And Natural Sciences, Department OfPsychology, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is
synthesized in serotonergic neurons, from tryptophan.
SLC6A4 is the gene that codes for the serotonin transporter
(5-HTT), responsible of reuptaking 5-HT. Functionalinsertion / deletion polymorphism found in the gene
promoter region (5-HTTLPR) primarily effects 5-HT
metabolism; short (S) allele has been reported to beassociated with less transcriptional ef ﬁciency compared to
allele with long (L) allele. Aim of the study is to investigate
the distribution of L and S allelles in patients with majordepression.
Materials and Methods: 49 patients were enrolled for
the study. All patients were informed about the study pro-tocol, each patient received written approval prior to the
registration. Conventional PCR methodology were carried
out for the genotyping of 44 bp S/L allelles.
Results: The numbers of the patients and their percen-
tages were 7 (14%), 26 (53%) and 16 (33%) for the geno-
types LL, LS and SS, respectively. Allelic count gave rise to40 (41%) and 58 (59%) for L and S allele, respectively.
Conclusion: Determining the genotype of patients with
depression is important for treatment and also for theappropriate dose of anti-depressant SSRIs drugs. In addi-
tion, the L allele with normal metabolic function compared
to the S allele of SLC6A4 is less common in depressedindividuals. Having knowledge about the genotype of
SLC6A4 will encourage both individuals and clinicians to
have a life style protecting against depression. But studieswith larger cohorts are needed to ful ﬁll the role of this
polymorphism on the onset of depression.
C. S. Doğan:None. S. Kapici: None. K. Ulucan: None.
M. Konuk: None. N. Tarhan: None.
P15.47B
Prediction of nephrotoxicity associated with cisplatin-
based chemotherapy in testicular cancer patients
S. Garcia
1, J. Lauritsen2, Z. Zhang1,3, M. D. Dalgaard1,
R. L. Nielsen1,3, G. Daugaard2, R. Gupta11Department of Heath Technology, Division of Digital
Health and Biological Modelling, Section for
Bioinformatics, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyng, Denmark,2Department of Oncology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,3SDC (Sino-
Danish Center for Education and Research), Copenhagen,Denmark
Introduction: In industrialized countries, testicular cancer
(TC) is the most common solid tumor in men between 20-
40 years old. Besides being one of the most treatable types
of cancer, the long-term side-effects of chemotherapy, suchas nephrotoxicity, are worrisome, since they are largely
irreversible. The standard treatment for TC is 3 cycles of
cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (BEP). Here, we focuson nephrotoxicity, measured as the drop in glomerular
ﬁltration rate after chemotherapy.
Materials and Methods: Clinical patient data on 420
individuals was collected from hospital ﬁles, and saliva
samples were used for genotyping using Illumina ®Huma-
nOmniExpressExome-8-v1-2-B-b37 chip (nearly 1 millionmarkers).
Machine learning (ML) models (random forests) includ-
ing clinical and genomic features were built for classifyingpatients at risk of developing nephrotoxicity given a treat-
ment of BEP-cycles.
Results: First, only clinical features, such as age at the
time of treatment, dose of cisplatin, patient ’s prognosis, and
number of cycles, were considered for training the model,
and relevant features were selected (based on Gini coef ﬁ-
cient) to use in the classi ﬁer (AUC 0.66 –sensitivity 0.59,
speciﬁcity 0.61). The classi ﬁer was then re-trained by
adding genomic markers. An AUC of 0.75 (sensitivity 0.66,speciﬁcity 0.67) was obtained through ML combination
clinical and genomic features for nephrotoxicity prediction
in patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Thepresentation will include the top clinical and GWAS SNPs.
Conclusions: The study proposes a ML algorithm which,
by helping predicting nephrotoxicity in advance, canimprove treatment ef ﬁcacy in TC patients by allowing a
more personalized treatment to each patient.
S. Garcia: None. J. Lauritsen: None. Z. Zhang: None.
M.D. Dalgaard: None. R.L. Nielsen: None. G. Daugaard:
None. R. Gupta: None.
P15.48C
Automated classi ﬁcation of ~7,000 variants shows near
perfect concordance with expert panel assessments
J. L. Poitras, D. Richards, H. Su, T. Love, R. Yip
QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, United States1686Introduction: Gathering the most current and accurate
information is critical to variant interpretation. The QIA-
GEN knowledgebase includes a manually curated database
of variant speci ﬁc publications, and data from public and
proprietary databases. This resource is the cornerstone of
QIAGEN Clinical Insight (QCI), which facilitates auto-mated variant classi ﬁcation using all 28 ACMG rules, while
transparently providing the underlying evidence. Here, we
compare the concordance of QCI ’s automated variant
classi ﬁcation with expert panel assessments across multiple
disease indications.
Materials and Methods: Expert panel (ENIGMA)
reviewed BRCA1 andBRCA2 variants (n =6154), and var-
iants reviewed by the ClinGen Inherited Cardiomyopathy
Expert Panel (n =102) were exported from ClinVar.
Resulting VCFs were uploaded into QCI, and concordance
of automated classi ﬁcations was compared with expert
panel assessments in ClinVar.
Results: With respect to clinical actionability, automated
variant classi ﬁcations were extremely concordant, reaching
99.6% concordance with ENIGMA assessments of BRCA
variants, and 96.1% concordance with cardiomyopathy
variants assessed by the ClinGen expert panel. The small
number of differences seen in the ENIGMA dataset couldbe attributed to functional studies used by the automated
algorithm not considered by the expert panel. The 3.9% of
discrepant classi ﬁcations in the cardiomyopathy set likely
result from differences in clinical case curation.
Conclusions: Through updated content, and continued
alignment with professional guidelines, automated variantclassi ﬁcation in QCI demonstrates extremely high accuracy
across multiple disease contexts. This level of accuracy
speaks to the quality of the clinical, functional, and popu-lation level data curation, as well as the robustness of the
underlying ACMG classi ﬁcation algorithm.
J.L. Poitras: None. D. Richards: None. H. Su: None. T.
Love: None. R. Yip: None.
P15.49D
How good are variant pathogenicity predictors?
A. Niroula, T. Orioli, M. VihinenLund University, Lund, Sweden
Computational tools are widely used for interpreting
variants detected in sequencing projects. The choice of
these tools is critical for reliable variant impact interpreta-tion for precision medicine and should be based on
systematic performance assessment. The performance of
the methods varies widely in different performanceassessments, for example due to the contents and sizes of
test datasets. To address this issue, we have collectedbenchmark datasets to VariBench ( http://structure.bmc.lu.
se/VariBench/ ) and VariSNP ( http://structure.bmc.lu.se/Va
riSNP/ ) and performed performance assessments for
disease-causing and benign variants, and variants in
different regions in membrane proteins. Recently we
investigated 63,160 common amino acid substitutions(allele frequency >1% and <25%) in ExAC database to
determine the speci ﬁcity for 10 variant interpretation tools.
In addition to overall speci ﬁcity of the tools, we tested their
performance for variants in six geographical populations.
PON-P2 had the best performance followed by FATHMM
and VEST. While these tools had excellent performance, the
poorest method predicted more than one third of the benign
variants to be disease-causing. The results allow choosing
reliable methods for benign variant interpretation, for bothresearch and clinical purposes, as well as provide a
benchmark for method developers. We have developed
tools also for the mechanisms of variants including proteinstability, solubility, steric clashes, disorder etc. Financial
support: Swedish Research Council References: Niroula,
A. and Vihinen, M. How good are pathogenicity predictorsin detecting benign variants? PLoS Comput. Biol. (in press).
Orioli, T. and Vihinen, M. Benchmarking membrane
proteins: Subcellular localization and variant tolerancepredictors. (revised).
A. Niroula: None. T. Orioli: None. M. Vihinen: None.
P16
Omics - Bioinformatics
P16.01A
Opioid, dopamine, and GABA receptor addiction andmental health enriched genomic areas co-located with 16
cancer, immunity and Parkinson ’s disease drug binding
sites
L. Jackson
Howard University, Washington, DC, United States
The adverse impact of opiate, dopamine, and alcohol
addiction on human populations is well known and
exacerbated by mental health co-morbidities including
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and depression. Thesedisorders have deep genomic roots that modulate disease
severity, duration, and potential therapeutic outcomes. Our
previous work demonstrates that using an in silico
functional genomics and evolutionary biology framework
can identify functionally relevant enriched genomic hot-
spots and variants with import for opioid, dopamine andalcohol addiction complex polygenic traits. This study seeks
to extend this approach to determine its utility in identifyingAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1687pharmacogenomics therapeutic targets at addiction and
mental health hotspots. To evaluate whether the intersection
of NCBI curated genes identi ﬁed as participating in
addiction phenotypes along with schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder and depression (N =1968 genes), genes lists were
projected onto the human genome to ﬁnd eight areas of
addiction and mental health gene set enrichment. Functional
annotations were conducted for core phenotype functions.
Finally, drug binding annotations were conducted todetermine whether the binding sites sitting in these
addiction and mental health hotspots were related to the
functional or gene set enrichment. We found that 16pharmacogenomic drug binding sites were identi ﬁed in this
analysis which broadly fell into four categories: cancer,
addiction, immunity and mental health related drug effects.The cancer drug target all had addiction, loss of immune
robustness, and anxiety as their side effects. These ﬁndings
suggest that this in silico approach can potentially inform
drug target effects and may be useful in informing novel
and drug-repurposing pipelines.
L. Jackson: None.
P16.02B
Genetic dysregulation of gene expression and splicingduring a ten-year period of human aging
B. Balliu
1, M. Durrant2, O. de Goede2, N. Abell2,X .L i2,
B. Liu2, M. Gloudemans2, N. Cook3, K. Smith2, M. Pala4,
F. Cucca4, D. Schlessinger5, S. Jaiswal2, C. Sabatti2,
L. Lind6, E. Ingelsson2, S. B. Montgomery2
1Department of Biomathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
United States,2Stanford University School of Medicine,
Palo Alto, CA, United States,3Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,
4University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy,5National Institute on
Aging, Bethesda, MD, United States,6Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden
Molecular and cellular changes are intrinsic to aging and
age-related diseases. Prior cross-sectional studies have
investigated the combined effects of age and genetics ongene expression and alternative splicing; however, there has
been no long-term, longitudinal characterization of these
molecular changes, especially in older age. We performedRNA sequencing in whole-blood from 65 healthy partici-
pants from the Prospective Investigation of Uppsala Seniors
study at both age 70 and 80, a period of the aging processcharacterized by high morbidity and mortality. We observed
that 93% of individuals are more similar to their own
expression pro ﬁles later in life than pro ﬁles of other
individuals their own age. We identi ﬁed 1,291 and 294
genes differentially expressed and alternatively spliced withage, as well as 529 genes with outlying individual
trajectories. Further, 7.8% and 9.6% of tested genes show
a reduction in genetic associations with expression and
splicing in older age, with impacted genes enriched in DNA
repair pathways. In addition, we observed a high genetic
correlation between ages ( ρ
G=0.96). In contrast, overall
allelic imbalance within an individual increases with age by
2.69%. These ﬁndings demonstrate that, although the
transcriptome and its genetic regulation is mostly stablelate in life, a small subset of genes is dynamic and is
characterized by reduction in genetic regulation. The strong
correlation of genetic effects and the increase in allelicimbalance with age demonstrates that increasing environ-
mental variance, as opposed to decreased genetic variance,
underlies the reduction in genetic regulation with age.
B. Balliu: None. M. Durrant: None. O. de Goede:
None. N. Abell: None. X. Li: None. B. Liu: None. M.
Gloudemans: None. N. Cook: None. K. Smith: None. M.
Pala: None. F. Cucca: None. D. Schlessinger: None. S.
Jaiswal: None. C. Sabatti: None. L. Lind: None. E.
Ingelsson: None. S.B. Montgomery: None.
P16.05A
CRISPY: a PYthon module for the analysis of geneediting experiments by CRISPR
E. Benetti
1, S. Croci2, S. Daga2,R .T i t a3, A. Giliberti2,
C. Fallerini2, I. Meloni2, A. Renieri2,3, S. Furini1
1Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy,2Medical Genetics
Laboratory, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy,
3Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Senese, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy
Dedicated bioinformatic tools are essential to evaluate the
accuracy of CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. Most of the web-
based algorithms, such as Cas-Analyzer, focus on the
frequency of correction rather than providing a detailedoutcome of the experiment. On the other hand, command
line tools usually provide more details, but they are not
easily accessible to researchers that are not experts inbioinformatics. In order to combine detailed outcomes with
easy-to-use, we implemented a self-contained python
module with a graphical user interface for the analysis ofgene editing experiments. CRISPY ﬁrst performs the
alignment against the reference genome starting from raw
NGS reads, and then it considers all the experimentalsequences overlapping the region of interest, regardless of
their lengths, without any sort of ﬁltering. CRISPY assesses
the editing accuracy by determining the amount ofsuccessfully edited sequences in the treated samples with
respect to the control experiment, classifying as edited only1688the identical sequences without mutations, therefore
indicating the true rate of Homology Directed Repair. It is
able not only to evaluate the rate of Non Homologous End
Joining, by computing the indel frequency but also to assess
the complessive biological ef ﬁcacy counting separately
synonymous and nonsynonymous substitutions induced inthe range of interest. From a clinical point of view, edited
alleles containing unsolicited synonymous substitutions
contribute positively to the correction and it may be worthto be identi ﬁed and counted. In conclusion, CRISPY is a
PYthon based, easy-to-use but raf ﬁnate tool for accurate
analysis of CRISPR induced gene editing.
E. Benetti: None. S. Croci: None. S. Daga: None. R.
Tita: None. A. Giliberti: None. C. Fallerini: None. I.
Meloni: None. A. Renieri: None. S. Furini: None.
P16.06B
Germline variants classi ﬁcation using bioinformatic
tools for next generation sequencing-based classi ﬁcation
J. El Hokayem*, U. Schmidt-Edelkraut*, A. Werner,
M. März, X. Wang, S. Hettich, S. Brock, C. Hülsewig,
K. Stecker, M. Hartenfeller, J. Hermanns
Molecular Health, Heidelberg, Germany
Currently, genetic medicine is increasing in complexity,
mainly due to the clinical implementation of next-
generation sequencing (NGS). Genetic variants can be
associated with unknown and/or complex phenotypes.Missense variants regularly tend to be classi ﬁed as variants
of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) leading to inconclusive
diagnostic ﬁndings. To meet the challenge of variant
classi ﬁcation, we developed two bioinformatic tools: one
supporting BRCA1/2 variants classi ﬁcation and one
supporting the classi ﬁcation of variants found in Mendelian
disorders. The variant interpretation relies on two indepen-
dent classi ﬁcation methods: Consensus and ACMG classi-
ﬁcation based on public and proprietary data sources. To
pre-validate the classi ﬁcation methods, we compared our
BRCA tool results with classi ﬁcations provided by three
published Japanese hereditary breast and ovarian cancerstudies. The results of the automated, ACMG-guided
conservative interpretation of BRCA1/2 variants are
comparable to the referenced clinical classi ﬁcation of
pathogenicity. Of 108 pathogenic variants, BRCA tool
classi ﬁed 80 as pathogenic, 26 as likely pathogenic, and 2
as VUS. Whereas 11/26 benign variants were classi ﬁed as
VUS, a discrepancy due to lack of public population-
frequency and patient-family history data. For the Mende-
lian tool, we compared the consensus classi ﬁcation with a
study, in which 98 germline variants spread over 95 genes
with a large phenotypic spectrum were classi ﬁed. Theconsensus method classi ﬁed 59/98 as pathogenic and 7/98
as likely pathogenic, a result identical to the reference
classi ﬁcation. Variant classi ﬁcations were found to be
accurately associated to the corresponding hereditary
disease. Further re ﬁnement of the methodology in close
collaboration with laboratory partners is in progress.
J. El Hokayem*: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Molecular Health. U. Schmidt-Edelkraut*: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health.A. Werner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Molecular Health. M. März: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Molecular Health. X. Wang: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. S.
Hettich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Molecular Health. S. Brock: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Molecular Health. C. Hülsewig: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health.
K. Stecker: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Molecular Health. M. Hartenfeller: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. J. Hermanns: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health.
P16.07C
Deciphering exome sequencing data: bringingmitochondrial DNA variants to light
P. Garret
1,2,3, C. Bris4,5, V. Procaccio4,5, P. Bonneau4,5,
P. Vabres1,6,7, N. Houcinat1,8,9, E. Tisserant1,2,
F. Feillet10,11,12, A. Bruel1,2, V. Quéré1,6, C. Philippe1,2,
A. Sorlin1,6,8, F. Tran Mau-Them1,2, A. Vitobello1,2,
J. Costa3, A. Boughalem3, D. Trost3, L. Faivre1,8,13,
C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,9, Y. Duffourd1,2
1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm –Université Bourgogne-Franche
Comté, Dijon, France,2Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,
3Laboratoire CERBA, Saint-Ouen l ’Aumône, France,
4Institut MITOVASC, UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM1083,
Université d'Angers, Angers, France,5Centre de Référence
maladies mitochondriales, CHU Angers, Angers, France,
6Centre de Référence maladies rares « maladies
dermatologiques en mosaïque », service de dermatologie,
FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,
7Service Dermatologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon,
France,8Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies
du développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de
génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne,Dijon, France,
9Centre de Référence maladies rares «
déﬁcience intellectuelle », centre de génétique, FHU-
TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,
10Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital d'Enfants Brabois, CHRU
Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France,11UMRS 1256Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1689NGERE, Inserm –Université de Lorraine –CHRU Nancy,
Nancy, France,12Centre de Références des maladies
héréditaires du métabolisme, CHRU de Nancy, Nancy,
France,13Centre de compétences des maladies
mitochondriales, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France
Introduction: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are
responsible of various phenotypes, causing partial or
entirely unexplained phenotypes concerning one or severalorgans. When suspected, mtDNA variants identi ﬁcation
requires targeted strategies on affected tissues. The
expanding use of exome sequencing (ES) in diagnosisgenerates a huge amount of data, including untargeted
mtDNA sequences. We thus developed a bioinformatics
pipeline on ES data in order to detect mitochondrial variantsin parallel with the routinely used “in-house ”nuclear exome
pipeline, in particular in patients with no initial clinical
suspicion of mitochondrial disorders.
Methodology: Mitochondrial DNA data coming from
off-target sequences (indirect sequencing) were extracted
from the BAM ﬁles in 928 individuals with developmental
(90%) and/or neurological anomalies (10%). After merging,
the variants were ﬁltered out based on database presence,
cohort frequencies, haplogroups and protein consequences.In parallel, some patients with previously identi ﬁed mito-
chondrial variants were sequenced and tested as positive
controls.
Results: Two homoplasmic pathogenic variants
(m.9035T>C and m.11778G>A) were identi ﬁed in 2/928
unrelated individuals (0.2%): the m.9035T>C ( MT-ATP6 )
variant in a female with ataxia and the m.11778G>A ( MT-
ND4) variant in a male with a complex mosaic disorder and
an unusual severe ophthalmological phenotype, uncoveringundiagnosed Leber ’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON).
Seven secondary ﬁndings were also found, predisposing to
deafness or LHON, in 7/928 individuals (0.75%).
Conclusion: This study demonstrates the usefulness of
including a targeted analysis strategy in ES pipeline to
detect mtDNA variants, improving results in diagnosis andresearch, without resampling patients and performing tar-
geted mtDNA strategies.
P. Garret: None. C. Bris: None. V. Procaccio: None. P.
Bonneau: None. P. Vabres: None. N. Houcinat: None. E.
Tisserant: None. F. Feillet: None. A. Bruel: None. V.
Quéré: None. C. Philippe: None. A. Sorlin: None. F.
Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: None. J. Costa:
None. A. Boughalem: None. D. Trost: None. L. Faivre:
None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Y. Duffourd: None.
P16.08D
Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource Center:Harmonizing genomic and clinical information tosupport childhood cancer and structural birth defect
research
Y. Guo
1, A. P. Heath1, P. Raman1, Y. Zhu1, J. Lilly1,
D. M. Taylor1,2, P. B. Storm1,2, A. J. Waanders1,2,
V. Ferretti3,4, M. Mattioni5, B. Davis-Dusenbery5,
Z. L. Flamig6, R. L. Grossman6, S. L. Volchenboum6,
S. Mueller7, J. Nazarian8, N. Vasilevsky9, M. Haendel9,10,
A. Resnick1,2
1Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Phiadelphia, PA,
United States,2University of Pennsylvania, Phiadelphia,
PA, United States,3Ontario Institute of Cancer Research,
Toronto, ON, Canada,4Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada,5Seven Bridges
Genomics, Cambridge, MA, United States,6The University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States,7University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, UnitedStates,
8Children's National Medical Center, Washington,
DC, United States,9Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR, United States,10Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, United States
Introduction: Childhood cancers and structural birth
defects present a huge burden to families as well as the
healthcare system. These diseases share a common context
of altered developmental biology, but the potential role ofgenetic alterations and/or pathways across them remains to
be investigated.
Materials and Methods: The NIH Common Fund
Gabriella Miller Kids First Program represents a national
collaborative initiative focused on large-scale genomic and
clinical data sharing for childhood cancers and structuralbirth defects. As part of this program, the Kids First Data
Resource Center (DRC) is charged with empowering col-
laborative discovery across Kids First datasets. Throughnewly developed platforms and cloud-based resources,
researchers are able to access standardized genomic and
clinical data in a timely fashion.
Results: Nearly 30,000 genomic and phenotypic ﬁles
generated for over 9,100 individuals from ~1,700 families
are available now at DRC portal, making DRC one of thelargest pediatric data resources across a wide range of dis-
eases. Cloud-based computing has greatly facilitated large-
scale genomic harmonization and DRC is capable of run-ning 200 work ﬂows simultaneously with considerable
scalability on demand. Additionally, there is a strong focus
on harmonizing and structuring clinical data to make themmore interoperable, discoverable and reusable by using
ontologies such as Human Phenotype Ontology.
Conclusions: The combination of harmonized genomic
and clinical data across pediatric cancers and structural birth
defects provides a key foundation for exploring and1690developing new methods to better understand the relation-
ships between germline variants, cancer risk, and associated
treatments and outcomes.
Y. Guo: None. A.P. Heath: None. P. Raman: None. Y.
Zhu: None. J. Lilly: None. D.M. Taylor: None. P.B.
Storm: None. A.J. Waanders: None. V. Ferretti: None.
M. Mattioni: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Seven Bridges Genomics. B. Davis-Dusenbery:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seven
Bridges Genomics. Z.L. Flamig: None. R.L. Grossman:
None. S.L. Volchenboum: None. S. Mueller: None. J.
Nazarian: None. N. Vasilevsky: None. M. Haendel:
None. A. Resnick: None.
P16.09A
Identi ﬁcation of bacteriophage-related sequences in
carcinoma patients and NIPT data of pregnant women
D. Smo ľak1, J. Budi š2, M. Böhmer1, M. Har šányová1,
M. Kajsík1, J. Tur ňa1, T. Szemes1
1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University in
Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia,2Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava,
Slovakia
Introduction: NIPT is ranked among most widespread
genomic test in the whole world with approx. 4 million testscarried out in 2017. On the other hand, bacteriophages are
the most widespread entities in the biosphere. In our
previous work we tried to ﬁnd out phage-related sequences
in standard NIPT data with 2x35bp sequence reads. Such
NIPT data has been shown inef ﬁcient for a contig assembly
or blast. In this study, we mined phage sequence fromgenomic data of carcinoma patients and longer unmapped
NIPT reads of average length 2x100bp.
Materials and Methods: We sequenced total DNA from
plasma of healthy people. We assessed presence of phage-
related sequences by different bioinformatic approaches. At
ﬁrst, we removed human sequences by mapping to hg38,
then we used tools based on k-mers identi ﬁcation, contig
mapping and gene-centric approaches, those utilizing our
custom phage database. Same methods were used to analyzeblood samples from patients with solid tumor.
Results: We detected the presence of phage-related
sequences and assessed disparities of aforementioned setsof samples. For instance, we identi ﬁed sequences belonging
to Proteus phage, Escherichia phage PhiX174, Campylo-
bacter phage B14.
Conclusions: NIPT data are like mines, containing
unbounded amount of unrevealed informations. Various
bioinformatic approaches can be used like mattock to obtainadditional results. Our results demonstrate the detection ofphage sequences in the NIPT data which are usually marked
as useless in common NIPT analyses.
D. Smoľak:None. J. Budi š:A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd.. M. Böhmer: None.
M. Har šányová: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd. M. Kajsík: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Science Park, Comenius University Science Park, Bra-tislava, Slovakia. J. Turňa:None. T. Szemes: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd..
P16.10B
Sensitive detection of low allele fraction structural
variants in clinical cancer samples
E. T. Lam
1, A. W. C. Pang1, T. Anantharaman1, J. Wang1,
J. Velazquez-Muriel1, T. Wang1, D. Zhang1, R. Massoud1,
S. Way1, A. R. Hastie1, M. Borodkin1, Y. Delpu2
1Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States,
2BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States
Tumors are often comprised of heterogeneous populations
of cells, with certain cancer-driving mutations at low allele
fractions in early stages of cancer development. Effective
detection of such variants is critical for diagnosis andtargeted treatment. However, typical short sequence reads
are limited in their ability to span across repetitive regions
of the genome and to facilitate structural variant (SV)analysis. Based on speci ﬁc labeling and mapping of ultra-
high molecular weight (UHMW) DNA, we developed a
single-molecule platform that has the potential to detectdisease-relevant SVs and give a high-resolution view of
tumor heterogeneity.
We have developed a pipeline that effectively detects
structural variants at low allele fractions. It includes single-
molecule based SV calling and fractional copy number
analysis. Preliminary analyses using simulated data andwell-characterized cancer samples showed high sensitivity
for variants of different types at as low as 5% allele frac-
tions with reasonable genomic coverage easily collectableon a Bionano Saphyr Chip. The candidate variants are then
annotated and further prioritized based on control data and
publically available annotations. The data are imported intoa graphical user interface tool that includes new visualiza-
tion features (such as Circos diagrams) for interactive
visualization and curation. The streamlined pipeline is fullycompatible with the new Direct Label and Stain (DLS)
chemistry. Together, these components allow for ef ﬁcient
analysis of any cancer genome of interest.
E.T. Lam: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. A.W.C. Pang: A.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1691Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. T. Anantharaman: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. J. Wang: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. J. Velazquez-Muriel: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. T. Wang: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. D. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. R. Massoud: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Bionano Genomics. S.
Way: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bio-
nano Genomics. A.R. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M. Borodkin: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. Y. Delpu: None.
P16.11C
Bioinformatics approach to ﬁnding new drug targets in
immunological synapse using gene expression as
biomarkers and unsupervised machine learning - a
comparative study of immune response regulatorynetworks in subtypes of kidney carcinoma
P. Stempor
1,2, P. Dobosz3,4,5
1The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Department of Genetics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Cancer Research Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba
Medical Centre Hospital, Ramat Gan, Israel,4Oncology
Department, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel,5School of Clinical Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Cancer immunotherapy, which utilizes immune system to
selectively destroy cancer cells, becomes a safer and moreeffective alternative for cancer patients ’treatment than
traditional approaches. However, success rate is low: many
patients do not respond to treatment, whereas others sufferfrom adverse effects.
The immune response is mediated by immunological
synapse –an interface between lymphocytes and antigen
presenting cells, which consists of co-inhibitory and co-
stimulatory checkpoint proteins. Understanding interactions
within immunological synapse is crucial for better design ofclinical trials and will provide better diagnostics and
therapeutics.
In our research we aim to improve cancer immu-
notherapies potential by understanding:
1) the complex regulatory network in immunological
synapse that modulates the response;2) how gene expression changes driven by genetic
variability translate to alterations in immunological synapse
regulatory network.
We developed a computational method that infers gene
interaction networks from expression pro ﬁles in large
cohorts of patients using unsupervised Bayesian machinelearning model. Our method also reduces the dimensionality
of data producing factors, that represent differences between
cancer sub-types and individual patients.
In this study we compare regulatory networks in subtypes
of kidney carcinomas: clear cell adenocarcinoma, papillary
adenocarcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma. We found sig-niﬁcant differences between subtypes, with some key nodes
of network being not expressed, while others being sig-
niﬁcantly up-regulated. These type-speci ﬁc alterations of
immunological synapse gene network may explain dif ﬁ-
culties in developing successful checkpoint inhibitors
immunotherapy in kidney carcinomas. It also indicates thatdifferent subtypes may require targeting different check-
point proteins to facilitate an effective therapy.
P. Stempor: None. P. Dobosz: None.
P16.12D
Deciphering complex genomic rearrangements bytraveling through 3
rdgeneration sequencing in rare
diseases: two chromothripsis cases
S. verdez1,2,3, Y. Duffourd1,4, E. Tisserant1,4, N. Marle3,
A. Bruel1,4, F. Tran Mau-Them1,4,5, C. Philippe1,4,3,
C. Thauvin-Robinet1,4,5,6, L. Faivre1,4,5,6, N. Chatron7,8,9,
C. Schluth-Bolard7,8,9, P. Callier1,4,5,3, S. Damien7,8,9,
A. Vitobello1,4
1UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies
rares, Dijon, France,2UMR1231 GAD, Inserm –University
of Burgundy-Franche Comté, Dijon, France,3Genetics
department, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,4Unité
Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des
maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon UniversityHospital, Dijon, France,
5UF Innovation en diagnostic
génomique des maladies rares, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,
6Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du
développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de
génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital,
Dijon, France,7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de
Génétique, Lyon, France,8Equipe GENDEV INSERM
U1028, CNRS, UMR5292, Lyon, France,9Université de
Lyon, Lyon, France
Background: Genome sequencing (GS) is rapidly becom-
ing the standard approach to identify the molecular cause ofrare Mendelian genetic disorders, allowing the simultaneous
analysis of single nucleotide and structural genomic variants1692(SV). However, technical limitations are associated with the
use of short reads (srGS) in the detection of SV, especially
in case of breaking points involving repetitive elements.
Hence, long read sequencing (lrGS) represents a promising
tool expected to overcome this problem.
Method: We deployed 30X srGS and 20X SMRT
sequencing (Paci ﬁc Biosciences) to evaluate the utility of
lrGS to resolve complex SV in 2 patients with syndromic
intellectual disability and carrying respectively more than30 and 70 chromosomal rearrangements (chromotripsis).
Results: Using 10 in silico generated datasets containing
known SV, were tested a combination of 6 mapping tools(blasr, bwa, nglmr, Lorfast, pbmm2, minimap2) and 3 SV
callers (PBhoney, snif ﬂes, pbsv) to identify the out-
performing pipeline. We then applied our pipeline to the 2chromothripsis and, using SV length and population fre-
quency information available from publicly data, we ﬁltered
out common variants. Retained breakpoints were indepen-dently validated by PCR, Sanger sequencing and/or FISH.
Next, we tested 3 assembling tools (Falcon, Canu and
wtdbg2) to perform de novo derivative chromosome
reconstruction. Using outperforming parameters, we
obtained 10238 contigs with a N50 at 13 Kb and a max-
imum contig length of 11Mb.
Conclusions: Overall the combination of srGS and lrGS
permitted to resolve, complex chromosomal breakpoints
and to reconstruct the phasing of structural variations, nototherwise achievable by srGS alone.
S. verdez: None. Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant:
None. N. Marle: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau-
Them: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet:
None. L. Faivre: None. N. Chatron: None. C. Schluth-
Bolard: None. P. Callier: None. S. Damien: None. A.
Vitobello: None.
P16.13A
Gene-set burden analysis detects novel signals in whole
exome sequencing of a chronic kidney disease cohort
S. R. Cameron-Christie
1, J. Fleckner2, R. E. March1,
A. Platt1, C. Hae ﬂiger1, S. Petrovski1
1Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and
Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,2Novo Nordisk, Copenhagen, Denmark
Exome and genome sequencing of large disease cohorts
allows researchers to investigate the role of rare variants incomplex, heterogeneous disorders, providing new under-
standing of disease and potentially identifying novel drug
targets. Using gene-based collapsing analysis of individualssequenced through the AstraZeneca Medimmune Genomics
Initiative, we previously validated known disease genes andidenti ﬁed new suggestive signals in speci ﬁc genes. How-
ever, risk to complex disorders may also be driven by
multiple hits in a common pathway, or the scenario where
many genes can cause the same disease thereby making it
difﬁcult to signi ﬁcantly detect individual genes in currently
available cohort sizes.
We present here the application of “mega-gene ”as a new
analytical approach to identify biologically relevant gene-
sets involved in disease. We achieve this by comparing thecase and control rates of genes in a given gene-set that carry
rare and deleterious-predicted variants. The tested gene-sets
include 10,161 from published databases such as KEGG,Reactome, Gene Ontology and others. Applying the novel
approach to a cohort of individuals who were diagnosed
with chronic kidney disease and recruited into an Astra-Zeneca clinical trial, we ﬁnd several gene-sets achieving a
false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-value < 0.01. Further
investigation is required to determine if and how the gene-sets, and the underlying individual genes, might be relevant
to disease. This demonstrates an example of an ontology-,
network- and pathway-centric approach to explore thegenetic architecture of heterogeneous genetic disorders.
S.R. Cameron-Christie: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Astrazeneca. J. Fleckner: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novo Nordisk. R.E.
March: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Astrazeneca. A. Platt: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Astrazeneca. C. Hae ﬂiger: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Astrazeneca. S. Petrovski:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Astrazeneca.
P16.14B
mantis-ml: Disease agnostic gene prioritisation withautomated machine learning
D. Vitsios, S. PetrovskiAstraZeneca - Centre for Genomics Research, Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Faced with the petabytes of genomic data generated through
our Genomics Initiative towards our ambition of analysingup to two million genomes, we have implemented novel
multi-dimensional, multi-step machine learning frameworks
to holistically and objectively assess the relevance of genesacross multiple therapeutic areas. Instead of laboriously
triaging highly-ranked possible targets from high-
throughput genome-wide screens, we can now draw onArtiﬁcial Intelligence to cut the inevitable subjectivity out
of conclusions from manual literature review of multiple
data sources. We sought to address this by exploring aplethora of gene-associated annotations (including HPO,
ExAC, GTEx, model-organism phenotypes and genic-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1693intolerance scores) to identify hidden patterns among
disease-associated genes and predict novel genes of interest.
We developed mantis-ml , an automated machine learning
(AutoML) framework, which employs Extremely Rando-
mised Trees and Positive-Unlabelled learning to rank
known and novel disease-associated genes through iterativetraining and prediction sessions on random balanced
datasets across the entire gene set (n =18,225). We applied
this framework on two major disease categories: cardiovas-cular and chronic kidney disease. mantis-ml successfully
ranked well-established disease-associated genes in the top
0.01-0.1% of all genes associated with each disease,respectively, and achieved an average AUC performance
of 0.82-0.83. Notably, the most highly ranked novel genes
were found to be enriched for characteristics relevant to therespective disease, based on expression and pathway
analysis using the ‘Ingenuity Pathway Analysis ’tool.
Coupled with high-throughput genomic screens, we believethatmantis-ml will enhance our understanding of complex
disease genotype-phenotype associations, accelerating the
path to successful target identi ﬁcation and validation.
D. Vitsios: None. S. Petrovski: None.
P16.15C
Deﬁning the landscape of circular RNAs in multiple
sclerosis
G. Cardamone
1, E. M. Paraboschi1, G. Liberatore2,
G. Soldà1,2, C. Cantoni3, F. Gallia2, L. Piccio3, E. Nobile
Orazio2,4, S. Duga1,2, R. Asselta1,2
1Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, Milan, Italy,
2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan,
Italy,3Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
MO, United States,4University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Introduction: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new class
of non-coding RNAs that are emerging as important players
in the pathogenesis and progression of autoimmune andneurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS). We
previously demonstrated an enrichment of circRNAs at MS
genome-wide associated loci as well as a genotype-dependent regulation of a circRNA derived from the MS-
associated STAT3 gene. Here, we aimed at exploring the
global pro ﬁle of circRNA expression in MS patients and
evaluating a possible correlation with their genetic
background.
Materials and Methods: We performed RNA-seq
experiments on RNAse R-treated RNAs, extracted from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 10 MS patients and
10 matched healthy controls. The same patients/controlswere genotyped using the In ﬁnium HumanCore-24 v1.1
BeadChip. An expression quantitative-trait loci (eQTL)analysis, aimed at correlating the genotypes of MS-
associated variants with the expression levels of cir-
cRNAs, was performed using the FastQTL tool.
Results: We detected 5,663 circRNAs, uniformly dis-
tributed on all chromosomes. The expression analysis
revealed 166 differentially expressed circRNAs in MSpatients (P<0.05), 125 of which are downregulated. Nota-
bly, the dysregulation of one of the top hits has already been
conﬁrmed in an independent case-control cohort. Moreover,
the eQTL analysis evidenced a signi ﬁcant association
between 58 MS loci and the expression of at least one
circRNA.
Conclusions: This work established for the ﬁrst time a
complete pro ﬁle of circRNA expression in MS, suggesting
that MS-associated variants may in ﬂuence the expression
levels of circRNAs, acting as “circ-eQTLs ”.
G. Cardamone: None. E.M. Paraboschi: None. G.
Liberatore: None. G. Soldà: None. C. Cantoni: None. F.
Gallia: None. L. Piccio: None. E. Nobile Orazio: None. S.
Duga: None. R. Asselta: None.
P16.16D
A multi-site comparison of copy number variant callers
for germline next generation sequencing using targetedcapture
S. G. Piatek
1,2, A. C. Davies2, P. Lombard1, H. Ahlfors1,
L. Jenkins1
1North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London,
United Kingdom,2The University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Using targeted Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) to detect Copy Number Variants (CNVs) would
allow for increased throughput and decreased costs inclinical genetics; however, this is challenging with small
CNVs (affecting one or few exons). To date, a wide
comparison of CNV-callers has been limited by the paucityof samples with known small CNVs. Here we carry out a
comprehensive comparison of CNV callers.
Materials and Methods: CNV-caller scripts and docker
containers were created to carry out a consistent analysis of
data. These have been shared with 5 NHS genetics
laboratories, using local NGS-data with a known CNV-status. The ﬁnal data will be pooled, with 200 CNV-positive
samples expected. Preliminary analysis was done using the
ICR96 exon validation series dataset (with known CNV-status).
Results: In the preliminary results (Table 1) DECoN
performed best, though there is little difference in the 95%conﬁdence intervals between DECoN, ExomeDepth and1694GATK. Canvas and WISExome were also tested but were
not applicable for targeted NGS.
Table 1: Preliminary results using the ICR96 Exon
Validation Series data
Caller (version) Number of CNVs
detectedSensitivity (95% con ﬁdence
interval)
CNVkit (0.9.5) 11 0.20 (0.11 - 0.34)
CopywriteR
(2.14.1)31 0.57 (0.43 - 0.70)
DECoN (1.0.2) 52 096 (0.86 - 0.99)
EXCAVATOR2
(1.1.2)0 0 (0 - 0.08)
ExomeDepth
(1.1.10)51 0.94 (0.84 - 0.99)
GATK gCNV
(4.1.0.0)51 0.94 (0.84 - 0.99)
XHMM (1.0) 4 0.07 (0.02 - 0.19)
Conclusions: A comprehensive analysis is underway and
will give a high-con ﬁdence comparison of CNV-callers.
These results will identify the most suitable CNV-caller in
clinical genetics.
S.G. Piatek: None. A.C. Davies: None. P. Lombard:
None. H. Ahlfors: None. L. Jenkins: None.
P16.17A
SnakeLines: integrated set of computational pipelines
for paired-end sequencing reads
W. Krampl1, J. Budi š1,2,3, M. Kucharík1, R. Hekel1,2,4,
M. Lichvár1, D. Smo ľak1,4, M. Böhmer4, A. Balá ž1,
F.Ďuriš1,2, J. Gazdarica1,2,4,K . Šoltys4,3, J. Tur ňa2,4,3,
J. Radvánszky1,5, T. Szemes1,4,3
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Slovak Centre of
Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia,
3Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia,
5Institute of Clinical and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences,Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Development of sequencing technologies
with massive parallel throughput allowed laboratories
around the world to analyze DNA fragments of various
organisms. However, actual use of DNA sequencing data isimpeded by two main obstructs. Firstly, DNA data
processing and interpretation is often dif ﬁcult for research-
ers and clinicians with small computational background.Secondly, due to the complexity of an available bioinfor-
matic software, where one tool is dependent on speci ﬁcversion of another tool, reproducing data analyses in other
computational clusters is often too troublesome.
Results: We propose a framework together with an
implemented set of computational pipelines, called Snake-
Lines, for processing of paired-end Illumina reads, includ-
ing mapping, assembly, variant calling, viral identi ﬁcation,
transcriptomics, metagenomics, and methylation analysis.
Our framework implements a self-created virtual environ-
ment that contains required tools and libraries and isolatesthem from host operating system, thus ensuring easy port-
ability and reproducibility across different Unix-based
systems.
Availability: The open-source code of the pipelines,
together with test data, is freely available for non-
commercial use from https://github.com/jbudis/snakelines .
The presented work was supported by the APVV -
“Slovak Research and Development Agency ”projects
APVV-16-0264 (50%) and APVV-15-0232 (50%).
W. Krampl: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budi š:A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. M. Kucharík: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. R.
Hekel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd. M. Lichvár: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. D. Smoľak:A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. M.
Böhmer: None. A. Balá ž:A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. F.Ďuriš:A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. K.
Šoltys: None. J. Turňa:None. J. Radvánszky: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. T.
Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd..
P16.18B
Intraspeci ﬁc tolerance of nonsynonymous variation is
closely correlated between human and mouse
orthologues
G. Powell1, S. Pulit1, A. Mallon2, M. Simon2, C. Lindgren1
1Big Data Institute, Oxford, United Kingdom,2MRC
Harwell Institute, Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell,
United Kingdom
Genic constraint describes how tolerant a gene is to
nonsynonymous variation before it is removed from thepopulation by negative selection. The recent abundance of
sequence data has enabled the development of multiple
metrics to evaluate gene constraint in human populations,and such efforts have discovered an enrichment for disease-
associated genes amongst those genes that are mostAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1695constrained. Notably, genic constraint has not been
estimated for mouse, which is the most widely utilised
mammalian model organism for biomedical research. As a
result, the relationship between gene constraint in human
and mouse orthologues remains poorly understood. Here,
we calculate constraint scores for mouse genes and showconstraint is positively correlated between human and
mouse orthologues (r =0.806). We further assess the
relationships between mouse gene constraint and knockoutphenotypes, showing gene constraint is positively correlated
with an increased number of phenotypic annotations, in
addition to an enrichment in developmental, morphological,and neurological knockout phenotypes amongst the most
constrained genes. Finally, we show mouse constraint can
be used to predict human genes associated with Mendeliandisease, and is positively correlated with an increase in the
number of known pathogenic variants in the human
orthologue. Our research supports the role of mouse modelsfor understanding the mechanistic basis of gene function
and human monogenic disease.
G. Powell: None. S. Pulit: None. A. Mallon: None. M.
Simon: None. C. Lindgren: None.
P16.20D
Efﬁcient pipeline for CNV detection from targeted NGS
data
S. Välipakka
1, M. Savarese1, L. Sagath1, K. Kiiski1,
M. Arumilli1, V. Nigro2,3, T. Giugliano2,3, B. Udd1,4,5,
P. Hackman1
1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland,2Telethon
Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy,
3Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Università degli
Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli ”, Napoli, Italy,
4Neuromuscular Research Center, Tampere University and
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland,5Department of
Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland
Introduction: Bioinformatic tool development for analysis
of copy number variants (CNV) from NGS data lags behind
that for other variant types. We present here an ef ﬁcient
bioinformatic pipeline for CNV detection from targeted
NGS data. This will increase the diagnostic yield in a cost-
effective way in clinically and genetically heterogeneousdisorders, such as neuromuscular disorders.
Materials and Methods: We chose four programs,
CoNIFER, XHMM, ExomeDepth and CODEX, since theyhave complementary CNV detection ranges in sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, and variant size and state. Heterozygous dele-
tions and duplications were generated in-silico into samples
sequenced with a gene panel of approximately 350 genesfor neuromuscular disorders. A logarithmic regression
model was trained for predicting true positive CNVs among
variant detections from these samples. This model was
validated with negative (N =30) and positive (N =52) con-
trol samples with real CNVs.
Results: CNV features, such as state or size, did not
markedly affect the model performance. Therefore, the
simpli ﬁed model examines only program scores for detec-
tions. Model with detections from all four programs pro-vided more accurate CNV detection results for the control
samples than any other program combination or
program alone.
Conclusions: No single analysis program can capture all
CNV sizes and types with equal accuracy. Therefore, a
combination of programs should be used to maximizesensitivity and speci ﬁcity. Additionally, the variants should
be reviewed with a statistical model to streamline and
standardize the process of ﬁltering of variants for variant
annotation and clinical use.
Grant references: Foundations: Alfred Kordelin, Sigrid
Jusélius, Jane and Aatos Erkko
S. Välipakka: None. M. Savarese: None. L. Sagath:
None. K. Kiiski: None. M. Arumilli: None. V. Nigro:
None. T. Giugliano: None. B. Udd: None. P.
Hackman: None.
P16.21A
DECIPHER: Enabling the sharing and interpretation of
rare disease variants and associated clinical phenotypes
J. Foreman
1, A. P. Bevan1, S. Brent1, B. Hutton1,
D. Perrett1, K. Samocha1, M. E. Hurles1, H. V. Firth1,2
1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
DECIPHER ( https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk ) established in
2004 has grown to become a major global platform for thevisualization of phenotypic and genomic relationships and
for sharing linked-anonymised rare disease patient records.
DECIPHER displays both the nuclear and mitochondrialgenomes, and all scales of genomic variation, from single
base to megabases, in a single interface. DECIPHER ’s
mission is to map the clinically relevant elements of thegenome and understand their contribution to human
development and disease.
DECIPHER stores both phenotype and genotype data.
Currently there are more than 37,000 variants (sequence and
copy-number) and more than 89,000 phenotypes (HPO
terms) that are shared openly on the website. The wealth ofthese data in DECIPHER allows the aggregation of data1696associated with pathogenic variants in disease genes. To aid
diagnosis aggregated phenotype data is used to identify the
most discriminating phenotypes associated with disease
genes. Quantitative phenotype data, such as anthropometric
measurements and developmental milestones, are aggre-
gated and visual/statistical tools are used to allow thecomparison of a patient with other patients harboring
pathogenic variants in the same gene. Aggregating data in
DECIPHER is extremely powerful in aiding diagnosis anddiscovery whilst harmonized with DECIPHER ’s propor-
tionate data sharing approach.
DECIPHER is dedicated to the sharing of patient data for
discovery and diagnosis and is a pioneering partner in the
Global Alliance for Global Health (GA4GH) and founder
member of the Matchmaker Exchange (MME) whichenables the federated discovery of similar entries in con-
nected databases.
WT206194J. Foreman: None. A.P. Bevan: None. S. Brent: None.
B. Hutton: None. D. Perrett: None. K. Samocha: None.
M.E. Hurles: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Con-
genica. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; Con-
genica. H.V. Firth: None.
P16.23C
Evaluation of the Bionano optical mapping technologyas a replacement of conventional cytogenetics in a
diagnostic setting
C. Keith
1, A. Hastie2, J. Warner1, E. Maher1
1South East Scotland Genetics Service, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom,2Bionano Genomic Inc, San Diego, CA, United
States
The diagnostic remit of a clinical cytogenomic laboratory is
to identify DNA copy number variations (CNVs) and
structural variations (SVs) that are likely to impactphenotype.
Current methodologies have signi ﬁcant limitations.
Within the South East Scotland Genetic Service, chromo-somal microarray (Affymetrix 750k) is used to diagnose
CNVs greater than 10 kilobase (Kb) in size, but cannot
detect “balanced ”aberrations such as translocations or
inversions. G-banded chromosome analysis detects most
structural variation, but at a lower resolution of 3-5 Mega-
bases (Mb) and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridisation (FISH)often requires prior knowledge of the variant.
Sequencing technology has improved, with signi ﬁcant
progress in the detection of single nucleotide changes andshort indels, but most methods produce short-readsequences and therefore fail in GC rich or repetitive regions
and cannot detect larger variants accurately.
Here we present the results of a small validation series
using Bionano ’s Saphyr system, an optical mapping tech-
nology that utilises single, megabase-size native DNA
molecules, identifying a custom recognition sequence to useﬂuorescent labelling for alignment. The automated calling
algorithms aim to detect all copy number and major struc-
tural variation types (including balanced rearrangements),potentially replacing the need for multiple analytical
techniques.
A range of sample with known abnormalities (analysed in
house using a combination of microarray, G-banding and
FISH) were analysed using optical mapping to assess the
clinical utility of the system. The Bionano optical mappingsystem not only detected all copy number variants with a
higher resolution than microarray, it also detected all
balanced structural variants.
C. Keith: None. A. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomic Inc. J. Warner:
None. E. Maher: None.
P16.24D
Conserved clinical variation visualization tool(ConVarT)
O. I. Kaplan, F. M. Torun, H. Guner, S. CevikSchool of Life and Natural Sciences, Abdullah Gul
University, Kayseri, Turkey
Introduction: It is extremely challenging to visualize the
evolutionary conservation of amino acid substitutionsassociated with diseases because there is no available tool
that maps the coordinates of these amino acids of humans in
common model organisms. Recent technological advancesin DNA sequencing have led to a comprehensive list of
human genetic variations, the functional effects of many of
which are yet to be clari ﬁed. Model organisms could be
employed to functionally assess the effect of genetic
variations. Here, we designed a user-friendly tool that
allows to visualize the comparability of human geneticvariations across the species and currently we are testing the
functional impact of disease associated amino acids with
CRISPR in C. elegans .
Materials and Methods: We extracted the genes con-
sisting of all types of amino acid substitutions from ClinVar
database. We have performed multiple sequence alignmentacross most commonly used model organisms and inte-
grated amino acid substitutions into corresponding posi-
tions. We are currently integrating the recently publishedgnomAD databases into our database.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1697Results: ClinVar data has revealed that while over 50000
genetic variations are pathogenic, large portions of human
genome variations (at least 40%) on genes are annotated
with uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance, suggesting that the
functional assessment of these positions are needed. We
are currently performing statistical analysis to ﬁnd the
comparability of human genetic variations among other
species.
Conclusion: Our tool can serve to visualize the evolu-
tionary conservation of disease causing amino acids
O.I. Kaplan: None. F.M. Torun: None. H. Guner:
None. S. Cevik: None.
P16.25A
Open Targets Genetics: An open-science resource forimproved drug target identi ﬁcation and prioritisation
using genetic data
E. Mountjoy
1,2, Open Targets Genetics
1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridgeshire, United
Kingdom,2Open Targets, Cambridgeshire, United
Kingdom
The discovery and development of new pharmaceuticals is a
time consuming and expensive process. A major challenge
is high attrition, as a large proportion of drugs are found tobe ineffective at clinical trial. However, drugs that have
genome-wide association study (GWAS) evidence support-
ing a link between its target and indication are twice aslikely to be approved for clinical use. Here we present Open
Targets Genetics, an open-science resource which makes
robust connections between disease-associated loci andlikely causal genes, to enable the identi ﬁcation and
prioritisation of new drug targets.
We combine GWAS associations curated from literature
and the recently released NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog
summary statistics database (including over 3,000 UK
Biobank phenotypes) to locate over 100,000 disease-associated loci. We then use statistical ﬁne-mapping (or
linkage-disequilibrium expansion if no summary statistics
are available) to identify a set of potentially causal variantsat each locus. Lastly, variants are integrated with functional
genomics data (e.g. promoter capture Hi-C, DNase hyper-
sensitivity sites), molecular quantitative trait loci (e.g.eQTLs, pQTLs) and in silico functional predictions to link
each variant to its target gene(s) using a uni ﬁed evidence
score. Most recently, we have added systematic disease-molecular trait colocalisation analysis using the upcoming
Open Targets-European Bioinformatics Institute eQTL
database.
The results of Open Targets Genetics are made available
through our web portal (genetics.opentargets.org), for bulkdownload and via a GraphQL API, enabling users to easily
prioritise genes at disease-associated loci and assess their
potential as pharmaceutical targets.
E. Mountjoy: None.
P16.26B
Complete work ﬂow for Discovery and Veri ﬁcation of
eQTLs in Lung Adenocarcinoma
H. Veereshlingam
1, S. Jackson1, D. Tommaso2,
F. Colombo2
1Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United
States,2Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di
Milano, Milan, Italy
Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed
associations between genotype, phenotype and pathologies.Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) have been
mapped in many tumor types, such as breast, lung and
prostate cancer. These studies measured genome-wide geneexpression in tumors and identi ﬁed associations between
these gene expression levels and commonly inherited
genetic variants pro ﬁled in the same patients. Since the
majority of inherited cancer risk variants as identi ﬁed by
GWAS are in non-coding regions, eQTL analysis of cancer
tissues is becoming extremely important. In this study wedemonstrate a streamlined work ﬂow to study eQTLs in lung
adenocarcinoma. Previous GWAS have identi ﬁed several
lung cancer susceptibility loci, however functionality ofmost of these loci remains unexplained. Here we focused on
SNPs previously reported to be associated with lung cancer
in different populations. We studied the association ofcandidate SNPs with lung adenocarcinoma risk and overall
survival in a cohort of 96 patients and healthy controls using
the Axiom genotyping arrays and Clariom D geneexpression arrays. The function of these SNPs was assessed
as eQTLs, these results suggest that the candidate SNPs
exert their effects on cancer risk/outcome through themodulation of mRNA levels of their target genes.
H. Veereshlingam: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc.S. Jackson: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher
Scienti ﬁc.D. Tommaso: None. F. Colombo: None.
P16.27C
Expanding GENCODE gene annotation to elucidate
disease-linked variants
J. M. Mudge
1, T. Hunt1, J. M. Gonzalez1, I. Jungreis2,
J. Lagarde3, R. Johnson4, C. Steward5, P. Flicek1,
A. Frankish116981European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United
Kingdom,2MIT Computer Science and Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, United States,
3Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain,
4University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland,5Congenica,
Hinxton, United Kingdom
An investigation into the link between variant and
phenotype usually begins with gene annotation. However,most GWAS variants fall in non-transcribed regions, and
even exon-focused catalogs such as ClinVar contain
thousands of variants that do not overlap known transcripts.Here, we present efforts by GENCODE to improve the
scope and usability of our human gene annotation in a
disease-related context, along multiple lines. Firstly, ourpublic geneset is about to undergo a massive expansion, as
tens of thousands of new transcript models are incorporated
based on long-read sequencing datasets. This work willcause thousands of variants to be reclassi ﬁed as transcribed.
However, even when variant transcription is established,
uncertainties regarding ‘functional categorization ’- espe-
cially coding potential - can still undermine attempts to
prioritize variants or judge pathogenicity. This expansion is
therefore being carried out alongside efforts to reappraisethe CDS content of our geneset, incorporating evolutionary
conservation, population genetics datasets and proteoge-
nomics methods. Pertinently, our creation of the ﬁrst whole-
genome PhyloCSF dataset allowed us to add over 230kb of
novel high-quality CDS annotation, leading to the reclassi-
ﬁcation of 118 GWAS variants from non-coding to protein-
disrupting. Furthermore, we are now utilizing a fully
integrated manual work ﬂow to develop our novel annota-
tions in a clinical context. For example, our targetedreannotation of 191 genes linked to epilepsy led to the
identi ﬁcation of 3 novel de novo SCN1A coding mutations
within a panel of 122 patients with Dravet ’s syndrome.
Primarily supported by the National Human Genome
Research Institute under Award U41HG007234.
J.M. Mudge: None. T. Hunt: None. J.M. Gonzalez:
None. I. Jungreis: None. J. Lagarde: None. R. Johnson:
None. C. Steward: None. P. Flicek: None. A.
Frankish: None.
P16.28D
The Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) knowledgebase:new features enhancing anatomical comparison of gene
expression and phenotype pro ﬁles
T. F. Hayamizu, A. V. Anagnostopoulos, S. M. Bello,
C. L. Smith, M. Ringwald, The MGI Software Team
The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United StatesMouse Genome Informatics (MGI) is the key knowledge-
base for the laboratory mouse. MGI integrates mouse
genotype-phenotype datasets from biomedical literature and
large-scale projects with genomic, mutation, expression,
functional and human disease model data to inform disease
etiology and therapeutic design. Recent enhancementsinclude newly established anatomical mappings between
the Mammalian Phenotype (MP) and Mouse Developmen-
tal Anatomy (EMAPA) ontologies and a user interface, co-deployed with the Gene Expression Database (GXD), which
enables comparison of gene expression and phenotype
annotations for mouse genes. The new Gene Expression +
Phenotype Comparison Matrix, accessible from MGI ’s
Gene Detail page, visually juxtaposes tissues where a gene
is normally expressed against tissues where mutations inthat gene cause phenotype abnormalities. The anatomy axis
of the matrix can be expanded and collapsed, allowing users
to interactively explore correlations between gene expres-sion and phenotype data at different levels of spatial
resolution. An enhanced Mouse Developmental Anatomy
Browser provides quick access to phenotype annotations inaddition to expression data associated with a given
anatomical structure or substructures. The updated MP
Browser links to mapped anatomical structures, enablingaccess to wild-type expression data in tissues associated
with a given phenotype. Moreover, MGI ’s Allele Detail
page features a link to affected anatomical structures,facilitating retrieval of wild-type expression data in tissues
afﬂicted by the underlying mutation. The MGI features
presented here will enhance researchers
’ability to probe
gene function and gain critical mechanistic insights into
developmental and disease processes. Supported by NHGRI
grant HG000330 and NICHD grant HD062499.
T.F. Hayamizu: None. A.V. Anagnostopoulos: None. S.
M. Bello: None. C.L. Smith: None. M. Ringwald: None.
P16.29A
Deconvoluting the Dementia phenotype using functional
computational approaches
D. Ivanov1, M. Hill1, N. Allen1, J. M. Thornton2,
J. Williams1, V. Escott-Price1
1UK Dementia Research Institute, School of Medicine,
College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff, UnitedKingdom,
2The European Bioinformatics Institute,
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Introduction: The development of Alzheimer ’s disease
(AD) is a multi-causal process, with an interaction betweencomponents. In this respect, delineating the constituent
biological components that play part will bring a greaterAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1699understanding of the processes in action. We will present an
integrative computational approach of linking gene-
expression to phenotypes and biological pathways in
Drosophila and extend the methodology in individuals
with AD. We base our approach on the concept that a broad
phenotype, such as AD, is composed of simpler inter-mediate subphenotypes.
Methods: By combining gene-expression data from
single-gene mutants in Drosophila that exhibit a particular
subphenotype (biological replicates of this phenotype),
genes/biological pathways that play a role in the sub-
phenotype will be enriched. The goal is to enhance thesignal from genes that play a role in a subphenotype and
reduce the noise. Linear mixed-effect model will be used to
circumvent the inter-experiment variability and to combinethe gene-expression data and generate molecular signatures
from different experiments and accounting for differences
that are not of interest.
Results: We will present preliminary, proof-of-concept
results for several complex subphenotypes in Drosophila .
We will also show how these molecular signatures can beused to describe the studied subphenotypes.
Conclusions: Our methodology has the ability to not only
assert the relationship of AD with already known sub-phenotypes, but can also discover not yet tested sub-
phenotypes and associated biological pathways. This
methodology has also a potential to quantify the relation-ship between different subphenotypes and AD animal
models.
Funding: ERDF through the Welsh GovernmentD. Ivanov: None. M. Hill: None. N. Allen: None. J.M.
Thornton: None. J. Williams: None. V. Escott-
Price: None.
P16.31C
F508del correction in CFTE29o- cell line by CRISPR/Cas9
S. A. Smirnikhina
1, E. V. Kondrateva1, A. A. Anuchina1,
E. P. Adilgereeva1, E. L. Amelina2, K. D. Ustinov1,
M. I. Yasinovsky1, K. S. Kochergin-Nikitsky1,
I. Zainitdinova1, V. Mozgovoy3, A. V. Lavrov1,3
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2The Research Institute of Pulmonology,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3The Russian National
Research Medical University Named after N.I. Pirogov,
Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: In most cases cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is incurable
disease, which makes the development of gene therapy anactual task. Genome editing provides wide opportunities for
modeling and treating CF. The aim of this work was editingof F508del mutation in CFTE29o- cells using CRISPR/
Cas9.
Materials and Methods: The work was performed in
CFTE29o- cell - immortalized cell line of tracheal epithe-
lium from a patient with CF (F508del/F508del). Three
nucleases (eSpCas9(1.1), SpCas9(HF4), SaCas9) in com-bination with four sgRNAs were used. Two sgRNAs were
targeted speci ﬁcally to F508del (sgCFTR#1,
sa_sgCFTR#3); the other two were to downstream region(sgCFTR#2, sgCFTR#3). In addition, we used a plasmid
with an insert of CFTR fragment with F508del to study
potential in ﬂuence of the genomic context on the editing
efﬁciency. Four single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides
(ssODNs) were designed to repair double-strand DNA
breaks. Cas9 +sgRNA plasmids were co-transfected with
model plasmid and ssODN into CFTE29o- cells by lipo-
fection. The editing ef ﬁcacy was evaluated by TIDE and
TIDER methods.
Results and Conclusions: Indel formation ef ﬁcacy was
2.1-7.5% in the plasmid (the highest ef ﬁcacy with Cas9
(HF4)/sgCFTR#1) and 1.4-7.9% in the genomic locus (thehighest ef ﬁcacy with Cas9(1.1)/sgCFTR#3). Then we co-
transfected cells with the most effective combination Cas9
(1.1)/sgCFTR#3 together with ssODN, homologous repair(CTT insertion) in genomic locus was 8.7%. This level of
efﬁciency makes reasonable development of treatment of
CF by genome editing. Additional studies are necessary toconﬁrm these results and increase ef ﬁcacy. This work was
supported by Russian Science Foundation (Agreement No.
17-75-20095).
S.A. Smirnikhina: B. Research Grant (principal inves-
tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Russian Sci-
ence Foundation. E.V. Kondrateva: None. A.A. Anu-
china: None. E.P. Adilgereeva: None. E.L. Amelina:
None. K.D. Ustinov: None. M.I. Yasinovsky: None. K.S.
Kochergin-Nikitsky: None. I. Zainitdinova: None. V.
Mozgovoy: None. A.V. Lavrov: None.
P16.32D
Prospective interest in deploying multi-omics
approaches to solve unsolved patients with suspectedmonogenic developmental delay syndromes
Y. Duffourd
1,2, E. Tisserant1,2, A. Plagos1, P. Callier3,
F. Mau Tran-Them1, A. Bruel1, A. Denommé-Pichon4,
C. Philippe4, B. Isidor5, S. Heide6, A. Afenjar7,
D. Rodriguez8, C. Mignot6, D. Heron6, M. Vincent5,
P. Charles6, S. Moutton9, N. Jean9, S. Odent10,
C. Dubourg11, A. Faudet6, B. Keren6, B. Cogné12,
A. Boland13, R. Olaso13, C. Thauvin9,1, L. Faivre9,1,
J. Deleuze13,14, A. Vitobello1,1417001Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental
disorders, Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon,
France,2*, Equal contribution, France,3UF Innovation en
diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, CHU Dijon,
France, Dijon, France,4Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, Franc,
Dijon, France,
5CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique
Médicale, Nantes, France, Nantes, France,6AP-HP,
Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière,
75013, Paris, France et Centre de Référence "dé ﬁciences
intellectuelles de causes rares", 75013 Paris, France, Paris,France,
7APHP, Département de génétique et embryologie
médicale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, F-75012 Paris,
France, Paris, France,8Centre de Référence de
Neurogénétique et Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, AP-
HP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, GHUEP ; Sorbonne
Université, GRC n°19, pathologies Congénitales duCervelet-LeucoDystrophies, Paris, France, Paris, France,
9Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du
développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre degénétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital,
Dijon, France, Dijon, France,
10CHU de RENNES,
Genetique; Univ Rennes, CNRS, IGDR (Institut deGénétique et Développement de Rennes) UMR 6290,
Rennes, France, Rennes, France,
11Service de Génétique
Moléculaire et Génomique, BMT-HC « Jean Dausset »,CHU Pontchaillou, 2 rue Henri Le Guilloux, 35033
RENNES Cedex 9, France, Rennes, France,
12L'institut du
thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU de Nantes,Nantes, France, Nantes, France,
13Centre National de
Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de
Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91057, Evry, France, and LabEx GENMED, Evry, France,
14#, Equal contribution, France
Background: Exome sequencing (ES) represents the ﬁrst-
tier diagnostic test in patients presenting with syndromic
developmental delay with suspected monogenic etiology.Yet, 50-70% of these patients remain unexplained at the
molecular level, arguing the interest to extend the genetic
investigations beyond protein-coding regions and tointegrate multi-omics approaches.
Method: We launched a multi-centric study gathering 30
unsolved patients, after trio ES and array-CGH analyses,presenting with heterogeneous mild to severe syndromic
intellectual disabilities. We performed trio genome
sequencing (GS) combined with linked-read sequencing(10X Genomics) and blood-derived transcriptome analysis.
Results: We present our results on the ﬁrst third of the
cohort. GS analysis identi ﬁed 3 de novo pathogenic or
likely-pathogenic variants in PURA, FOXG1, CYFIP2 and
KMT2D , as well as an inherited hemizygous FGD1 variant.Theﬁrst two variants had not been captured by the exome
kit, while CYFIP2 was not yet a morbid gene at the time of
the ES analysis. The remaining ones, had not been identi ﬁed
by the molecular diagnostic laboratory responsible for the
ES analysis. GS highlighted the presence of a de novo 2M b
inversion located 400 Kb upstream MEF2C (conﬁrmed by
linked-read analysis), responsible for the disruption of the
Topologically Associating Domain regulating this gene, and
a9K b de novo complex structural variant, causing the
heterozygous loss of 3 exons of CASK resulting in a fra-
meshift mutation (RNA-seq data).
Conslusions: Our preliminary results on 10 patients show
that a multi-omics approach allowed the identi ﬁcation of 4
additional molecular diagnoses not otherwise achievable
with ES.
Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant: None. A. Plagos:
None. P. Callier: None. F. Mau Tran-Them: None. A.
Bruel: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. C. Philippe:
None. B. Isidor: None. S. Heide: None. A. Afenjar: None.
D. Rodriguez: None. C. Mignot: None. D. Heron: None.
M. Vincent: None. P. Charles: None. S. Moutton: None.
N. Jean: None.
S. Odent: None. C. Dubourg: None. A.
Faudet: None. B. Keren: None. B. Cogné: None. A.
Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. C. Thauvin: None. L.
Faivre: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Vitobello: None.
P16.34B
Matched annotation from the NCBI and EMBL-EBI
(MANE): Converging on a high-value, genome-wide
transcript set
J. Morales1, J. Loveland1, S. Pujar2, A. Astashyn2,
R. Bennett1, C. Davidson1, O. Ermolaeva2, C. Farrell2,
L. Gil1, V. Joardar2, M. Kay1, K. McGarvey2,
A. McMahon1, S. Rangwala2, G. Threadgold1,
F. Cunningham1, A. Frankish1, T. Murphy2
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory - European
Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom,
2National Center for Biotechnology Information, National
Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States
Accurate annotation of the human genome is essential for
genomics research and clinical applications. RefSeq (NCBI)and Ensembl/GENCODE (led by EMBL-EBI) produce
independent human gene annotation. Since 2005, the joint
Consensus Coding Sequence (CCDS) project has de ﬁned
over 30,000 CDS for 95% of coding genes. However, the
large number of alternatively spliced transcripts and the lack
of standardized default transcripts displayed acrossresources present challenges, especially in the clinical
context. Building on our past collaboration, we haveAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1701launched a new initiative, the Matched Annotation from
NCBI and EMBL-EBI (MANE) project, to jointly converge
on a high-con ﬁdence, genome-wide transcript set.
During phase-1, we will release the MANE Select tran-
script set to include one well-supported transcript per
protein-coding locus. All transcripts in the set will perfectlyalign to the GRCh38 reference assembly and represent
100% identity (5 ’UTR, CDS, 3 ’UTR) between the Ensembl
(ENST) transcript and the corresponding RefSeq (NM)transcript. MANE Select transcripts are identi ﬁed using
independent computational methods complemented by
manual review and discussion. The methods utilize evi-dence of functional potential such as expression levels,
evolutionary conservation, and clinical signi ﬁcance. Tran-
script ends are de ﬁned using CAGE data from the FAN-
TOM consortium and polyA site data from conventional
and next generation sequencing. Currently, we have de ﬁned
MANE Select transcripts for 53% of human coding genesand are working towards genome-wide coverage. During
phase-2, we intend to release an expanded set (MANE Plus)
to include additional transcripts per locus that are well-supported or of particular user interest.
Funding: Wellcome Trust-WT200990/Z/16/Z; EMBL-
Core-Funds; NIH-U41HG007234; NIH-Intramural-Research-program.
J. Morales: None. J. Loveland: None. S. Pujar: None.
A. Astashyn: None. R. Bennett: None. C. Davidson:
None. O. Ermolaeva: None. C. Farrell: None. L. Gil:
None. V. Joardar: None. M. Kay: None. K. McGarvey:
None. A. McMahon: None. S. Rangwala: None. G.
Threadgold: None. F. Cunningham: None. A. Frankish:
None. T. Murphy: None.
P16.35C
Full p-value summary statistics in the GWAS Catalog
J. A. L. MacArthur
1, A. Buniello1, M. Cerezo1,
J. Hayhurst1, P. Hall2, L. Harris1, L. A. Hindorff2,
H. Junkins2, E. Lewis1, C. Malangone1, A. McMahon1,
J. Morales1, E. Mountjoy3, E. Sollis1, D. Suveges1,
O. Vrousgou1, P. L. Whetzel1, T. Burdett1,
F. Cunningham1, P. Flicek1, H. Parkinson1
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European
Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UnitedKingdom,
2Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States,3Open Targets, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
The NHGRI-EBI Catalog of published genome-wide
association studies (GWAS Catalog, www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas )
contains over 5,500 full p-value summary statistics (SS)datasets, making it the largest repository of GWAS SS. To
ensure SS are consistent across studies and interoperable
they are pre-processed and made available in a standard
format. They are also harmonised, with respect to genome
build and strand. Each SS dataset is linked to the curated
data and metadata from the publication. Older GWASCatalog studies are re-curated, where required, to ensure the
study structure is correctly represented.
Access to SS is provided from the GWAS Catalog FTP
site ( www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/downloads/summary-statistics ),
via API from a SS datastore ( www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/summa
ry-statistics/docs/ ) and via links within our redesigned query
interface ( www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/search ). The query interface
also provides improved search and display functionality for
all Catalog data. New pages provide access to structuredinformation and visualisations that were previously una-
vailable, while a new API provides programmatic access to
curated Catalog data ( www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/docs/api ).
We are working to increase the number of available SS,
encouraging authors to submit their SS and campaigning for
data sharing. To ensure SS are accessible, usable, updatedand relevant to the user community we are engaging with
the community to develop standards for data reporting. The
broad availability of SS will vastly extend the potential ofGWAS, allowing users to perform a wide range of analyses.
Funding: National Human Genome Research Institute of
the National Institutes of Health [U41-HG007823]; OpenTargets [OTAR2-045]; EMBL Core Funds. L.A.H., P.H.
and H.J. are employees of the NHGRI.
J.A.L. MacArthur: None. A. Buniello: None. M. Cer-
ezo: None. J. Hayhurst: None. P. Hall: None. L. Harris:
None. L.A. Hindorff: None. H. Junkins: None. E. Lewis:
None. C. Malangone: None. A. McMahon: None. J.
Morales: None. E. Mountjoy: None. E. Sollis: None. D.
Suveges: None. O. Vrousgou: None. P.L. Whetzel: None.
T. Burdett: None. F. Cunningham: None. P. Flicek:
None. H. Parkinson: None.
P16.36D
Genetic control of fatty acids in the isolated population
of Sardinia
C. Sidore, M. Marongiu, M. Lobina, M. Piras, V. Orrù,
E. Fiorillo, F. Cucca
Institute of Genetic and Biomedic Research (IRGB CNR),
Cagliari, Italy
It is well established that short and long chain fatty acids are
the main medium of interaction between immune system
and gut microbiota. Although there are preliminary resultson the genetic and environmental in ﬂuence on the
metabolite levels, the interactions between immune systems1702and microbiome are very complex and their mechanisms
still need to be understood.Here we present an omic analysis
of the fatty acid levels in the isolated population of the
Sardinia island. The cohort involves ~8,000 individuals
from the valley of Lanusei, deeply genotyped with >23M
genomic variants imputed from a population-speci ﬁc
reference panel. In addition to >1,000 quantitative traits
biomedical parameters, the cohort is also deeply pheno-
typed with >2,000 immune cell traits. We performed aGWAS analysis on levels of 8 short and 29 long chain fatty
acids in 2,000 volunteers of the SardiNIA cohort (ranging
from 19 to 103 years of age). The association resultsshowed signals in the ACADS, SLC44A5 andELOVL2 gene
regions. Furthermore, we observed a general increase of
fatty acid levels with age, with speci ﬁc exceptions.
Additional analyses combining the immune pro ﬁle by
means of correlations, colocalization, and mendelian
randomization will provide hints on the regulatory functionsof these important molecules. The results will help to
elucidate the host genetic regulation on fatty acids variance
and how and to what extent they interact with the hostimmune system in health and disease state.
C. Sidore: None. M. Marongiu: None. M. Lobina:
None. M. Piras: None. V. Orrù: None. E. Fiorillo: None.
F. Cucca: None.
P16.37A
HiVA: a web platform for haplotyping and copy
number analysis of single-cell genomes
A. Ardeshirdavani
1, M. Zamani Esteki2, D. Alcaide1,
H. Masset3,J .D i n g3, A. Sifrim3, J. Aerts1, T. Voet3,
Y. Moreau1, J. Vermeesch3
1KU Leuven - STADIUS, Leuven, Belgium,2Maastricht
University Medical Center, Department of ClinicalGenetics, Maastricht, Netherlands,
3KU Leuven, Centre for
Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium
Haplotyping is imperative for comprehensive analysis of
genomes, imputation of genetic variants and interpretation
of error-prone single-cell genomic data. We have developeda pipeline and user interface for single-cell analysis named
HiVA ( https://hiva.esat.kuleuven.be ). HiVA (Haplarithm
inference of Variant Alleles) is an interactive web platformfor genome haplarithmisis of DNA samples derived from a
large number of cells down to a single cell. HiVA
automatically reconstructs parental haplarithms (i.e. hapla-rithm pro ﬁles indicating both haplotypes and copy number
states) and provides a user-friendly interface for scrutinizing
allelic imbalances across the genome. We are showing thatHiVA enables concurrent haplotyping and copy-number
proﬁling of single cells. In contrast to conventional family-based haplotyping methods that make use of discrete bi-
allelic SNP genotypes (AA, AB and BB) to reconstruct
haplotypes, haplarithmisis uses continuous SNP genotypes
values, which potentially harbor quantitative (haplotype)
and qualitative (copy number) assessment of genomes.
HiVA is a novel sequencing-based approach for whole-genome SNP typing of single cells, and determine genome-
wide haplotypes, the copy number of those haplotypes as
well as the parental and segregational origin of chromoso-mal aberrations from sequencing- and array-based SNP
landscapes of single cells.
Work by A.A and Y.M was supported by KU Leuven
CELSA/17/032, Flemish Government: IWT 150865, FWO
06260, and VIB: ELIXIR. Work by J.R.V. and T.V. is
supported by KULeuven funding (C1/018) and the Horizon2020 WIDENLIFE: 692065 to J.R.V. and T.V. H.M. is
supported by FWO (11A7119N).
A. Ardeshirdavani: None. M. Zamani Esteki: None. D.
Alcaide: None. H. Masset: None. J. Ding: None. A.
Sifrim: None. J. Aerts: None. T. Voet: None. Y. Moreau:
None. J. Vermeesch: None.
P16.38B
HADA: a resource for automated annotation of next-generation sequencing data in hereditary angioedema
studies
A. Mendoza-Alvarez
1, I. Marcelino-Rodriguez1, L. Rubio-
Rodriguez2, A. Muñoz-Barrera2, A. Callero3, J. Garcia-
Robaina3, J. Lorenzo-Salazar2, C. Flores1,2,4,5
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de
Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain,
2Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías
Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary
Islands, Spain,3Department of Allergy, Hospital
Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain,4CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,
5Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de
La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain
Introduction: Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare
genetic disease caused by dysfunction of the C1 inhibitor or
dysregulation of the kinin cascade. Because of its non-speciﬁc signs, HAE is poorly recognized in the clinical
ﬁeld, resulting in delayed diagnoses that increase the risk of
morbidity and mortality. To adapt its diagnosis to next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based assessments, we devel-
oped Hereditary Angioedema Database Annotation
(HADA) tool.
Materials and Methods: We performed a manual cura-
tion and update to GRCh37/hg19 of the causal variantsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1703described to date in HAEdb and VarSome and classi ﬁed all
of them to the ACMG guidelines. The information was used
to establish a database con ﬁgured for ANNOVAR to be
seamlessly incorporated into the routine NGS bioinfor-
matics annotation.
Results: Currently, HADA includes records for 416 sim-
ple causal variants in the ﬁve genes underlying HAE.
However, 25% of those were classi ﬁed as non-pathogenic
by current guidelines, suggestive of a gap in the inter-pretation of disease variants and a necessity to improve the
classi ﬁers of pathogenicity potential of genetic variants.
Conclusions: To adapt the genetic diagnosis of HAE to
the era of NGS-based genomic medicine, we have devel-
oped HADA as a freely available tool simplifying the
identi ﬁcation of point mutations and short indels causing
HAE. Annotation of structural variation will be covered in
future developments. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia,
Innovación y Universidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER, UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER to
strengthen scienti ﬁc and technological education, training,
research, development and innovation in Genomics, Per-sonalized Medicine and Biotechnology, and a CajaSiete-
ULL fellowship (to AMA).
A. Mendoza-Alvarez: None. I. Marcelino-Rodriguez:
None. L. Rubio-Rodriguez: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera:
None. A. Callero: None. J. Garcia-Robaina: None. J.
Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None.
P16.39C
HLA-VBSeq v2: enhancements of HLA calling accuracyfrom WGS data with full-length Japanese HLA
sequences
Y. Wang
1, T. Mimori1, S. Khor2, O. Gervais1, Y. Kawai2,
Y. Hitomi2, K. Tokunaga2, M. Nagasaki3
1Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan,2The University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan,3Tohoku University,
Sendai, Miyagi, JAPAN, Japan
Introduction: The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system,
which is the most variable gene region in the entire genome,encodes the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
proteins in humans on chromosome 6 and has been reported
to be associated with numerous immune-mediated diseases.HLA calling from whole genome sequencing data (WGS)
remains to be challenging due to the incompleteness of
population speci ﬁc references. We have previously
described the construction of Japanese reference sequences
that fully covers the gene body region of HLA class I
(Japanese HLA sequences). This study aims to evaluate theaccuracy of HLA calling from WGS when the Japanese
HLA sequences were combined with the IPD-IMGTreference sequences to estimate the most likely HLA
genotypes.
Materials and Methods: To assess the usefulness of
population-speci ﬁc HLA references in HLA calling, we
have compared the performance of different sets of refer-
ences (with and without Japanese HLA sequences) acrossHLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C alleles by using HLA-VBSeq,
aﬂexible software which allows the use of arbitrary refer-
ence sequences.
Results: We evaluated their performances by using 418
Japanese samples as testing data, in which HLA genotypes
were determined with Luminex technology. All of the testswere implemented based on 4-digit resolution. As a result,
the performance of HLA-calling in the Japanese population
signiﬁcantly increased with custom HLA panel
Conclusions: We suggest that including the sequences
obtained from regional population samples is an effective
way to improve the accuracy of HLA calling from WGSdataset. The software is available from ( http://nagasakilab.
csml.org/ja/hla-vbseq ) as HLA-VBSeq v2.
Y. Wang: None. T. Mimori: None. S. Khor: None. O.
Gervais: None. Y. Kawai: None. Y. Hitomi: None. K.
Tokunaga: None. M. Nagasaki: None.
P16.40D
Efﬁcient and high-throughput genotyping of elusive
human polymorphic inversions mediated by invertedrepeats
M. Laplana
1, S. Villatoro1, R. Zaurín1, J. Royo2, M. Puig1,
M. Cáceres1,3
1Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Institut de
Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Bellaterra, Spain,
2Department of Surgery, Biochemistry and Immunology,
School of Medicine, University of Malaga, Málaga, Spain,
3ICREA, Barcelona, Spain
Structural variants are large genomic rearrangements that
affect a big number of bases, with the potential to have a
wide phenotypic impact. Among them, inversions are
genomic regions that change orientation without gain orloss of DNA and many of them have highly identical
inverted repeats (IRs) at the breakpoints. Moreover, they
tend to be recurrent and not linked to SNPs. Thus, thecomplexity of such regions has made inversion character-
ization dif ﬁcult. Previously, we developed a combination of
inverse PCR and MLPA to simultaneously interrogate 24common human inversions mediated by IRs in hundreds of
individuals. Here, we have optimized this method by taking
advantage of the iPLEX technology to detect one singlenucleotide change speci ﬁc of each orientation using mass
spectrometry and extending the analysis to additional1704inversions. Also, we have improved genotype accuracy by
designing speci ﬁc assays that take into account common
polymorphisms affecting restriction-enzyme target sites.
Currently, we are able to genotype 37 inversions ampli ﬁed
in four different PCR reactions from as little as 400 ng of
DNA. In order to test the performance of the method, wehave genotyped 95 individuals from three populations of the
1000 Genomes Project with 94.3% genotyping rate and an
error rate of ~3% for a single experiment. The newgenotype data generated allow us to have a ﬁrst glimpse on
the functional and evolutionary consequences of these
inversions. In addition, having a high-throughput genotyp-ing technique paves the way to unravel the role of
inversions in complex traits and disease susceptibilities.
M. Laplana: None. S. Villatoro: None. R. Zaurín:
None. J. Royo: None. M. Puig: None. M. Cáceres: None.
P16.41A
Evaluating the expansion of the experimentally
determined human protein interactome using the
PICKLE meta-database
G. N. Dimitrakopoulos
1,2, A. Gioutlakis1,2, M. I. Klapa2,
N. K. Moschonas1,2
1General Biology Laboratory, Medical School, University
of Patras, Patras, Greece,2Metabolic Engineering &
Systems Biology Laboratory, Institute of Chemical
Engineering Sciences, Foundation for Research &
Technology Hellas (FORTH/ICE-HT), Patras, Greece
Introduction: The Protein InteraCtion KnowLedgebasE
(PICKLE; www.pickle.gr ) is a meta-database of the human
experimentally-determined direct protein-protein interaction
(PPI) network, integrating ﬁve primary datasets over the
genetic information ontology network of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot reviewed human complete proteome (RHCP).
Its ontological PPI integration using RHCP as a standar-
dized reference node set constitutes PICKLE the only PPImeta-database enabling the evaluation of the human
interactome expansion at both the protein and gene levels
through comparison of its successive releases; this evalua-tion is the objective of this study.
Methods: The default ( “cross-checked ”) Uniprot-level
interactomes of PICKLE 2.1-2.3, integrating data from 02/2015 to 11/2018, respectively, were compared. Default net-
works exclude PPIs of low experimental con ﬁdence of being
direct. Network analysis was performed using Cytoscape.
Results: The current human experimentally-determined
direct PPI network, as reconstructed by PICKLE, comprises
178306 PPIs between 15823 UniProt IDs, twice more thanthe largest primary datasets, emphasizing thus the need for
source database integration for reliable human interactomereconstruction. The increase in newly added proteins is one-
third than that in newly determined PPIs, most of the latter
enriching the interactions of existing proteins, while, as
predicted in PICKLE 1.0, most newly added proteins have
1-4 interactions. The interactome becomes denser, however,
its expansion over the 15% of RHCP with no known PPIsmay require targeted experiments.
Conclusions: The study supports our previous statement
that the human protein interactome structure with respect toits hubs has been largely de ﬁned. Elucidating its dynamics
is the next challenge for network medicine.
Supported by: ELIXIR-GR(MIS_5002780)/ ΒΙΤΑΔ -ΔΕ
(MIS_5002469)/EATRIS-GR(MIS_5028091)/INSPIRED
(MIS_5002550).
G.N. Dimitrakopoulos: None. A. Gioutlakis: None. M.
I. Klapa: None. N.K. Moschonas: None.
P16.42B
Gene co-expression network rewiring between pre-
symptomatic and Huntington's disease human blood
samples
C. C. Christodoulou, E. Zamba Papanicolaou,
G. M. Spyrou
Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia,
Cyprus
Introduction: Huntington ’s disease (HD) is a rare,
inherited autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease.Network based bioinformatics approaches are used to
highlight the genes that participate in the co-expression
network differentiation between pre-symptomatic and HDstatus.
Materials and Methods: A microarray dataset “Human
blood expression for Huntington ’s disease versus control ”
(GSE1751), was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus.
Differential expression and gene co-expression analysis
took place with Limma, Parmigene and igraph packages.DyNet, a Cytoscape plugin, was used to visualize the most
rewired nodes and edges in pairwise network comparisons,
namely control vs HD and control vs pre-symptomatic HDgene co-expression networks. The highlighted genes
through DyNet were further analysed through Pathway-
Connector, a post-pathway analysis tool developed by ourgroup, that provides clusters of connected pathways related
to the input genes.
Results: From the top network-based differentiated genes
we kept the ones that correspond to each network and we
performed PathwayConnector analysis. Among the com-
mon pathways between HD and pre-symptomatic, wehighlight the dopaminergic synapse pathway. Furthermore,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1705there are 12 pathways found exclusively in the pre-
symptomatic group and 6 in the HD group.
Conclusion: The genes and pathways obtained through
the presented network-based approach may be further
investigated to understand which genes and proteins are
most important in each stage providing insight regarding thecorresponding implicated mechanisms.
Grant references: European Commission Research
Executive Agency (REA) Grant BIORISE (Num. 669026),under the Spreading Excellence, Widening Participation
Science with and for Society Framework.
C.C. Christodoulou: None. E. Zamba Papanicolaou:
None. G.M. Spyrou: None.
P16.43C
Analysis of genome sequencing data with a minimal
investment IT-infrastructure
J. Alneberg
1, M. U. Garcia2, A. Peltzer3, T. Koch3,
M. Proks4, A. Wilm5, P. A. Ewels6
1National Genomics Infrastructure Stockholm, Science for
Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in
Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Royal Institute ofTechnology KTH, Solna, Sweden,
2Department of
Oncology, Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden,
3Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,4University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark,5A*STAR Genome Institute of
Singapore, Bioinformatics Core Unit, Singapore,Singapore,
6National Genomics Infrastructure Stockholm,
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
The computational analysis of genomic data has become an
integral part of genome research. The sheer volume of thedata produced by whole-genome sequencing requires
researchers to have access to sizeable IT-infrastructure in
order to interpret the data produced. While large high-performance computing might be already available to larger
research groups, especially smaller research groups would
greatly bene ﬁt from a publicly accessible commercial
alternative.
We demonstrate how to setup such an infrastructure with
a small amount of time and a minimal initial investmentusing the Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud infra-
structure. After a walkthrough of the technical solutions
used, the power of this setup is displayed by describing theanalysis of a human WGS sample using the open-source
analysis pipeline Sarek. Using Sarek on the AWS cloud
infrastructure; mapping, germline variant calling andannotation for a human WGS sample (30X coverage) was
performed for less than US-$ 50.This work was supported by the AWS Cloud Credits for
Research program in the form of a computational credit
grant received by Philip A Ewels.
J. Alneberg: None. M.U. Garcia: None. A. Peltzer:
None. T. Koch: None. M. Proks: None. A. Wilm: None.
P.A. Ewels: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equip-
ment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest;
Amazon Web Services.
P16.45A
Long read sequencing of patient-parent trios with
intellectual disability
C. Gilissen
1, A. M. Wenger2, M. Pauper1, M. van de
Vorst1, K. Yauy3, E. Kücük1, M. Kwint1, M. Nelen1,
K. Neveling1, P. Baybayan2, L. Hickey2, J. Korlach2,
H. G. Brunner1,4, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, A. Hoischen1
1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United
States,3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier,
Montpellier, France,4Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, Netherlands
Current short read whole genome sequencing (SRS)
approaches are unable to identify all genetic variation in
an individual. Long-read sequencing (LRS) techniques mayresolve this problem by enabling more sensitive detection of
structural variants (SVs) and variation in low-complexity
regions. In order to con ﬁrm the potential increased
sensitivity of LRS, we selected 5 patients with intellectual
disability and their healthy parents and performed trio LRS
using the Paci ﬁc Biosciences Sequel instrument. These
samples had been previously analyzed extensively with
CNV-microarrays, exome sequencing and by whole
genome SRS, but no disease-causing variant was found.All samples were sequenced to at least 15x coverage, and a
single trio was sequenced to more than 40x coverage. We
found that more than 20Mb of the genome was coveredonly by LRS and not by SRS, of which 600kb within
coding regions. Per individual genome we identi ﬁed up to
22,000 SVs >50bp and >40,000 indels of 20-50bp.Mendelian inheritance concordance was as high as 87-
95% within trios. Per trio we identi ﬁed only 3-32 candidate
de novo SVs. Additionally, we performed single nucleotidevariant (SNV) calling, giving rise to 3-4 million SNVs per
individual, with approximately 24,000 in the exome.
Mendelian inheritance concordance for SNVs was as highas 97%. Taken together this shows that current LRS
performs better for identifying SVs and variation in low-
complexity regions, whereas results for SNVs are close tothose for SRS. These results highlight the potential of LRS
to replace SRS for clinical purposes in the future.1706C. Gilissen: None. A.M. Wenger: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park,
California, USA. M. Pauper: None. M. van de Vorst:
None. K. Yauy: None. E. Kücük: None. M. Kwint: None.
M. Nelen: None. K. Neveling: None. P. Baybayan: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. L. Hickey: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. J. Korlach: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. H.G. Brunner:
None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. A. Hoischen: None.
P16.46B
LOY Associated Transcriptional Effect (LATE) inimmune cells measured by single cell RNAseq and bulk
RNAseq
J. Mattisson
1,2, J. Halvardson1,2, B. Torabi Moghadam1,2,
M. Danielsson1,2, H. Davies1,2, J. Dumanski1,2,3,
L. A. Forsberg1,2,4
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,2Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,
3Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Gdansk,
Gdansk, Poland,4Beijer Laboratory of Genome Research,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in blood cells is the
most common somatic human mutation and it is associated
with all-cause mortality and increased risk for common
disease such as cancer, Alzheimer ’s disease, CVD, AMD,
autoimmune conditions and diabetes. Genes located on the
Y chromosome, both in the male-speci ﬁc region (MSY) and
in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR), are involved inimportant processes such as transcription, translation,
chromatin remodeling, ribosome assembly, transcription
factor binding and post translational modi ﬁcations. LOY
therefore has the potential to cause genome wide dysregula-
tion of gene expression in affected cells. Here we present
results from transcriptome sequencing of freshly collectedperipheral blood cells using two different technologies, i.e.
scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq, the latter performed on
selected immune cell fractions sorted using ﬂuorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS). The results shows that: 1)
LOY can be measured from RNA and that results are
comparable with DNA-based measurements, 2) that theexpression of genes located in the MSY and PAR regions of
chromosome Y follows predictable patterns with lower
expression as a consequence of LOY, and 3) that LOYAssociated Transcriptional Effect (LATE) can also be
identi ﬁed in autosomal genes. The results indicate thatLOY in immune cells cause dysregulation of gene
expression with important functional consequences for
affected cells and individuals. Together with previous
ﬁndings that men with LOY in blood cells have a greater
risk for mortality and disease, these new results helps
explain why men live shorter lives compared to females.
Funded by ERC-StG#679744 and Swedish-Reseach-
Council#2017-03762.
J. Mattisson: None. J. Halvardson: None. B. Torabi
Moghadam: None. M. Danielsson: None. H. Davies:
None. J. Dumanski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; CrayInnovation AB. L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Modest; Cray Innovation AB.
P16.47C
Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) dynamics overtime, estimated with a new method
M. Danielsson
1, J. Halvardson1, H. Davies1, B. Torabi
Moghadam1, J. Mattisson1, E. Rychlicka-Buniowska1,
J. Heintz1, L. Lannfelt2, V. Giedraitis2, M. Ingelsson2,
J. P. Dumanski1, L. A. Forsberg1
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala, Sweden,2Department of Public Health and
Caring Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden
The most common human somatic mutation is mosaic loss
of chromosome Y (LOY), associated with many severe
diseases and outcomes i.e. all-cause mortality, non-
haematological cancers, Alzheimer ’s disease and diabetes
amongst others. The method of choice for LOY estimation
is SNP-array, because the generated data originally intended
for GWAS is now used to for LOY studies. However onebig drawback with SNP-array is the data-unit (log R Ratio),
making it dif ﬁcult to interpret and compare with LOY
measurements using other methods.
Here I present a new method to transform SNP-array data
into percentage of LOY cells. This method was derived
from LOY measurements from 121 men at 93 years of age,using three different methods i.e. SNP-array, whole genome
sequencing and droplet digital PCR targeting AMELY and
AMELX . This standardization was applied to samples from
a unique cohort consisting of LOY measurements from 276
men, sampled at different time points over a period of up to
22.2 years. Most of the individuals had an increase inmeasured LOY over time but complex LOY dynamics
could also be seen, likely due to aberrant clonal expansions.
The project is funded by an ERC-StG as well as other
sources.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1707M. Danielsson: None. J. Halvardson: None. H. Davies:
None. B. Torabi Moghadam: None. J. Mattisson: None.
E. Rychlicka-Buniowska: None. J. Heintz: None. L.
Lannfelt: None. V. Giedraitis: None. M. Ingelsson: None.
J.P. Dumanski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; CrayInnovation AB. L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Modest; Cray Innovation AB.
P16.48D
Mendelian Randomization analysis of celiac GWASreveals a blood expression signature with diagnostic
potential in absence of gluten consumption
N. Fernandez-Jimenez
1,2, J. R. Bilbao1,3
1University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa,
Spain,2Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Institute,
Barakaldo, Spain,3Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research
Institute - CIBERDEM, Barakaldo, Spain
Introduction: Celiac disease (CeD) is an immune-mediated
enteropathy with a strong genetic component for which themain environmental trigger is dietary gluten. Being on a
gluten-containing diet is necessary for a correct diagnosis.
We hypothesize that merging different levels of genomicinformation through Mendelian Randomization (MR) can
help discover genetic biomarkers useful in the diagnosis of
different conditions such as CeD.
Methods: We apply a MR-based approach confronting
results from the largest to-date genome-wide association
study (GWAS) on CeD and from expression and methyla-tion quantitative trait loci(QTL) databases. Particularly, we
search for the overlapping hits of the different MR analyses
performed and interrogate the prioritized genes in inde-pendent expression databases to test their diagnostic
potential.
Results: We identify UBE2L3 , an ubiquitin ligase located
in a CeD-associated region whose expression is altered in
peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of CeD patients on
gluten-free diet (GFD). The relative expression of UBE2L3
isoforms predicts CeD with 100% speci ﬁcity and sensitivity
and thus could be used as a diagnostic marker, especially in
the absence of gluten consumption.
Conclusions: The clinical interest of this ﬁnding is in line
with the rising frequency of both self-reported wheat sen-
sitivity and auto-imposed GFD, a phenomenon that is hin-dering the diagnosis of CeD. Additionally, our strategy
could be applicable to other disorders in which diagnosis in
the absence of the disease-provoking insult is challenging,and is a good demonstration of the translation of the resultsof MR to the routine clinical practice. Funding: ISCIII 16/
00258 and GVSAN2018/111086 to JRB.
N. Fernandez-Jimenez: None. J.R. Bilbao: None.
P16.50B
Gut microbiota abundances relate to gene methylationin blood in the Dutch LifeLines Deep cohort
A. Demirkan
1,2, A. Kurilshikov1, S. Jankipersadsing1,3,
H. Westra1, M. Bonder1,J .F u1,3, L. Franke1,
C. Wijmenga1,4, A. Zhernakova1
1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands,2School of Biosciences and Medicine,
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom,
3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands,4K.G. Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research
Centre, Department of Immunology, University of Oslo,Oslo, Norway
The gut microbiome is under investigation for its impact on
human health. Since gene methylation can capture the long-
term effects on gene regulation, its role as a determinant or
target of gut microbial composition is of special interest. Byintegrating the population based data from the LifeLines-
Deep cohort, we investigated the relations between gene
methylation in blood and gut microbiota abundances. Themicrobiome data were generated by 16S (V4 region)
sequencing of the DNA isolated from stool samples, and
processed according to the MiBioGen pipeline available athttps://github.com/alexa-kur/miQTL_cookbook . 271 taxa
present in at least 10% of the individuals were selected.
Methylation was detected by Illumina 450K methylationarray, and dasen-normalized M-values were calculated. For
each taxa we performed an epigenome-wide association
study correcting for environmental, intrinsic and hostgenetic factors in the complete set of 702 individuals.
Although no CpG-taxa pair reached experiment-wide
signiﬁcance calculated as false discovery rate, 49 pairs
with P-value < 2.4 × 10
-7passed the signi ﬁcance threshold
set for a single test. At genus level the most striking
associations appear between Lachnospiraceae sp . abun-
dance and methylation near gene RAB18 (3.68 × 10-9),
Coriobacteriaceae sp . with ARFGAP2 (1.86 × 10-9) and
Bacteroides sp . with LRP3 . When integrating the shot-gun
metagenomics data from the same samples, we found that
Bacteroides dorei is the species responsible for the
association with LRP3 (6.15 × 10-7). We demonstrate the
potential impact of gut microbiome on the host epigenetics1708and suggest candidate regulatory pathways which could be
stimulated by distinct bacterial genera.
A. Demirkan: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. S. Janki-
persadsing: None. H. Westra: None. M. Bonder: None. J.
Fu: None. L. Franke: None. C. Wijmenga: None. A.
Zhernakova: None.
P16.51C
Remus: a web application for prioritization ofregulatory variants in monogenic diseases
P. Sztromwasser
1, D. Skrzypczak2, A. Michalak1,3,
W. Fendler1,4
1Department of Biostatistics and Translational Medicine,
Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, Poland,2Wroclaw
University of Enviromental and Life Sciences, Wroc ław,
Poland,3Department of Pediatrics, Diabetology,
Endocrinology and Nephrology, Medical University of
Lodz, Łódź, Poland,4Department of Radiation Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,Boston, MA, United States
Introduction: Analysis of variants in distant regulatory
elements could improve current 25-50% yield of genetic
testing for monogenic diseases. However, the vast size of
the regulome, great number of variants, and dif ﬁculty in
predicting their phenotypic impact make searching patho-
genic variants in the regulatory genome challenging. New
tools for identi ﬁcation of regulatory variants based on their
relevance to the phenotype are needed.
Methods: We used tissue-speci ﬁc regulatory locimapped
by ENCODE and FANTOM5, together with microRNA -gene interactions from miRTarBase and miRWalk, to
develop Remus - a system for identi ﬁcation of tissue-
speciﬁc regulatory regions ( https://github.com/seru71/
remus ). Remus combines regulatory features linked to
known disease-associated genes, and ﬁlters them using
activity status in target tissues. For user convenience,Remus provides a web interface and facilitates in-browser
ﬁltering of variant ﬁles, making it suitable for sensitive data.
Results: To evaluate our approach, we used a set of distal
regulatory mutations reported causative for 23 distinct
monogenic disorders, and a manually curated list of tissues
affected by these disorders. Out of 23 mutated loci
(enhancers and promoters) located 100bp-120,000bp away
from the regulated genes, Remus correctly identi ﬁed 19.
Conclusion: Remus facilitates identi ﬁcation of regulatory
regions potentially associated with a monogenic disease,
and can supplement classical analysis of coding variation
with an aim of improving diagnostic yield of WGSexperiments.Project funded by National Science Center in Poland
(2016/23/P/NZ2/04251). This project has received funding
from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under the Marie Sk łodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 665778.
P. Sztromwasser: None. D. Skrzypczak: None. A.
Michalak: None. W. Fendler: None.
P16.52D
An integrated bioinformatic pipeline for accurate and
ﬂexible DNA copy-number analysis from next-
generation sequencing platforms
A. Mikulasova
1, C. Ashby2, B. A. Walker2, G. J. Morgan2,
M. J. Xavier3, F. K. Mastrorosa3, K. R. Engelhardt1,
A. Skelton4, D. Rico1, J. A. Veltman3,5, S. Hambleton1,6
1Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,2Myeloma Center,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock,
AR, United States,3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,
4Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,5Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and
Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
6Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom
Introduction: DNA copy-number variations (CNV) are a
part of the human genome variability as well as associated
with pathologies, including congenital genetic disorders andtumors. DNA-microarrays still dominate in CNV detection,
however next-generation sequencing (NGS) is slowly
taking over using coverage-based tools. In this study, wedeveloped a comprehensive in-house bioinformatic pipeline
that integrates CNV and loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
analysis from various NGS-platforms and provides exten-sive annotation for routine use in research and diagnostics.
Methods: GATK4 tools were used to process bam ﬁles
and data denoising. Allele-frequency (AF) data wasobtained from gnomAD. CNV segments were called using
the in-house algorithm and annotated by Variant Effect
Predictor. Additional scripts were developed for AFdenoising, visualization, QC and reporting. The pipeline
was evaluated in two WES datasets (male infertility and
primary immunode ﬁciency) and targeted-sequencing of cell
line U266, focused on Ig-genes.
Results: Using the pipeline, we observed effective noise
reduction even in bam ﬁles previously tested by other tools
and displaying GC-wave. Independent validation showed
that CNV detection was accurate, even within the Ig-lociAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1709with complex rearrangements. Incorporating AF, we con-
ﬁrmed losses/gains and identi ﬁed CN neutral LOH
(cnnLOH) in addition to CNV. Our in-house segmentation
offered the ﬂexibility to adapt speci ﬁcity and sensitivity,
based on quality and coverage conditions. The visualization
and data tables allowed reliable CNV interpretation.
Conclusions: We developed a robust and effective
pipeline for CNV and cnnLOH detection. The pipeline is
NGS-platform independent and can be adapted to matchdata segmentation, based on experimental conditions.
A. Mikulasova: None. C. Ashby: None. B.A. Walker:
None. G.J. Morgan: None. M.J. Xavier: None. F.K.
Mastrorosa: None. K.R. Engelhardt: None. A. Skelton:
None. D. Rico: None. J.A. Veltman: None. S.
Hambleton: None.
P16.53A
Homozygosity mapping from small targeted NGS panelsusing SavvyHomozygosity - getting more from less
M. N. Wakeling, E. De Franco, T. W. Laver,
S. E. Flanagan, M. Johnson, K. Patel, A. T. Hattersley,
S. Ellard
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom
Diagnosis of monogenic diabetes and hyperinsulinism is
often achieved using targeted next generation sequencing
(NGS). For consanguineous patients without a geneticdiagnosis, the identi ﬁcation of regions of homozygosity can
assist with both diagnosis and gene discovery. This is
usually obtained using a microarray, or it can be calculatedfrom genome sequencing data.
We aimed to develop a novel method to utilise the off-
target reads from existing targeted NGS panel data toidentify regions of homozygosity genome-wide.
We developed SavvyHomozygosity, which uses off-
target reads from targeted NGS data in combination withlinkage disequilibrium to calculate regions of homo-
zygosity. We used data from 170 samples sequenced using
both targeted NGS (average 3.4M reads per sample) andgenome sequencing (mean read depth 35) to estimate the
sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of the method.
Regions of homozygosity larger than 3Mb were detected
with sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of 77%, and 10Mb with
sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of 93%. Detection was not limited
to regions of the genome that are targeted by thesequencing panel.
SavvyHomozygosity identi ﬁes regions of homozygosity
genome-wide in samples sequenced using a targeted NGSpanel. The resulting data can be used to assist the discovery
of causative variants, and can also be used with manysamples to identify “hot spots ”in the genome that may
pinpoint an as yet undiscovered disease gene. The homo-
zygosity data can also be used to identify candidate samples
for more extensive sequencing.
SE and ATH are the recipients of a Wellcome Trust
Senior Investigator award (grant number WT098395/Z/12/Z).
M.N. Wakeling: None. E. De Franco: None. T.W.
Laver: None. S.E. Flanagan: None. M. Johnson: None.
K. Patel: None. A.T. Hattersley:
None. S. Ellard: None.
P16.54B
Analyses of olfactory related genes
T. Olender1, T. E. Jones2, E. Bruford2, A. Alkelai3,
D. Lancet1
1The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel,
2European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome
Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,3Columbia University
Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States
We study genes that participate in the olfactory pathway.
We previously published RNAseq from human olfactoryepithelium, a rarely studied tissue, and obtained a whole
transcriptome overview. The results were incorporated into
a study of 8 Israeli families with congenital general anosmia(CGA). Identi ﬁed mutations in olfactory developmental
genes suggest that the de ﬁcit results from abnormal
embryonic development of the olfactory neuronal pathway.
In parallel, we study the evolution of the olfactory
receptor genes (ORs), GPCRs with a crucial role in odor
detection. The ORs undergo many species-speci ﬁc dupli-
cations/deletions, resulting in complex orthology relation-
ships. While for human a widely accepted nomenclature is
available, based on phylogenetic classi ﬁcation into 18
families and further into subfamilies, for other mammals
different nomenclature systems are used, concealing
important evolutionary insights. We developed a systematicclassi ﬁer for assigning a uni ﬁed human-based nomenclature
to any OR gene based on inter-species hierarchical pairwise
similarities, and applied it to the OR repertoires of 7mammals and zebra ﬁsh (10,247 ORs). This nomenclature
generates a framework for evolutionary studies, where
textual symbol comparison allows an immediate identi ﬁ-
cation of potential orthologs and species-speci ﬁc expan-
sions/deletions, e.g. Or52e5 and Or52e5b represent a
duplication of OR52E5 in rat. Another example is the
absence of OR6Z subfamily among primate OR symbols. In
other mammals, OR6Z members are disposed in one
genomic cluster, suggesting a large deletion in the primatelineage.1710This uni ﬁed nomenclature is applied by the Vertebrate
Gene Nomenclature Committee and its implementation is
under consideration by relevant species-speci ﬁc nomen-
clature committees.
Support: U41HG003345 (NHGRI)
T. Olender: None. T.E. Jones: None. E. Bruford:
None. A. Alkelai: None. D. Lancet: None.
P16.56D
Systematic integration of genetic and epigenetic data
yields novel insights into craniofacial development and
orofacial clefting
J. Welzenbach1, N. Hammond2, M. Bartusel3,4,
E. Mangold1, A. Rada-Iglesias3,4, M. J. Dixon2,
M. Knapp5, K. U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Center for
Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,4Cologne Excellence Cluster
for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases(CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
5Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Craniofacial development (CD) is a complex embryonic
process that shapes the human face. Defects in CD mightlead to forms of orofacial clefting, such as nonsyndromic
cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P). Despite recent
success by GWAS, the biological interpretation has largelybeen hampered by the lack of relevant tissue and the
location of risk loci within non-coding regions. Here, we
generated a new multi-ethnic meta-analysis on nsCL/P bycombining three recent nsCL/P GWAS. Subsequently, these
data were systematically integrated with epigenetic data
from human neural crest cells (NCC) and embryonic facialtissue (eFT), covering the entire period of CD. In our meta-
analysis, ﬁve novel risk loci were identi ﬁed, increasing the
number of nsCL/P risk loci to 45. For about 50%, availabledata on histone modi ﬁcations and chromatin accessibility
revealed distinct epigenetic activity patterns in NCC and
eFT. The Combination with interaction data revealed novelcandidate genes with yet unknown roles in CD. For
instance, at the 1p22 locus, we con ﬁrm the presence of
active enhancers within ABCA4 that regulate ARHGAP29
expression. However, our data also suggest that another
gene, ABCD3 , becomes activated at later stages of CD. This
ﬁrst systematic integration of functional data from relevant
embryonic cell types provides new insights into the etiology
of nsCL/P and the biological impact of associated variants.Our data indicate that different genes become activated and
repressed in a time- and tissue-speci ﬁc manner, which
implies that the “one locus - one candidate gene ”theory
might be too simplistic, at least for nsCL/P.
J. Welzenbach: None. N. Hammond: None. M. Bar-
tusel: None. E. Mangold: None. A. Rada-Iglesias: None.
M.J. Dixon: None. M. Knapp: None. K.U.
Ludwig: None.
P16.57A
When the outlier is the signal: Denoising autoencoders
to pinpoint causes of rare diseases from RNA-seq data
C. Mertes
1, I. Scheller1, F. Brechtmann1,
A. Matusevi čiūtė1, V. A. Yépez1,2, H. Prokisch3,4,
J. Gagneur1,2
1Department of Informatics, Technical University of
Munich, Garching, Germany,2Quantitative Biosciences
Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich,
Munich, Germany,3Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany,4Institute of
Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany
For most individuals with a suspected rare Mendelian
disorder, no clear pathogenic variant can be pinpointed afterundergoing genome sequencing. A promising complemen-
tary avenue is to identify causes of rare diseases as aberrant
regulatory events (RNA level or splicing) in RNAsequencing data. However, existing methods for detecting
aberrant regulatory events in RNA-seq data either lack
assessments of statistical signi ﬁcance or rely on subjective
manual corrections for confounders. Here, we address these
issues by using denoising autoencoders as generic tool to
detect outliers while automatically controlling for co-variation resulting from technical, environmental, or
common genetic variations. Our model to detect expression
outliers, implemented in the Bioconductor package OUT-RIDER, uses the negative binomial distribution to model
RNA-seq read counts. OUTRIDER improves upon state-of-
the-art expression outlier methods for detecting simulatedoutliers, genes with rare variants possibly causing non-sense
mediated decay in the GTEx dataset, and pathogenic rare
expression events in a rare disease cohort. We will alsopresent unpublished results on splicing outlier detection
based on the beta-binomial distribution. We use an
annotation-free approach to detect novel splice sites, andconsider both exon-exon junction reads and reads over-
lapping exon-intron boundaries to detect intron retention
events. Application to a mitochondrial disease cohortdemonstrated increased sensitivity over our previous
splicing outlier method and led to a new diagnostic byAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1711identifying an aberrant exon truncation in the gene TAZ.
Altogether, these results indicate that employing denoising
autoencoders may become a general strategy to identify
causes of rare diseases in omics data.
C. Mertes: None. I. Scheller: None. F. Brechtmann:
None. A. Matusevi čiūtė:None. V.A. Yépez: None. H.
Prokisch: None. J. Gagneur: None.
P16.58B
Guidelines for the detection of somatic mutations from
whole exome sequencing data: a case study of
Parkinson's disease patients
I. Lobon1,2, D. Juan1, J. Ávila3,4, T. Marques-Bonet1,5,6,
E. Soriano2,4,6
1Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientí ﬁcas‐Universitat Pompeu Fabra),
Barcelona, Spain,2Department of Cell Biology, Physiology
and Immunology, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de Biología
Molecular "Severo Ochoa", CBMSO, CSIC-UAM, Madrid,
Spain,4Center for Networked Biomedical Research on
neurodegenerative diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain,
5CNAG ‐CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona, Spain,6ICREA Academia, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Accurate calling of somatic mutations from
bulk sequencing data still poses a challenge outside the
scenario of clonal expansion in cancer. Low frequencymutations present in a tissue have been shown to exist in
other tissues, even of different germ layer origin. Conse-
quently, de ﬁning tissue-speci ﬁc variants is an inef ﬁcient
strategy for detecting these mutations, which increases the
need to identify the confounding factors hampering the
discrimination of true somatic variants from noise. As acase study, we assessed the detection of somatic mutations
in sporadic Parkinson ’s disease (PD).
Methods: We sequenced the whole exomes of substantia
nigra, striatum, neocortex, cerebellum and peripheral blood
from 10 PD patients. Con ﬁdence of detected variants was
assessed by comparative analyses.
Results: Inter-tissue and inter-individual comparisons
showed high variability of variant allele frequency (VAF)
even for high con ﬁdence heterozygous variants (21.1% of
calls with a VAF <0.4 or >0.6). Moreover, we found that
on-target calls VAFs are signi ﬁcantly shifted towards the
reference allele, demonstrating a probe bias in exomesequencing data relevant for this application. Remarkably,
we also observed that alignment artifacts derived from
unresolved regions still emerge even after removing geno-mic regions dif ﬁcult to align, such as low mappability
regions or segmental duplications. Based on theseobservations, we propose a series of guidelines to call
somatic mutations and describe a set of high con ﬁdence
calls from 10 PD patients.
Conclusions: The use of multiple tissues or replicates as
well as awareness of the error sources are of great impor-
tance to call somatic mutations.
I. Lobon: None. D. Juan: None. J. Ávila: None. T.
Marques-Bonet: None. E. Soriano: None.
P16.59C
The gut microbiome of Kashmiri women with polycystic
ovary syndrome shows signi ﬁcant enrichment at
multiple genera, including Bi ﬁdobacterium
M. Kaakinen
1,2, A. Demirkan3,2, S. Hassan1,4,
M. A. Ganie5, J. Selvin4, P. Vogazianos6,7, C. Shammas8,
A. Antoniades6, I. Prokopenko1,2
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
2University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom,
3University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,
4Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India,5Sheri
Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar, India,
6Stremble Ventures Ltd, Limassol, Cyprus,7European
University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus,8AVVA
Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Limassol, Cyprus
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine
condition in women of reproductive age characterized by
polycystic ovaries, hyperandrogenism, oligo- or amenor-rhea, and a constellation of metabolic derangements. Gut
microbiome composition might contribute to PCOS sus-
ceptibility. We pro ﬁled the microbiome in DNA isolated
from faecal samples by 16S rRNA sequencing of 19/20
Kashmiri (India) women with/without PCOS. We excluded
bacteria not detected in at least 1/3 of the subjects or withless than 0.1% average relative abundance. We compared
the relative abundances of 40/58 operational taxonomic
units in family/genus level between cases and controls, andin relation to 33 hormonal and metabolic factors, by
multivariate analyses adjusted for stool consistency, day of
menstrual cycle at sample collection, sequencing read depthand age, and corrected for multiple testing. For the ﬁrst
time, we detected a positive signi ﬁcant link between the
butyrate production-related Eubacterium and follicle-
stimulating hormone levels. We identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant
enrichment in Biﬁdobacteriaceae (median 6.07% vs.
2.77%) and Aerococcaceae (0.03% vs. 0.004%), whereas
we detected lower Peptococcaceae levels (0.16% vs.
0.25%) in PCOS cases. Additionally, seven genera were
signiﬁcantly enriched in PCOS cases: Sarcina, Alkalibac-
terium and Megasphaera , and the previously PCOS-
associated Biﬁdobacterium, Collinsella ,Paraprevotella1712andLactobacillus . We observed enrichment of Collinsella
and Paraprevotella with higher fasting blood glucose
levels, and Paraprevotella andAlkalibacterium with larger
hip and waist circumference, and weight. We show a
relationship between gut microbiome composition and
PCOS, and link it to speci ﬁc metabolic and hormonal
predictors of reproductive health in Indian women.
Funding: Newton Bhabha (BT/IN/UK/DBT-BC/2015-
16), WT205915.
M. Kaakinen: None. A. Demirkan: None. S. Hassan:
None. M.A. Ganie: None. J. Selvin: None. P. Vogazianos:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Stremble
Ventures Ltd. C. Shammas: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AVVA Pharmaceuticals Ltd. A. Anto-
niades: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Stremble Ventures Ltd. I. Prokopenko: None.
P16.60D
Genetic clusters and population strati ﬁcation in the
Estonian Biobank and its association with complex traits
R. Mägi1, N. Pervjakova1, S. E. Ojavee2, K. Läll1,
M. Mändul1, A. P. Morris1,3, K. Fischer1
1Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
2Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, Tartu, Estonia,
3Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, United Kingdom
Introduction: It has been shown that principal components
(PCs) mainly indicate individuals ’geographic ancestry.
Therefore, the PCs have often been used for adjusting
genome-wide association analyses for population strati ﬁca-
tion. It can be assumed that this is particularly relevant in a
genetically heterogeneous population. Large-scale popula-
tion-based biobanks have increased the potential to studythe impact of ﬁne-scale strati ﬁcation and cryptic relatedness
also in small and homogeneous populations.
Methods: We analysed 49,363 participants from the
EGCUT cohort genotyped using various Illumina arrays.
The individuals are sampled from all counties of Estonia.
We calculated the ﬁrst 250 PCs using 61,044 independent
variants.
Results: As most of the ﬁrst 250 PCs were signi ﬁcantly
associated with the county of birth, we show that it is mostefﬁcient to use all of them in the k-means algorithm. Next,
we tested the association of cluster membership, actual
county of birth as well as the individual PCs with prevalentcoronary heart disease (CAD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D),
and polygenic risk scores (GRS) for the same diseases.
Three ﬁrst PCs as well as county of birth were signi ﬁcantly
associated with prevalent CAD status, but not with T2D.
The GRS for T2D was signi ﬁcantly associated with the ﬁrsteleven PCs and the GRS for CAD with ﬁrst and third PC,
but both GRSs were associated with the cluster
membership.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that although PCs may
help to adjust for population strati ﬁcation, a genetic cluster
indicator may be more ef ﬁcient in capturing the con-
founding due to geographic variation.
R. Mägi: None. N. Pervjakova: None. S.E. Ojavee:
None. K. Läll: None. M. Mändul: None. A.P. Morris:
None. K. Fischer: None.
P16.61A
GENETIC DETERMINANTS OF
TRANSCRIPTIONAL VARIATION IN PRIMARY
HUMAN MONOCYTES ACROSS MULTIPLECONTEXTS
I. Nassiri
1, S. Danielli1, E. Lau2, J. Gilchrist1, H. Al-
Mossawi3, E. Mahe1, J. C. Knight2, B. P. Fairfax1
1Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom,2Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,3NDORMS,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Inter-individual variation in the regulation of gene expres-
sion is a key driver of phenotypic diversity. Monocytesform sentinel cells within the innate immune system and are
implicated in numerous in ﬂammatory disease processes.
We have previously found a signi ﬁcant proportion of
monocyte eQTL to be detectable only after activation. The
degree to which activation state modulates genetically
determined gene-splicing events and differential transcriptusage is unclear however. Here we use 100bp paired-end
RNA-sequencing to systematically explore genetic determi-
nants of gene-expression and isoform usage across mono-cytes from 192 individuals in the naive state and post-
exposure to IFN γor lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We observe
novel splicing effects and unappreciated complexity atmany loci associated with a high degree of chromatin
accessibility. We similarly replicate and extend previous
observations of trans acting master-regulatory regions (e.g.
NFE2L3 ,IRF2 ,IFNB1 ). Speci ﬁcally, we identify 7,275
lead eQTL for 7,631 transcripts. We ﬁnd isoform QTL
show a high degree of context speci ﬁcity, with the majority
being unique to one treatment state. We apply an empirical
Bayesian approach to model context-speci ﬁc eQTL and
facilitate the identi ﬁcation and prioritization of the most
likely causal variants. We integrate these results with
genomic regulatory features, chromatin interaction datasets,
and summary-statistics from 761 UK-Biobank traits tofurther our understanding of the biological role of context-
eQTL. Our ﬁndings provide novel insights into the context-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1713speciﬁc role of genetic effects in the regulation of the
transcriptional machinery in primary immune cells and
identify new potential insights into complex disease
processes.
I. Nassiri: None. S. Danielli: None. E. Lau: None. J.
Gilchrist: None. H. Al-Mossawi: None. E. Mahe: None.
J.C. Knight: None. B.P. Fairfax: None.
P16.62B
Whole platelet transcriptome pro ﬁling con ﬁrms a
cytoskeleton remodeling in platelet components
associated with adverse transfusion reactions
D. Awounou1, C. Barlier1, C. Aloui1, J. Fagan1,2,
F. Salin3, C. Boury3, I. Lesur4, C. Mounier5,
E. Tavernier5, F. Cognasse1,2, O. Garraud6,2,
L. Sandrine1,2
1French Blood Establishment (EFS) Auvergne-Rhône-
Alpes, Saint-Etienne, France,2GIMAP-EA3064, University
of Lyon, Saint-Etienne, France,3UMR Biodiversity of
Genes and Ecosystems, Genomics Platform, INRA, Cestas,
France,4Helixventure, Mérignac, France,5ICLN-
Cancerology Institute Lucien Neuwirth, Saint-Priest enJarez, France,
6INTS - Institut National de la Transfusion
Sanguine, Paris, France
Introduction: Platelets are small anucleate cells that play a
key role in hemostasis and thrombosis. Blood platelets
destined for the transfusion release panoply of moleculesduring preparation and storage. The leukoreduction process
made the transfusion safer but did not abolish the adverse
events. The purpose of this work was to study the wholeplatelet transcriptome when found in association with
adverse transfusion reactions (ATRs).
Methods: Total RNA isolated from six buffy-coat-
derived pooled platelet components (PPC) were sequenced
using the Ion-Proton ®technology. The alignment of the
reads to the hg19 reference genome were done with STARsoftware. The genes were quanti ﬁed, using the EM algo-
rithm method implemented in Partek Flow ®software.
DESeq2, Edge R and Limma voom (three R packages) wereused for differentially expressed (DE) gene identi ﬁcation.
Gene-Gene interactions and clustering analyses were per-
formed with STRING db to identify hubs genes and clustersof interests. PANTHER allowed performing the functional
enrichment analysis.
Results: Among 79 dysregulated DE genes (common
with the 3 methods), 6 transcripts (score con ﬁdence: 90%)
encoding proteins were found to be related to the dysre-
gulated network of the cytoskeleton remodeling, associatedwith a cellular reorganization. RhoC was strongly present,
with DE genes involved in the signaling of chemokines.Conclusion: Platelets in PC having led to clinical ATRs
in the transfused patients were found to exhibit profound
transcriptome changes. This study contributes to better
understand the pathophysiological aspect of ATRs that
appear to be associated with the modi ﬁcation of the platelet
cytoskeleton. Grant EFS- APR-2016-32, ART-INTS, “Les-
Amis-de-Rémi ”, France.
D. Awounou: None. C. Barlier: None. C. Aloui: None.
J. Fagan: None. F. Salin: None. C. Boury: None. I.
Lesur: None. C. Mounier: None. E. Tavernier: None. F.
Cognasse: None. O. Garraud: None. L. Sandrine: None.
P16.63C
Finding the diagnosis for rare disease patients in
southern Sweden by coordination of high-resolutiongenomic arrays (CytoScan HD/XON, Thermo Fisher
Scienti ﬁc) and massive parallel sequencing (CREv2,
Agilent/NextSeq500, Illumina)
S. Samuelsson
1,2, M. Bidgoli3, S. Gruvberger-Saal1,
K. Karrman3,2, H. Ehrencrona3,2, L. Olsson-Arvidsson3,2,
C. Montén1, M. Sundberg1, J. Laustsen1, E. Futoma-
Kazmierczak1, P. Piccinelli1, B. Hallström1, P. Storm1,
V. Henmyr1, E. Eklund4, M. Heidenblad1, T. Jonson1,2
1Clinical Genomics Lund, Dep. of Clinical Genetics &
Pathology, Lund, Sweden,2Dep. of Laboratory Medicine,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden,3Dep. of Clinical Genetics & Pathology, Lund,
Sweden,4Dep. of Clinical Sciences, Section for Pediatrics,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Introduction: Until recently, it was dif ﬁcult to identify
genetic causes of heterogeneous diseases and syndromes.
Today, advances in two crucial techniques, high resolution
genomic arrays and massive parallel sequencing, makes itpossible to investigate essentially all genes in parallel. A
consensus has been established that parallel or sequential
genomic array and exome analysis, should be considered asﬁrst-line tests in the evaluation of children with e.g.,
unexplained intellectual disability and/or congenital
anomalies.
Methods and Results: The main objective of the pre-
sented work ﬂow is to provide a smooth and ﬁnancially
viable pipeline to diagnose rare disease patients in southernSweden by combining genome wide copy number detection
and innovative SNP/UPD-analysis of genomic arrays with
exome sequencing. The presented results and analysispipeline, including regionally developed bioinformatic and
visualization tools, are based on comprehensive clinical
validation and experience from 9 years of genomic arrayand 4 years of exome sequencing. A complementary1714method, CytoScan XON, was implemented in 2018 to
detect copy number variants down to 1 exon.
Conclusions: We conclude that genomic arrays and
exome sequencing are broad and powerful methods which
complement each other, and we believe these methods
provide a strong foundation throughout the foreseen tran-sition towards whole genome sequencing. We further con-
clude that, in a clinical setting, together with careful
standardized phenotyping and local expert interpretationand bioinformatic teams, the described work ﬂow can deli-
ver a diagnostic yield of >50% at a sustainable cost to the
regional health care system.
S. Samuelsson: None. M. Bidgoli: None. S. Gruvber-
ger-Saal: None. K. Karrman: None. H. Ehrencrona:
None. L. Olsson-Arvidsson: None. C. Montén: None. M.
Sundberg: None. J. Laustsen: None. E. Futoma-Kaz-
mierczak: None. P. Piccinelli: None. B. Hallström: None.
P. Storm: None. V. Henmyr: None. E. Eklund: None. M.
Heidenblad: None. T. Jonson: None.
P16.64D
Detecting pathogenic repeat expansions from genome
sequence data
R. L. McLaughlin
Smur ﬁt Institute of Genetics, Dublin, Ireland
Repeat expansions are an important class of genetic
variation in neurological diseases and may represent aconvergent aetiological molecular mechanism. However,
the identi ﬁcation of novel repeat expansions using conven-
tional sequencing methods is a challenge due to their typicallengths relative to short sequence reads and dif ﬁculty in
producing accurate and unique alignments for repetitive
sequence. However, this latter property can be harnessedwhen using paired-end short read sequencing data to infer
the possible locations of repeat expansions and other
structural variation.
Here we present REscan, a fast and lightweight command
line utility that infers the possible locations of repeat
expansions from paired-end short read sequencing data byreporting the proportion of reads orientated towards a locus
that do not have an adequately mapped mate. A high
number for this statistic relative to a population of dataindicates the location of a possible repeat expansion that can
be cross-referenced against structural variant calls derived
from alternative algorithms and brought forward forexperimental follow-up. We validate this approach using
whole-genome sequence data for 259 cases of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, of which 25 are positive for a large hex-anucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72 , determined by
repeat-primed PCR. We show that REscan has gooddiscriminative accuracy in identifying repeat expansions
from paired-end sequence data, and application genome-
wide can be used in an initial screen to infer the locations of
other repeat expansions, thus accelerating the discovery of
novel disease-relevant genetic variation.
Funding: MND Association (957-799); Science Founda-
tion Ireland (17/CDA/4737)
R.L. McLaughlin: None.
P16.65A
SPiP: a Splicing Prediction Pipeline addressing the
diversity of splice alterations, validated on a curateddiagnostic set of 2,468 exonic and intronic variants
R. Leman
1,2,3, B. Parfait4, D. Vidaud4, E. Girodon4,
L. Pacot4, G. Le Gac5,C .K a5, C. Ferec5, Y. Fichou5,
C. Quesnelle2, E. Muller2, D. Vaur2, L. Castéra2,
A. Ricou2, H. Tubeuf1, O. Soukarieh1, P. Gaildrat1,
F. Riant6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, V. Caux-Moncoutier8,
N. Boutry-Kryza9, F. Bonnet-Dorion10, I. Schultz11,
M. Rossing12, M. Parsons13, A. Spurdle13, A. Martins1,
C. Houdayer1, S. Krieger1,2,3
1Inserm U1245 Genomics and Personalized Medecine in
Cancer and Neurological Disorders, Normandie Univ,
UNIROUEN, Normandy Centre for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France,2Laboratoire de
biologie et de génétique du cancer, Centre François
Baclesse, Caen, France,3Normandie Université,
UNICAEN, Caen, France,4Service de Génétique et
Biologie Moléculaires, APHP, HUPC, Hôpital Cochin,
Paris, France,5Inserm U1078, Genetics, Functional
Genomics and Biotechnology, Université de Bretagne,Brest, France,
6Laboratoire de Génétique, AP-HP, GH
Saint-Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal, Paris, France,
7Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Département de
Biopathologie, Villejuif, France,8Service de Génétique,
Institut Curie, Paris, France,9Unité Mixte de Génétique
Constitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Hospices Civilsde Lyon, Lyon, France,
10Institut Bergonie - INSERM
U1218 Departement de Biopathologie Unité de Génétique
Constitutionnelle, Bordeaux, France,11Laboratoire
d’Oncogénétique, Centre Paul Straus, Strasbourg, France,
12Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,13Department of
Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Australia
Variant interpretation is recognized as the major challenge
in genetic diagnosis. Spliceogenic variants exemplify this
issue as all types of nucleotide variations can be pathogenicby affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/
creation of splicing signals such as splice sites (ss),Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1715branchpoints (BPs) or splicing regulatory elements (SREs).
Unfortunately, most in silico prediction tools are dedicated
to speci ﬁc signals (eg 5 ’/3’ss, BPs or SREs). We developed
the Splicing Prediction Pipeline (SPiP) to allow compre-
hensive assessment of variant effect on the different
regulatory motifs involved in splicing. SPiP runs a cascadeof different and complementary tools, chosen on their
efﬁciency, i.e. Splicing Prediction in Consensus Element
(SPiCE) for physiological 5 ’/3’ss, Branch Point Prediction
(BPP) for BPs, ΔtESRseq for SREs. Moreover, we
embedded a new score for the prediction of cryptic/ de
novo ss, after training and validation on more than 200
million of ss obtained through Ensembl data. SPiP was
evaluated on a curated diagnostic collection of 2,468
variants (19.8% unpublished) in 345 genes, with theircorresponding experimental RNA splicing data. These
variants were scattered along the exonic and intronic
sequences up to 36,947 bp from the ss. SPiP achieved anaccuracy of 80.5 %, with a speci ﬁcity of 71.3 % and a
sensitivity of 91.07 %. As a result, SPiP is a comprehensive
prediction pipeline which properly deals with the diversityof possible splicing alterations. It can be easily implemented
in any diagnostic laboratory as a routine decision making
tool for prioritizing RNA studies.
R. Leman: None. B. Parfait: None. D. Vidaud: None.
E. Girodon: None. L. Pacot: None. G. Le Gac: None. C.
Ka: None. C. Ferec: None. Y. Fichou: None. C. Ques-
nelle: None. E. Muller: None. D. Vaur: None. L. Castéra:
None. A. Ricou: None. H. Tubeuf: None. O. Soukarieh:
None. P. Gaildrat: None. F. Riant: None. M. Guillaud-
Bataille: None. V. Caux-Moncoutier: None. N. Boutry-
Kryza: None. F. Bonnet-Dorion: None. I. Schultz: None.
M. Rossing: None. M. Parsons: None. A. Spurdle: None.
A. Martins: None. C. Houdayer: None. S. Krieger:
None.
P16.66B
PrimerBench: A modern framework for continuous
primer validation
J. Stoppani1, B. Wolf1, A. Zaum2, P. Kuonen1
1iCoSys, University of applied sciences and arts western
switzerland, Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland,2Department
of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum
Am Hubland, Würzburg, Germany, Würzburg, Germany
Introduction: The usage of primers of Sanger sequencing
is essential in molecular diagnostics. The quality of thoseprimers is critical for a good analysis of the targeted
genomic regions during sequencing. The quality of a primer
depends on many factors, as for example, the absence ofvariants on the region covered by the primers themselves. A
primer with variants would fail to amplify both alleles andconsequently lead to allele dropout in the sequencing
results. Given the large amount of primers managed by a
laboratory and their quality depending on continually
updated data, an automated reassessment is needed.
Methods: A web application has been developed using
python and the Django web framework. To determine thelocation of the primers on the reference genome we use
Blast. The variants present at the location of the primers is
recovered through the Ensembl REST API. We imple-mented con ﬁgurable validation checks for the primers, such
as a maximum MAF for any variant found inside the pri-
mer. Primers can be reanalyzed at any time to take intoconsideration updated external databases.
Results: We developed an open-source web based solu-
tion to validate primers, accessible at https://genetic.tools .
Users can be organized in laboratories, sharing primers and
validating them whenever public databases such as Gno-
mad, TOPMed or others update their variant information, orthe reference genome is updated. Those updates can be
automated, with automatic alerts to the users if the updated
information on their primers.
J. Stoppani: None. B. Wolf: None. A. Zaum: None. P.
Kuonen: None.
P16.67C
A SMARTer solution to stranded single-cell RNA-seq
S. Gandlur
1, M. Pesant2, N. Bolduc1, S. Lee1, C. Hardy1,
A. Das1, M. Bostick1, A. Farmer1
1Takara Bio USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States,
2Takara Bio Europe, Saint Germain en Laye, France
Introduction: With the growing need for low-input and
single-cell NGS library prep solutions, we see that
researchers recognize the value in revealing transcriptomeproﬁles from damaged cells as well as noncoding informa-
tion from extremely low cell numbers (1-1,000). We have
previously released several RNA-seq solutions based onoligo(d)T priming that push the limits of sensitivity and
reproducibility from ultra-low inputs as well as single cells.
Oligo(d)T priming is a very ef ﬁcient way to capture the
transcriptome, only the polyadenylated fraction can be
captured. In addition, for oligo(dT)-primed cDNA synthesis
to generate high-quality libraries, one needs to start withhigh-quality RNA, which excludes the use of this
technology with samples damaged or degraded due to the
nature of the processing (e.g., FFPE samples) or method ofisolation. Additionally, these earlier single-cell kits do not
preserve strand-of origin information.
Methods and Results: SMART-Seq Stranded Kit now
allows the generation of sequencing-ready, stranded Illu-
mina ®libraries directly from 1-1,000 sorted cells or an1716equivalent amount (10 pg-10 ng) of puri ﬁed total RNA of
any quality. This kit integrates an innovative technology,
already incorporated in our SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-
Seq Kit v2 - Pico Input Mammalian, which enables removal
of ribosomal cDNA following cDNA synthesis, as opposed
to direct removal of corresponding rRNA molecules prior toreverse transcription. The SMART-Seq Stranded Kit pro-
tocol can be completed within seven hours, and a con-
venient pooling option for inputs between one to ten cellsfacilitates greater ease-of-use by minimizing the number of
samples being handled.
S. Gandlur: None. M. Pesant: None. N. Bolduc: None.
S. Lee: None. C. Hardy: None. A. Das: None. M. Bostick:
None. A. Farmer: None.
P16.69A
PopDel calls medium-size deletions jointly in tens of
thousands of genomes
S. Roskosch
1, D. Beyter2, H. Jónsson2, H. P. Eggertsson2,
B. V. Halldórsson2, B. Kehr1
1Berlin Institute of Health / Charité, Berlin, Germany,
2deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc., Reykjavík, Iceland
Catalogs of genetic variation for large numbers of
individuals are a foundation for research on human diversityand disease. Creating such catalogs for small variants from
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data is now commonly
done with joint calling approaches. We have transferred thejoint calling idea to larger deletion variants and developed
theﬁrst joint calling tool, PopDel, that can detect deletions
in WGS data of tens of thousands of individualssimultaneously. In the joint analysis of hundreds of
simulated genomes, PopDel shows similar recall and
precision to existing deletion callers while being fasterand requiring less memory. On data of the extensively
studied genome NA12878, PopDel identi ﬁes more deletions
contained in GiaB and PacBio reference call sets comparedto its competitors Delly and Lumpy. On Illumina Polaris
data, PopDel ’s deletions distinguish individuals from
different populations indicating that the callset re ﬂects
biological differences. In PopDel ’s output for 49 Polaris
trios, we identi ﬁed a de novo deletion in the individual
HG01763 con ﬁrmed by multiple SNPs that further indicate
its origin on a maternal haplotype. Application to WGS data
of tens of thousands of Icelanders including 778 Icelandic
trios yields a preliminary Mendelian inheritance error rate of0.05% (28,210,207 trio-deletion-pairs) using only a ﬁlter on
genotype likelihoods. Based on these results, we believe
that PopDel will enable more routine scans for deletions inlarge sequencing cohorts.S. Roskosch: None. D. Beyter: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc. H.
Jónsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc. H.P. Eggertsson: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE
genetics/Amgen Inc. B.V. Halldórsson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen
Inc.. B. Kehr: None.
P16.70B
Enrichment and Clustering of Rare Genetic Variants
using Shared Protein Structure Domains
J. D. Stephenson
1,2, R. A. Laskowski1, J. M. Thornton1,
M. E. Hurles2
1EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, United Kingdom,2Wellcome Sanger
Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom
Introduction: The spatial distribution of variants in
proteins can suggest mechanisms of disruption and canhelp to differentiate benign from damaging changes.
However, in rare diseases the sparsity of variants per
protein reduces the power of spatial distribution analysis.We overcome this by enriching rare variant data and
aligning shared structural domains from different proteins.
We then analyse the domains together and uncover spatialpatterns using DBSCAN 3D clustering.
Materials and Methods: The variants are mapped from
DNA coordinates to the position on the most appropriateprotein structure. They are then grouped by CATH struc-
tural domain and protein structures within each domain
containing a variant are aligned. DBSCAN clustering isthen performed on the 3D coordinates of the variants in the
aligned structure space for each CATH domain family.
Results: Firstly, comparing the locations of clusters with
those of known disease-associated variants and those con-
sidered benign can help to assign a pathogenicity prob-
ability to variants of unknown signi ﬁcance. Secondly, the
location of the cluster in the protein or complex can suggest
potential mechanisms of action such as the interruption of
ligand binding, catalysis or structure destabilization/mis-folding. Thirdly by comparing members of the same spatial
clusters with gene lists of known disease association we can
uncover new disease gene candidates.
Conclusion: Enrichment and spatial clustering of rare
variants on protein structures can allow disease-sensitive
regions of proteins to be uncovered, new disease associatedgenes to be found and can help to characterise variants of
unknown signi ﬁcance.
ESPOD fellowship: EMBL/Wellcome Trust.J.D. Stephenson: None. R.A. Laskowski: None. J.M.
Thornton: None. M.E. Hurles: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1717P16.71C
Using multiple sequencing platforms to identify and
characterise disease-causing genome alterations
G. Gallone1, R. Schöp ﬂin1, H. Moeinzadeh1, D. Heller1,
M. Spielmann1, M. Vingron1, S. Mundlos1,2
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2Charité –Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
Genomic alterations, including single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs), small insertions/deletions (InDels) andstructural variants (SVs) are a major determinant of
congenital disease. Whereas coding SNPs and InDels have
been the focus of intense study, and rare small variants havebeen implicated in about 40% of rare genetic developmental
disorder diagnoses, little is known about the mechanisms
and disease impact underlying non-coding variation. Noncoding SNPs can affect regulatory elements and have been
causally linked to Mendelian disorders. SVs can alter the
genome by duplicating, deleting, inverting or translocatinggenomic segments. SVs, in particular, are poorly under-
stood, mainly because of the dif ﬁculties inherent with their
reliable detection and phasing via short read sequencingtechnology. Genomic alterations that remain cryptic to
current sequencing technology are likely to represent a
signiﬁcant source of disease-causing variation in unsolved
Mendelian disorders.
Here, we aim to comprehensively discover, phase and
characterise the spectrum of genomic variation for a cohortof several individuals affected by rare congenital disorders,
using an array of genomic resources: deep short read whole
genome sequencing (WGS), in situ Hi-C, long readsequencing (PacBio), optical mapping (Bionano) and
linked-read (10x Genomics) technologies.
G. Gallone: None. R. Schöp ﬂin:None. H. Moeinzadeh:
None. D. Heller: None. M. Spielmann: None. M. Vin-
gron: None. S. Mundlos: None.
P16.74B
Identi ﬁcation of uniparental disomy events in a cohort of
29,723 whole exome sequencing samples
K. Yauy
1,2, N. de Leeuw2, C. Gilissen2, R. Pfundt2
1Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et
Médecine Personnalisée, Génétique clinique, CHU
Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, Centre de référenceanomalies du développement SORO, INSERM U1183,
Montpellier, France,
2Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, RadboudUniversity Medical Center, Nijmegen, NetherlandsIntroduction: Uniparental disomy (UPD) is the occurrence
of two homologous chromosomes, or segments originating
from the same parent. Although the majority of UPDs does
not have phenotypic consequences, particular events may
lead to disease due to imprinting effects, an underlying
homozygous pathogenic disease variant or a low mosaictrisomy of the respective chromosome. UPD were typically
identi ﬁed by SNP microarrays during routine genetic
diagnostics. Here we present a validated method to detectUPDs in both trio and single whole exome sequencing
(WES) data.
Material and Methods: We applied UPDio for the
detection of UPD based on Mendelian inheritance errors to
a cohort of 4,912 WES trios and used identi ﬁed regions of
homozygosity (ROH) by H3M2 for isodisomy UPD (iUPD)detection to a cohort of 29,723 single WES samples. We
calculated per chromosome whether the ROH size deviated
signiﬁcantly from the log-normal distribution and we
reported cases with ROH involving a whole chromosome.
Results: Among the 4,912 WES trios we identi ﬁed 9
(0.18%) UPD events, 3 of which involved isodisomy and 6heterodisomy. In the cohort of 29,723 single cases we found
13 (0.04%) iUPD events, including the 3 found in trios. At
least 11/22 UPD ﬁndings had previously been reported.
Two involved a known imprinted chromosome disorder and
in at least four patients a homozygously mutated disease
gene was identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: UPD can be identi ﬁed using both single
and trio WES. UPD can be clinically relevant and may
affect genetic counseling, given the reduced risk of recur-rence for affected families.
K. Yauy: None. N. de Leeuw: None. C. Gilissen: None.
R. Pfundt: None.
P16.75C
An ultrafast amplicon-based targeted librarypreparation method using double-stranded unique
molecular identi ﬁers for detecting rare mutations in cell-
free DNA
T. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Lee, K. Pendleton, C. Li, L. Lin,
G. Liu, Z. Liu
Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States
Introduction: Liquid biopsy is a noninvasive easily
obtainable sample with diagnostic value, especially using
cell-free DNA (cfDNA). But it presents challenges towardaccurate variant detection, as low fractions of mutant DNA
present can be masked by artifacts or background noise
from PCR and sequencing errors, leading to false negatives.Progress has been made using hybrid capture-based1718sequencing methods using unique molecular identi ﬁers
(UMIs), but can be time-consuming with complicated and
tedious work ﬂows, resulting in poor results. Large amounts
of cfDNA for these protocols are not realistic to obtain from
patients. To provide a fast (4-hour) and reliable NGS
solution for low-frequency variant detection, we developedthe CleanPlex ®UMI technology.
Methods: CleanPlex ®UMI technology features 3 steps to
generate molecular-barcoded NGS libraries: multiplex PCRfor molecular barcoding, background cleaning step to
remove PCR by-products, and indexing PCR to add Illu-
mina ®adapters and sample indexes. Here we present a
panel targeting frequently mutated hotspots in 23 genes in
lung cancer. Libraries were prepared with reference cfDNA
(SeraCare) at 0.1% to 0.5% minor allele frequencies (mAF)and sequenced using Illumina ®NextSeq ®.
Results: With CleanPlex UMI Lung Cancer panel at
input of 50ng cfDNA nearly all mutations are detected at0.1% mAF and at 0.25% mAF with 100% PPV. With input
of 20 ng of cfDNA, the method can achieve 100% detection
at 0.5% mAF.
Conclusion: The CleanPlex ®UMI technology demon-
strates high sensitivity with low false positive rate, for the
detection of low-frequency alleles, even at low DNA inputswith an easy cost-effective work ﬂow.
T. Chen: None. Y. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. L. Lee: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc. K. Pendleton: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. C. Li: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon
Genomics, Inc. L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics,
Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent orother intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paragon Genomics,
Inc.Z. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ
cant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Paragon Genomics, Inc..P16.77A
Combining ACMG guideline and multiple public
databases identi ﬁes misclassi ﬁed HGMD variants
K. Park
1,2, W. Lee3
1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Myungji Hospital,
Goyang-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, Korea, Republic of,2Tomocube
Co.1, Ltd., Seoul, Korea, Republic of,3Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine and Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic
of
Background: Discordant variant classi ﬁcations between
public databases is one of the well-documented limitationswhen interpreting pathogenicity of variants. The aim of this
study is to investigate the level of variant misclassi ﬁcation
from the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) and theannotation concordance between databases in depth.
Materials and Methods: We used a total of 166,834
classi ﬁed variants [disease-causing mutations (DM,
n=157,874) and disease-associated polymorphisms (DP,
n=3,275; DFP, n =2,009; FP, n =3,676)] from the HGMD.
All variants were reanalyzed based on the American Col-lege of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guideline
and compared to ClinVar variants. Misclassi ﬁcation types
were categorized into major discordance (from pathogenicto benign or vice versa) and minor discordance (from
pathogenic to variants of unknown signi ﬁcance or vice
versa).
Results: According to variant classi ﬁcation based on
ACMG guideline, major discordance were observed in
0.1% (559/157,874) of DMs and 6.2% (129/3,676) ofpolymorphisms. Major discordance was frequently
observed in nonsense (41.3%), splicing (10.6%), or frame-
shift (29.8%) variants, while minor discordance wasoccurred in nonsynonymous variants (84.9%). Overall
concordance between HGMD and ClinVar were 89.9%
(39,792/44,772) variants studied. The remaining 10.1% ofvariants was discordant classi ﬁcation, most of which are
nonsynonymous variants.
Conclusions: Variant classi ﬁcation from databases needs
to use with caution when interpreting pathogenicity of
variants. We found that signi ﬁcant number of loss of
function variants, which was reported pathogenic in data-bases may not be pathogenic. This is the ﬁrst study to reveal
misclassi ﬁcation burden of the HGMD variants and anno-
tation concordance at the genome-wide level.
K. Park: None. W. Lee: None.
P16.78B
Loqusdb: the value of a local frequency databaseAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1719M. Magnusson1,2,3, J. Eisfeldt1,2, H. Stranneheim1,2,3,
D. Nilsson4,2,5,1, A. Lindsdtrand1,5,4, A. Wedell1,3
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Science for Life
Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna,Sweden,
3Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,5Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Variant frequencies are essential when differing between
benign and potentially disease causing variants in rare
disease cases. After analysis and annotation of exomes andwhole genomes we are presented with thousands of
candidate variants that calls for further investigation. One
of the most effective and unbiased way to reduce thisnumber is to assess the rarity of a variant in any population.
This approach is especially powerful when working in the
ﬁeld of rare diseases. Currently there are a number of
reliable sources of information for major population
frequencies when considering single nucleotide variants
(SNV) and small indels, with gnomAD as the mostprominent public resource available. In contrast, for
structural variation (SV), the background frequency in the
general population is more or less unknown mostly due tochallenges in calling SVs in a consistent way. Keeping track
of local variation can reduce the number of potential disease
causing variants, both for SNVs and SVs, in a considerableway. Here, we present loqusdb , a tool to solve the problem
of keeping track of any type of variant frequencies.
Loqusdb was designed to handle a large ﬂow of samples
and unlike other solutions samples can be added con-
tinuously to the database without rebuilding which
simpli ﬁes the situation. We show both how powerful SV
analysis can be when considering population frequencies
and also how the number of SNV/INDELS can be reduced
by adding local population frequency information even afterannotating with gnomAD.
M. Magnusson: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. H. Stranne-
heim: None. D. Nilsson: None. A. Lindsdtrand: None. A.
Wedell: None.
P16.79C
Quantitative approaches to variant classi ﬁcation
increase the yield and precision of genetic testing in
Mendelian diseases
R. Walsh
1, F. Mazzarotto2, N. Whif ﬁn3, R. Buchan4,
N. Li3, L. Felkin4, K. L. Thomson5, H. Watkins6,P .J .R .
Barton4, I. Olivotto7, S. A. Cook8, C. R. Bezzina1,
J. S. Ware41Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2University of
Florence, Florence, Italy,3MRC London Institute of
Medical Sciences, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom,4National Heart & Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
5Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom,6Radcliffe Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,
7Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy,8Duke-
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
Guidelines for variant interpretation in Mendelian disease
set stringent criteria to report a variant as (likely)
pathogenic, prioritising control of false positive rate over
test sensitivity and diagnostic yield. For geneticallyheterogeneous diseases where missense variants constitute
the preponderance of disease-causing variants, this leads to
high rates of variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in known
disease genes and false negative test results, as many
variants detected in patients will be novel or poorly
characterised.
We compared rare variants in large case cohorts of
inherited cardiac conditions to reference populations to
identify variant classes with high prior likelihoods ofpathogenicity, de ﬁned by etiological fraction (EF). Analysis
of variant distribution using a bespoke unsupervised clus-
tering algorithm identi ﬁed gene regions where case variants
are signi ﬁcantly clustered. Non-truncating variant cate-
gories with EF ≥0.95 were identi ﬁed in 5 established
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) genes and high EFregions de ﬁned in major arrhythmia genes ( RYR2 /SCN5A ).
We propose adaptations to ACMG/AMP guidelines to
incorporate this quantitative evidence and demonstratesubstantial increases in diagnostic rates, e.g. a 14-20%
relative increase in HCM cases with actionable variants.
Particular variants classes are empirically shown to have a
sufﬁciently high probability of pathogenicity to support a
“likely pathogenic ”classi ﬁcation when found in patients,
even without segregation or functional evidence. Our pro-posed adaptations to ACMG/AMP guidelines can be
seamlessly incorporated into clinical genetics laboratory
workﬂows for diseases with large genetic datasets. This
approach could increase the yield of high con ﬁdence
actionable variants in many Mendelian diseases, consistent
with the framework and recommendations of currentguidelines.
R. Walsh: None. F. Mazzarotto: None. N. Whif ﬁn:
None. R. Buchan: None. N. Li: None. L. Felkin: None. K.
L. Thomson: None. H. Watkins: None. P.J.R. Barton:
None. I. Olivotto: None. S.A. Cook: None. C.R. Bezzina:
None. J.S. Ware: None.1720P16.80D
An Arti ﬁcial Intelligence Engine for High-Throughput
Matching of Genetic Variants to their ACMG/AMP
Classi ﬁcation for Inherited Disease Gene Panels
E. Frise, S. Nohzadeh-Malakshah, M. Falcioni,
E. Kiruluta, F. M. De La Vega
Fabric Genomics, Oakland, CA, United StatesThe ACMG/AMP evidence-based guidelines for variant
pathogenicity assessment de ﬁne several criteria assessing
particular supporting evidence information. Criteria are
combined to classify a variant as either pathogenic (P),
likely-pathogenic (LP), benign (B), likely-benign (LB), oruncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS). Although widely adopted in
clinical interpretation of variants this process has remained
largely manual and time-consuming. Current informaticstools aimed to ease the application of the guidelines do not
completely automate the entire process. Therefore, we
developed an arti ﬁcial intelligence method to automatically
infer the classi ﬁcation of variants that utilizes a forward-
chaining inference engine at its core to implement the
ACMG-AMP criteria returning a predicted classi ﬁcation for
each variant. The engine is able to incorporate criteria and
rule re ﬁnements for speci ﬁc genes by separating the rule
speciﬁcation from the code that executes them. Natural
language generation provides explanatory text with the
rationale of the classi ﬁcation attained for reference by
clinical geneticists. To evaluate the performance of ourmethod, we analyzed a set of 19,990 variants for a 15-gene
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer panel with prior
classi ﬁcations from ClinVar (2 +stars) and Color Genomics
database used as ground truth. We show automatic
classi ﬁcation of 91.6% of P/LP and 60% of B/LB ClinVar
variants with essentially no misclassi ﬁcations. Unclassi ﬁed
variants are annotated with resolved guideline criteria for
rapid manual assessment to ﬁnalize classi ﬁcation. In
addition, we show the ability to reclassify 76% previouslyVUS variants of the Color database. We are integrating this
engine into our cloud-based software platform for clinical
genomic interpretation.
E. Frise: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Fabric Genomics, Inc. S. Nohzadeh-Malakshah: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fabric Geno-
mics, Inc. M. Falcioni: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc. E. Kiruluta: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fabric Geno-
mics, Inc. F.M. De La Vega: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc..P16.81A
Enhanced access to extensive phenotype and disease
annotation of genes and genetic variation in Ensembl
I. M. Armean, L. Gil, D. Lemos, A. Parton,
H. Schuilenburg, A. Thormann, S. Hunt, F. CunninghamEuropean Molecular Biology Laboratory, European
Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UnitedKingdom
The accurate annotation and interpretation of genes and
genetic variation is paramount in basic research and clinical
diagnostics. Critical information such as population allele
frequencies, the predicted molecular consequences ofvariants and observed associations with phenotype often
lie in decentralized large-scale resources and are time
consuming to integrate.
We import and harmonize phenotype and disease anno-
tations from sources including ClinVar, DGVa/dbVar, the
NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, DDG2P, Orphanet, MIMmorbid and the Cancer Gene Census into a standard struc-
ture and provide simple tools for data access.
To facilitate improved querying across conditions
described differently in different studies and support
aggregated views in the Ensembl genome browser, we map
the phenotype descriptions used in these projects to ontol-ogy terms. We have recently updated the Ensembl Variant
Effect Predictor (VEP) to provide enhanced phenotype and
disease annotations alongside predicted molecular con-sequence and frequency data. We have also recently
extended our REST API to support detailed querying of
these data.
In Ensembl release 96 (April 2019) we have 54,859
human phenotype/disease annotations associated with genes
and 5,910,851 associated with variants from 15 differentsources. These can be extracted using a variety of interfaces
and are available for variant annotation with VEP.
We import an extensive range of phenotype and disease
annotations into one uni ﬁed resource. Here we describe the
data types we hold and the multiple access methods we have
developed to simplify the use of these essential data withinthe community.
I.M. Armean: None. L. Gil: None. D. Lemos: None. A.
Parton: None. H. Schuilenburg: None. A. Thormann:
None. S. Hunt: None. F. Cunningham: None.
P16.82B
Implementation of WGS in diagnosis through extensive
computational optimizationAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1721E. Souche1, C. Herzeel2, P. Costanza2, D. Decap3,
L. Dehaspe1, A. Cortes Calabuig1, F. Vervloesem4,
G. E. Maes1, R. Wuyts2, W. Bossuyt1, J. Vermeesch1
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium,
2ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC, Leuven, Belgium,
3Department of Information Technology, Ghent University -
IMEC, Ghent, Belgium,4Western Digital, Ghent, Belgium
Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) is becoming the
standard of care to diagnose rare hereditary diseases as it
promises to deliver more information than the currentstandard of care, namely arrayCGH and whole exome
sequencing (WES). Its implementation in a diagnostic
setting will homogenize the molecular laboratory work ﬂow,
offer a single test for multiple conditions, and may
ultimately decrease cost and time to diagnosis. Although
the bioinformatics pipelines used for analyzing WGS andWES are very similar, implementing WGS analysis in
routine diagnosis is hampered by the huge amount of data
generated. In the ICON-GAP project, we developed andevaluated new solutions for WGS data analysis. First, we
implemented GATK Base Quality Score Recalibration in
the new version of elPrep, a high-performance tool forpreparing BAM ﬁles for variant calling. The use of elPrep to
sort BAM ﬁles, remove duplicates and perform base quality
score recalibration produces the same output as thetraditional samtools/Picard/GATK approach but runs seven
times faster on WGS data. Second, we integrated this
version of elPrep in Halvade, a framework for executingpipelines in parallel. Halvade ’se fﬁcient parallelization
enabled to complete the analysis of a 30X WGS in three
hours. Finally, we compared the results obtained usingelPrep and Halvade to those obtained using the Broad
Institute production pipeline run on the Google Genomics
cloud using well-characterized cell lines. In conclusion, wedeveloped and optimized a software infrastructure that
signiﬁcantly minimizes the computational needs for WGS,
hence enabling the short-term implementation of WGS intofull diagnostic use.
E. Souche: None. C. Herzeel: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC. P.
Costanza: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC. D. Decap: None. L. Dehaspe:
None. A. Cortes Calabuig: None. F. Vervloesem: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Western Digi-
tal.G.E. Maes: None. R. Wuyts: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC. W.
Bossuyt: None. J. Vermeesch: None.
P16.83C
VarFish - ﬁshing for causative variantsM. Holtgrewe, O. Stolpe, M. Nieminen, D. Beule
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, GermanyVarFish is an easy-to-use web-based database system
designed for empowering geneticists in the analysis ofclinical and whole exome sequencing variant data sets for
individuals and families. It provides a set of tools for
supporting the full work ﬂow from (i) variant data quality
control, (ii) variant ﬁltration and (iii) ef ﬁcient assessment of
variants based on visual alignment inspection and annota-
tion data such as functional and frequency annotation.
The system allows to organize data into a project folder
structure with access control. Variant quality metrics can be
displayed project- (and thus cohort-) wise or for singlecases/families. The variants themselves can be ﬁltered based
on genotype, population frequency, variant effect, quality
metrics, and annotation such as membership in ClinVar orHGMD Public. A special ClinVar-centric view allows for
the easy screening of variants based on pathogenicity
annotation in ClinVar.
After ﬁ
ltration of the variants, their quick and ef ﬁcient
assessment is supported by various tools: color ﬂags and
commenting allows for simple yet effective note-taking,remote-controlling the genome viewer IGV to display a
variant ’s locus, and some important database excerpts are
available directly within the system. Further, link-out toexternal databases (e.g., ENSEMBL or NCBI), allow the
assessment of variants using MutationTaster, SIFT, or
various splice site assessment tools. Filtered data sets can bedownloaded as VCF or Excel ﬁles (including comments and
ﬂags) or submitted to external tools such as
MutationDistiller.
VarFish is available under a permissive open source
license and ships with comprehensive documentation and
installation instructions.
M. Holtgrewe: None. O. Stolpe: None. M. Nieminen:
None. D. Beule: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
MicroDiscovery GmbH.
P16.84D
Detecting and sizing short tandem repeat expansion
mutations in whole genome sequence data
I. Rajan Babu
1, R. Chiu2, M. Couse1, I. Birol2,
J. Friedman1
1The University of British Columbia, and Children ’s&
Women ’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada,2Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency,Vancouver, BC, Canada1722Introduction: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has
unprecedented potential to identify disease-causing genetic
variants. However, most clinical WGS bioinformatic
pipelines overlook variations in short tandem repeat
(STR) regions, which constitute ~3% of our genomes.
Several algorithms to analyze STRs in WGS data have beendeveloped recently, yet a comprehensive characterization of
their reliability in detecting and sizing STR expansions is
lacking.
Methods: We compared the performance of eight avail-
able STR algorithms (lobSTR, RepeatSeq, HipSTR,
TREDPARSE, ExpansionHunter, STRetch, exSTRa andGangSTR) on the European Genome-phenome Archive
dataset of 118 Coriell genomes with known repeat expan-
sion mutations in one of eight different disease-associatedSTR loci. We evaluated the sensitivity of the tools in
detecting the disease-associated full-mutation (FM) expan-
sions in this gold standard dataset and ascertained theconcordance between estimated and actual repeat lengths.
Results: lobSTR, RepeatSeq and HipSTR failed to detect
STR expansions altogether, while TREDPARSE, Expan-sionHunter, STRetch, exSTRa and GangSTR exhibited
100% sensitivity in detecting FMs at ARandATN1 loci, and
identi ﬁed FMs in 94-100%, 85-100% and 50-100% of
DMPK ,HTT and ATXN1 expansion-positive samples,
respectively. Only ExpansionHunter, GangSTR and
STRetch identi ﬁed the single ATXN3 FM sample, whereas
none of the algorithms reliably detected FMR1 FMs.
TREDPARSE and GangSTR did not identify the homo-
zygous FXN FM expansions, while STRetch, Expansion-
Hunter and exSTRa exhibited sensitivities of 79%, 57% and
29%, respectively. While most callers appeared to perform
well in sizing non-expanded alleles, ExpansionHunter ’s
repeat size estimates, in general, were closer to the actual
lengths of both non-expanded and expanded STR alleles.
I. Rajan Babu: None. R. Chiu: None. M. Couse: None.
I. Birol: None. J. Friedman: None.
P16.85A
Comprehensive variant detection in a human genome
with highly accurate long reads
W. J. Rowell
1, A. M. Wenger1, A. Kolesnikov2, P. Chang2,
A. Carroll2, R. J. Hall1, P. Peluso1
1Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States,
2Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States
Introduction: Long-read sequencing has been applied
successfully to assemble genomes and detect structural
variants. However, due to high raw-read error rates (10-15%), it has remained dif ﬁcult to call small variants from
long reads. Recent improvements in library preparation andsequencing chemistry have increased length, accuracy, and
throughput of PacBio circular consensus sequencing (CCS)
reads, resulting in 10-20kb reads with average read quality
above 99%.
Materials and Methods: We sequenced a 12kb library
from human reference sample HG002 to 18-fold coverageon the PacBio Sequel II System with three SMRT Cells 8M.
The CCS algorithm was used to generate highly-accurate
(average 99.8%) 11.4kb reads, which were mapped to thehg19 reference with pbmm2. We detected small variants
using Google DeepVariant with a model trained for CCS
and phased the variants using WhatsHap. Structural variantswere detected with pbsv. Variant calls were evaluated
against Genome in a Bottle (GIAB) benchmarks.
Results: With these reads, DeepVariant achieves SNP
and Indel F1 scores of 99.82% and 96.70% against the
GIAB truth set, and pbsv achieves 95.94% recall on struc-
tural variants longer than 50bp. Using WhatsHap, smallvariants were phased into haplotype blocks with 105kb
N50. The improved mappability of long reads allows us to
align to and detect variants in medically relevant genes suchasCYP2D6 andPMS2 that have proven "dif ﬁcult-to-map"
with short reads.
Conclusions: These highly-accurate long reads combine
the mappability and ability to detect structural variants of
long reads with the accuracy and ability to detect small
variants of short reads.
W.J. Rowell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-niﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. A.M. Wenger: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. A.
Kolesnikov: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Google Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Google
Inc.P. Chang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Google Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Google Inc. A. Carroll: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Google Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Google Inc. R.J. Hall: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci
ﬁc Biosciences. P. Peluso: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1723P17
Epigenetics - Gene regulation
P17.01B
Methylome-wide association study of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis case-control cohorts
M. F. Nabais, Australian ALS Methylation Consortium
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Brisbane, Australia
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common
subtype of the motor neuron diseases. The clinical
heterogeneity of ALS may re ﬂect a complex disease
etiology, caused in part by large genetic heterogeneityamong patients. Despite a clear genetic contribution to ALS,
epigenomic molecular events such as DNA methylation
(DNAm) may also play a role in ALS. DNAm differencesbetween cases and could re ﬂect both cause or consequences
of disease. Here we applied the OmicS-data-based Complex
trait Analysis (OSCA) software to new ALS (782 cases and613 controls). OSCA implements mixed linear model
approaches to account for unknown confounders by ﬁtting
a random effect of genome-wide methylation with variance-covariance structure estimated from the data and thus
controls for the high false positive rate in standard linear
models with little loss of power. We identi ﬁed 10 sig-
niﬁcantly differentially methylated CpGs between ALS
cases and controls and estimate the proportion of variance
explained by all probes to be ρ
2=16.1%. Finally, out-of-
sample prediction with ALS derived BLUP solutions of the
probes effects, gives signi ﬁcant predictive accuracy (AUC
=62%, CI 95%=[0.59-0.64], p-value =9.3x10-14). Given a
reported genetic relationship between ALS and schizo-
phrenia, we also assessed the predictive accuracy of ALS
derived BLUP scores in an independent schizophreniatarget sample and report a smaller but signi ﬁcant prediction
(AUC=54%, CI
95%=[0.51-0.57], p-value =7.1x10-3).
M.F. Nabais: None.
P17.02C
Estrogen-mediated regulation of FGF5 and its role for
male-pattern baldness
L. M. Hochfeld1, C. Walter1, S. Schoch2, M. M. Nöthen1,
S. Heilmann-Heimbach1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn
Medical Center, Bonn, GermanyGWAS have identi ﬁed >600 genetic risk loci for male-
pattern baldness (MPB). However, for the majority of loci,
the biological mechanisms through which the associated
variants exert their functional effects remain elusive.
Among them, the 4q21.21 risk locus located intronically
inFGF5 , a known inhibitor of human hair growth. Of note,
premature termination of hair growth is a key pathophy-
siological sign of MPB. To gain a deeper understanding of
the regulatory architecture at the FGF5 -locus and its effect
on MPB development a HaploRegv4.0 query was per-
formed. The database research revealed that the lead SNP
rs4690116 is located in an estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)binding site. This is of particular interest, as estrogens have
a reported role in hair growth control and act as opponents
of androgens, the key hormonal mediators in MPB. To testif the risk allele may affect ESR1 binding af ﬁnity, which
might eventually result in an insuf ﬁcient inhibition of FGF5
we designed a luciferase assay where we co-transfect (i) aluciferase vector containing the FGF5 promoter and the
4q21.21-ESR1 binding site with either the risk or the
alternate allele and (ii) an ESR1 -expression vector.
Estrogen-stimulation is used to induce ESR1 function. First
results in HEK293T cells indicate an inhibition of the FGF5
promoter under estrogen stimulation. Additional experi-ments are currently performed and the results will be
presented at the conference. These data will elucidate the
molecular mechanism at the FGF5 -locus and will even-
tually contribute to a deeper understanding of MPB
pathobiology.
L.M. Hochfeld: None. C. Walter: None. S. Schoch:
None. M.M. Nöthen: None. S. Heilmann-
Heimbach: None.
P17.03D
epigenome wide association studies in asthma: a
systematic review
A. Edris Mohamed
1, H. Den Dekker2, E. Melen3,
L. Lahousse1
1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,2Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden
Objective: Asthma is a common, chronic respiratory airway
disease in ﬂuenced by environmental factors and possibly
their interaction with the human genome causing epigenetic
changes. Epigenome wide association studies (EWAS) havemainly investigated DNA methylation and its association
with disease or traits, exposure factors or gene expression.
This systematic review aimed to identify all EWASassessing differentially methylated sites associated with
asthma in humans.1724Design: Structured systematic literature search following
PRISMA guidelines, Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort
studies was used for bias assessment.
Data Sources: We searched PubMed and Embase data-
bases from 2005 through 2019.
Eligibility Criteria: EWAS studies testing association
between differential methylation and asthma in humans.
Results: Overall, we identi ﬁed sixteen EWAS studies
complying with our search criteria. Twelve studies wereconducted on children and ten were conducted on sample
sizes less than 150 subjects. Four hundred and nineteen
CpGs were reported in children studies after correction formultiple testing. In adult studies, thousands of differentially
methylated sites were identi ﬁed. Differential methylation in
inﬂammatory related genes correlated with higher levels of
gene expressions of in ﬂammatory modulators in asthma.
Differentially methylated genes associated with asthma
included SMAD3, SERPINC1, PROK1, IL13, RUNX3 and
TIGIT . Fourty-one CpGs were replicated at least once in
blood samples, and 28 CpGs were replicated in nasal
samples.
Conclusion: Although many differentially methylated
CpGs in genes known to be involved in asthma have been
identi ﬁed in EWAS to date, we conclude that further studies
of larger sample sizes and analyses of differential methy-
lation between different phenotypes are needed.
A. Edris Mohamed: None. H. Den Dekker: None. E.
Melen: None. L. Lahousse: None.
P17.04A
Statistical ﬁnemapping and functional annotation of risk
loci for Barrett ’s esophagus and esophageal
adenocarcinoma
J. Schröder
1, V. Schüller2, A. May3, C. Gerges4,
M. Anders5,6, J. Becker1, T. Hess1,7, N. Kreuser8,
T. Noder5, M. Venerito9, L. Veits10, T. Schmidt11,
C. Fuchs12, J. R. Izbicki13, A. H. Hölscher12, D. Dakkak8,
B. Jansen-Winkeln8, Y. Moulla8, O. Lyros8, S. Niebisch8,
M. Mehdorn8, H. Lang14, D. Lorenz15, B. Schumacher16,
R. Mayershofer17, Y. Vashist18,19, K. Ott11,20, M. Vieth10,
J. Weismüller21, E. Mangold1, S. Moebus22, M. Knapp23,
H. Neuhaus4, T. Rösch5, C. Ell3, M. M. Nöthen1,
I. Gockel8, R. Thieme8, J. Schumacher1,7, A. C. Böhmer1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Department of Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Bonn, Germany,
3Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach,
Germany,4Department of Internal Medicine II,
Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany,
5Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, UniversityHospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
6Department of Gastroenterology and Interdisciplinary
Endoscopy, Vivantes Wenckebach-Klinikum, Berlin,
Germany,7Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany,8Department of Visceral,
Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, UniversityHospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,
9Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg,Germany,
10Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Bayreuth,
Bayreuth, Germany,11Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University of Heidelberg,Heidelberg, Germany,
12Department of General, Visceral,
and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,13Department of General, Visceral, and Thoracic
Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany,14Department
of General, Visceral, and Transplant Surgery, UniversityMedical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany,
15Department of General, Visceral, and Thoracic Surgery,
Klinikum Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany,16Department
of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, Elisabeth
Hospital, Essen, Germany,17Gastroenterologie am
Burgweiher, Bonn, Germany,18Department of General,
Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany,19Kantonsspital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland,
20Department of General, Visceral, and Thorax Surgery,
RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim, Rosenheim, Germany,
21Gastroenterologische Gemeinschaftspraxis, Koblenz,
Germany,22Centre of Urban Epidemiology, Institute of
Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology,
University of Essen, Essen, Germany,23Department of
Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) and its precancerous
condition Barrett ’s esophagus (BE) are multifactorial
diseases with rising prevalence rates in Western popula-tions. A recent GWAS meta-analysis identi ﬁed 14 risk loci,
which are all located in non-coding genomic regions.
Therefore, our understanding of the biological mechanismsunderlying these associations is incomplete. The aim of this
study was (i) to statistically ﬁnemap and (ii) to functionally
annotate all known risk loci for BE/EA.
First, we calculated credible SNP sets for every risk locus.
This resulted in sets of variants that most likely included
true causal variants. The credible SNPs were cross-referenced with Roadmap chromatin states associated with
enhancer activity from esophageal tissue. We functionally
annotated variants located in enhancers and investigatednearby genes regarding their function. Based on thisAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1725information, the risk loci were prioritized for subsequent
functional follow-up analyses.
As a ﬁrst result, two credible SNPs at the 5p15 locus are
located in an enhancer upstream SLC9A3 , which encodes an
epithelial brush-border Na-H-exchanger. Both SNPs, as
well as the best-associated SNP at 5p15, are eQTLs forSLC9A3 . Interestingly, upregulation of SLC9A3 has been
associated to gastroesophageal re ﬂux disease - a major risk
factor for BE/EA.
In order to unveil regulatory mechanisms that are
involved in the development of BE/EA, we are now per-
forming functional analyses. This includes 4C-sequencingand dual-luciferase assays in cells of all stages of BE/EA
development. Altogether, our systematic approach of
functional characterization of genetic risk factors will con-tribute to the elucidation of pathomechanisms involved in
the development of BE/EA.
J. Schröder: None. V. Schüller: None. A. May: None.
C. Gerges: None. M. Anders: None. J. Becker: None. T.
Hess: None. N. Kreuser: None. T. Noder: None. M.
Venerito: None. L. Veits: None. T. Schmidt: None. C.
Fuchs: None. J.R. Izbicki: None. A.H. Hölscher: None.
D. Dakkak: None. B. Jansen-Winkeln: None. Y. Moulla:
None. O. Lyros: None. S. Niebisch: None. M. Mehdorn:
None. H. Lang: None. D. Lorenz: None. B. Schumacher:
None. R. Mayershofer: None. Y. Vashist: None. K. Ott:
None. M. Vieth: None. J. Weismüller: None. E. Man-
gold: None. S. Moebus: None. M. Knapp: None. H.
Neuhaus: None. T. Rösch: None. C. Ell: None. M.M.
Nöthen: None.
I. Gockel: None. R. Thieme: None. J.
Schumacher: None. A.C. Böhmer: None.
P17.06C
Post-transcriptional mechanisms distinguish human and
chimpanzee forebrain progenitors
D. A. Grassi1, P. Brattås1, J. G. Valdés2, M. Rezeli3,
M. E. Jönsson1, S. Nolbrant4, M. Parmar4, G. Marko-
Varga3, J. Jakobsson1
1Lab of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of
Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience,Lund, Sweden,
2Oncology and Pathology, Kamprad Lab,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund, Sweden,3Clinical
Protein Science and Imaging, Department of BiomedicalEngineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund,
Sweden,
4Lab of Developmental and Regenerative
Neurobiology, Department of Experimental MedicalScience, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund, Sweden
The human forebrain has increased in size and complexity
since the split between the human and chimpanzee lineages
and these changes are thought to underlie human-speci ﬁccognitive abilities. Interspecies divergence of regulatory
elements as well as trans -acting factors are likely to
contribute to human traits. Here we used bulk and single-
cell RNA-seq in combination with in-depth proteomics to
compare human and chimpanzee iPSC-derived forebrain
progenitors. We found that interspecies differences inprotein levels exceeded the differences in transcript levels.
Lowly and moderately expressed proteins were found to
contribute to most of the human-chimpanzee expressiondifferences, while highly expressed proteins remained at
similar levels. Our data indicate that post-transcriptional
mechanisms and trans -acting elements play a crucial role in
the evolution of the human forebrain.
Funding: the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish
Foundation for Strategic Research, the Swedish BrainFoundation, the Swedish excellence project Basal Ganglia
Disorders Linnaeus Consortium (Bagadilico), and the
Swedish Government Initiative for Strategic Research Areas(Multipark & StemTherapy), the Swedish National Infra-
structure for Biological Mass Spectrometry (BioMS) and
ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁc, San Jose USA.
D.A. Grassi: None. P. Brattås: None. J.G. Valdés:
None. M. Rezeli: None. M.E. Jönsson: None. S. Nol-
brant: None. M. Parmar: None. G. Marko-Varga: None.
J. Jakobsson: None.
P17.07D
Identi ﬁcation of CFTR cis -regulatory variants
M. Collobert
1, K. Rouault1,2,C .L’Hostis1,3,
M. Audrézet1,2, C. Férec1,2, S. Moisan1,2
1Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France,
2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et
d'Histocompatibilité, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France,
3Association Gaétan Saleün, Brest, France, Brest, France
Although, more than 2000 mutations have been discovered
inCystic Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulator
(CFTR ) gene, some patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or CFTR -
related disorders ( CFTR -RD) have incomplete genotypes or
present extreme phenotypes. Development of chromatinconformation study techniques has identi ﬁed several long-
range regulatory elements as involved in this control
expression. The objective of this project is to study theinvolvement of ‘cis-ruption ’, that is the dysfunction of a cis-
regulatory element, in cystic ﬁbrosis and CFTR-RD
(Congenital Bilateral Absence of Vas Deferens , CBAVD).
In a homogeneous group of 25 CBAVD patients carrying
only one F508del mutation, 17 cis-regulatory regions of
CFTR gene were sequenced. By comparing to European
population, some variants display a frequency signi ﬁcantly
different. In particularly, one variant located in cis-1726regulatory region of intron 21 encompassing an important
transcription factor binding site EP300, is 40 times more
frequent in this group. Enhancer tests are realised to
measure the effect of the intron 21 region on the activity of
CFTR promoter in intestinal and airway cells. By combin-
ing the enhancer of intron 21 and the enhancer of intron 11(strong enhancer described in intestinal cells), a strong
cooperative effect is observed on the CFTR promoter
activity in intestinal cells. These two enhancers havecommon transcription factor binding sites which some
interact together (EP300/TCF12 and EP300/CEBPB).
Enhancer tests with the insertion of the variant of interestin the combination of intron 11 and 21 enhancers are in
progress to determine the impact of the variant on the CFTR
promoter activity.
M. Collobert: None. K. Rouault: None. C. L ’Hostis:
None. M. Audrézet: None. C. Férec: None. S.
Moisan: None.
P17.08A
NGS-panel for Chromatinopathies: implications indiagnosis and research
G. Squeo
1, B. Augello1, T. Mazza2, S. Castellana2,
M. Castori1, E. Di Fede3, N. Malerba1,4, E. Colombo3,
V. Massa3, D. Milani5, C. Gervasini3, G. Merla1
1Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy,
2Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy,3Medical
Genetics, Dept. Health sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy,4PhD Program in Experimental and
Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Univ. of
Foggia, Foggia, Italy,5UOSD Pediatria ad alta intensità di
cura, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale MaggiorePoliclinico, Milano, Italy
Introduction: The regulation of the chromatin state by
epigenetic mechanisms plays a central role in gene
expression, development, function, and maintenance of cell
identity. Defects in components of the epigenetic machinerylead to a highly heterogeneus group of syndromic
conditions, we termed “Chromatinopathies ”characterized
by intellectual disability, growth abnormalities, and typicalfacial features.
Material and Methods: We designed a NGS-targeted
panel containing 68 genes associated with chromatino-pathies including Kabuki, Kleefstra, Cof ﬁn Lowry, Wie-
demann Steiner, Rubinstein-Taybi, Floating Harbor, and
Cornelia de Lange syndromes.
Results: Driven by clinical diagnosis, we analyzed 253
patients and found pathogenic variants in 60 (24%). Themain sub-groups consist of 120 Kabuki syndrome patients,
33 (28%) of them carrying KMT2D orKDM6A pathogenic
variants, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients, with 12/47
(25%) subjects carrying EP300 orCREBBP pathogenic
variants and Floating Harbor syndrome patients, with 3/19
(16%) subjects carrying SRCAP pathogenic variants. Con-sidering the clinical overlapping and shared molecular
mechanisms among the Chromatinopathies, we extended
thein silico variants analysis to all patients. 42/193 (22%)
of patients showed pathogenic variants in genes not asso-
ciated with the original clinical suspicion. A re-evaluation
of the clinic signs in part con ﬁrmed the molecular data.
Some examples include KS patients found mutated in
KMT2A ,CTCF andARID1B ; RSTS patients with frameshift
and nonsense variants in KMT2A .
Conclusion: The study of chromatinopathies may offer a
unique opportunity to learn about epigenetics in health and
disease. This study highlights the need to analyze with NGSapproaches these diseases that show molecular and clinical
overlap.
G. Squeo: None. B. Augello: None. T. Mazza: None. S.
Castellana: None. M. Castori: None. E. Di Fede: None.
N. Malerba: None. E. Colombo: None. V. Massa: None.
D. Milani: None. C. Gervasini: None. G. Merla: None.
P17.09B
Expression study of candidate miRNAs and evaluationof their potential use as biomarkers of diabetic
neuropathy
A. Latini
1, C. Ciccacci1,2, A. Colantuono1, C. Politi1,
V. Spallone3, G. Novelli1, P. Borgiani1
1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Genetics
Section, University of Rome Tor Vergata, It, Rome, Italy,
2UniCamillus, International University of Health and
Medical Science, Rome, Italy,3Department of Systems
Medicine, Endocrinology Section, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, It, Rome, Italy
Diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) and Cardiovascular Auto-
nomic Neuropathy (CAN) are common forms of diabeticneuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). There is
an increasing evidence that microRNAs may be involved in
many disorders as also in diabetes and its complications.Our aim was to evaluate the expression of candidate
miRNAs in positive and negative patients for both forms of
diabetic neuropathy. We recruited 50 T2D patients withneurological evaluation. We extracted RNA from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and quanti ﬁed the expression of 6
miRNAs (miR-499a, miR-27a, miR-146a, miR-128a, miR-155, miR-21) by TaqMan assays. The expression in
different groups was compared by ANOVA test. InAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1727addition, we extracted DNA from the patients ’whole blood,
analyzed common polymorphisms of the MIRNA gene and
evaluated the possible correlation between genetic variants
and miRNA levels expression. Patients with DPN showed a
higher expression of miR-128a compared to those DPN-
negative (P =0.015). In contrast, miR-155 and miR-499
seem to be down-expressed in patients with DPN (P =0.04
and P=0.05, respectively). We observed a lower expression
of miR-155 (P =0.05) even in patients with CAN respect to
CAN-negative patients. Genotypic analysis showed that
rs767649 polymorphism variant allele in the miR-155
promoter region is associated with a higher expression ofthis miRNA (P =0.003) compared to the wild-type allele.
Our data suggest the involvement of miRNAs in the
development of diabetic complications. If these preliminaryresults will be validated in more numerous cohorts, these
miRNAs could be considered potential biomarkers for the
development of diabetic neuropathy.
A. Latini: None. C. Ciccacci: None. A. Colantuono:
None. C. Politi: None. V. Spallone: None. G. Novelli:
None. P. Borgiani: None.
P17.10C
DNA methylation regulates miR-146a expression inosteoarthritic synoviocytes by altering NF-kB binding
afﬁnity on promoter
I. Papathanasiou
1, E. Mourmoura1, M. Tzetis2,
A. Tsezou1,3
1University of Thessaly, School of Medicine, Laboratory of
Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Larissa, Greece,
2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Dept. of
Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece,3University of Thessaly,
School of Medicine, Department of Biology, Larissa,
Greece
Introduction: Abnormal expression of miR-146a has been
linked to osteoarthritis (OA) pathogenesis. We aimed toinvestigate the role of DNA methylation on miR-146a
expression in OA synoviocytes.
Material and Methods: miR-146a expression levels
were investigated in OA (n =16) and normal synoviocytes
(n=9) using qRT-PCR. The methylation status of miR-146a
promoter was analysed using quantitative methylation-speciﬁc PCR (qMSP) and bisul ﬁte DNA sequencing
assay. The effect of 5 ’-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-AzadC) and
siRNA against NF-kB on miR-146a expression was inves-tigated. In addition, NF-KB binding to miR-146a promoter
was assessed by Ch ΙP.
Results: miR-146a expression levels were signi ﬁcantly
reduced in OA compared with normal synoviocytes.
Downregulation of miR-146a was correlated with increasedmethylation of miR-146a promoter in OA synoviocytes and
weaker binding af ﬁnity of NF-kB on this hypermethylated
region in OA synoviocytes. Signi ﬁcant upregulation of
miR-146a was observed in 5-AzadC-treated OA synovio-
cytes compared with untreated, which was associated with
demethylation of miR-146a promoter. Inhibition of NF-kBreversed the effect of 5-AzadC on miR-146a expression in
OA synoviocytes.
Conclusion: We demonstrated, for the ﬁrst time to our
knowledge, that DNA methylation regulates miR-146a
expression in OA synoviocytes, by preventing NF-kB
from binding to miR-146a promoter. These data provide
strong evidence that epigenetic mechanisms could regulate
the expression of miRNAs linked to OA pathogenesis.
Fellowships: The study was co- ﬁnanced by Greece and the
European Union (European Social Fund- ESF )through the
Operational Program «Human Resources Development,
Education and Lifelong Learning» in the context of theproject “Reinforcement of Postdoctoral Researchers ”(MIS-
5001552) implemented by the State Scholarships Founda-
tion ( ΙΚΥ).
I. Papathanasiou: None. E. Mourmoura: None. M.
Tzetis: None. A. Tsezou: None.
P17.11D
Enzymatic Methyl-Seq: Next Generation Methylomes
B. Sexton, L. Williams, V. Ponnaluri, L. Saleh, K. Marks,
M. Samaranayake, L. Ettwiller, S. Guan, H. Church,
N. Dai, E. Tamanaha, E. Yigit, B. Langhorst, Z. Sun,T. Evans, R. Vaisvila, E. Dimalanta, T. Davis
New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United StatesDNA methylation is important for gene regulation. The
ability to accurately identify 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) gives us greater insight into
potential regulatory mechanisms. Bisul ﬁte sequencing (BS)
is traditionally used to detect methylated C's, however, BSdoes have its drawbacks. DNA is commonly damaged and
degraded by the chemical bisul ﬁte reaction resulting in
libraries that demonstrate high GC-bias and are enriched formethylated regions. To overcome these limitations, we
developed an enzymatic approach, NEBNext ®
Enzymatic
Methyl-Seq (EM-Seq ™), for methylation detection.
Illumina libraries were prepared using bisul ﬁte and EM-
Seq methods. Libraries generated with NA12878 DNA
inputs ranging from 10 ng to 200 ng were sequenced usingIllumina ’s NovaSeq 6000. EM-Seq libraries have longer
inserts, lower duplication rates, a higher percentage of
mapped reads and less GC-bias compared to bisul ﬁte con-
verted libraries. Global methylation levels are similar
between EM-seq and whole genome bisul ﬁte libraries1728(WGBS) indicating overall detection of methylated C's is
similar. However, CpG correlation plots demonstrated
higher correlation coef ﬁcients indicating that EM-Seq
libraries are more consistent than WGBS across replicates
and input amount. GC-bias and dinucleotide distribution
showed that EM-Seq has more even dinucleotide repre-sentation compared to the AT-rich representation observed
for WGBS. EM-seq ’s more even coverage allows for a
higher percentage of CpG's to be assessed leading to moreconsistent evaluation of methylation across key genomic
features (TSS, CpG island, etc.). EM-seq is more robust
than WGBS, works over a wide range of DNA inputamounts, has superior sequencing metrics, and detects more
CpG's.
B. Sexton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; New England Biolabs. L. Williams: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. V. Ponnaluri: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. L. Saleh:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. K.
Marks: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
NEB. M. Samaranayake: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. L. Ettwiller: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. S. Guan: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. H. Church: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. N. Dai:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. E.
Tamanaha: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
NEB. E. Yigit: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; NEB. B. Langhorst: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. Z. Sun: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. T. Evans: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. R. Vaisvila: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NEB. E.
Dimalanta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
NEB.
T. Davis: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; NEB.
P17.12A
DNA methylation signatures as potential novelprognostic biomarkers in sub-types of Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
K. Chwialkowska
1, M. Niemira2, A. Bielska2,
A. Szalkowska2, A. Kretowski2, J. Nikli ński3,
M. Kwasniewski1
1Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,2Center for
Clinical Research, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland,3Department of Clinical Molecular
Biology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, PolandIntroduction: NSCLC constitutes the most common
cancer-related cause of death. Adenocarcinoma (AC) and
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are characterized by unique
molecular features. Recent studies have revealed that
cancer-related changes in DNA methylation are not random,
and subsets of genes are selectively affected. The aim of theresearch was to characterize methylome pro ﬁles of AC and
SCC tumors, and to develop novel prognostic biomarkers
speciﬁc for both sub-types.
Materials and Methods: For large-scale methylome
proﬁling, reduced representation bisul ﬁte sequencing
(RRBS) in 123 patients with NSCLC was carried out. Thepaired analyses of lung tumor and adjacent normal tissue of
patients grouped into several comparison sets was per-
formed. Then, using binary segmentation algorithm, dif-ferentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identi ﬁed.
Results: Hundreds of DMRs were identi ﬁed in NSCLC;
vast majority of them exhibited hypomethylation in patientswith relapse or who died. In tumors of SCC patients with
relapse, several DMRs were detected within GATA2 gene,
playing a role in an aggressiveness of lung cancer andespecially important in patients with KRAS mutations.
Interestingly, a distinctive methylation levels were observed
forRUVBL1 -related DMRs in SCC and AC patients with
relapse. Hypomethylation of PRKCA , which exhibits sup-
pressor activity in lung cancers, was identi ﬁed in AC
patients who eventually did not survive.
Conclusion: Obtained results allow for better under-
standing of speci ﬁc epigenetic pathways dysregulated in
different sub-types of NSCLC. We have provided a catalogof methylation-related biomarkers predictive in terms of
tumor relapse and survival.
The study was funded within the MOBIT project
(STRATEGMED2/266484/2/NCBR/2015).
K. Chwialkowska: None. M. Niemira: None. A.
Bielska: None. A. Szalkowska: None. A. Kretowski:
None. J. Nikliński:None. M. Kwasniewski: None.
P17.13B
An integrated chromatin accessibility and transcriptome
landscape of human pre- and post-implantation
embryos
Z. Shang
1, L. Liu1, L. Leng2, C. Liu1, Y. Yuan1, X. Dai1,
Q. Wang1, S. Wang1, F. Chen1
1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China,2Institute of Reproductive
and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic MedicalScience, Central South University, Changsha, China
Introduction: The human pre- and post-implantation
development is a delicately balanced and orchestrated
process that involves extensive changes in chromatinAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1729structure and transcriptional activity. However, a genome-
wide survey of chromatin structure and its association with
molecular regulation in this process have been impeded by
the scarcity of the required materials.
Materials and Methods: For pre-implantation develop-
ment study, we adopted LiCAT-seq, a technique that allowssimultaneous pro ﬁling of chromatin accessibility and gene
expression with ultra-low input of cells, cell stages includ-
ing oocytes, 1-cell, 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula and blas-tocyst. For post-implantation development study, we
generated single-cell RNA and single-cell ATAC-seq data
from E6, E7, E8, E9, E10, E12, E13.5 cells using an in vitro
culture system. Here, combined with transcriptome and
epigenome maps of human pre- and post-implantation
in vitro culture system (before E14) allowed us to reveal the
underlying regulatory mechanism of cell fate decision
during this complex developmental time.
Results: Integrative analysis between the two omics
layers revealed a strong association between the establish-
ment of accessible chromatin and the related genes up-
regulated during embryonic genome activation (EGA) andepiblast development. Furthermore, combined analysis of
transcription factor accessibility identi ﬁed putative novel
transcription factors in regulating EGA and cell fate deci-sion. In addition, we identi ﬁed massively expressed endo-
genous retrovirus (ERVs) during EGA and epiblast disc.
Conclusions: we mapped the chromatin accessibility and
transcriptome pro ﬁles for human pre- and post-implantation
embryos. Our results thus offer new mechanistic insights
into the molecular events inherent to human pre- and post-implantation embryo development.
Z. Shang: None. L. Liu: None. L. Leng: None. C. Liu:
None. Y. Yuan: None. X. Dai: None. Q. Wang: None. S.
Wang: None. F. Chen: None.
P17.14C
CRUP: A comprehensive framework to predict
condition-speci ﬁc regulatory units
V. Heinrich
1, A. Ramisch1, L. V. Glaser1, A. Fuchs1,
X. Yang1, P. Benner1, R. Schöp ﬂin1,N .L i1, S. Kinkley1,
A. Hillmann2, J. Longinotto3, S. Heyne3, B. Czepukojc4,
S. M. Kessler4, A. K. Kiemer4, C. Cadenas5, L. Arrigoni3,
N. Gasparoni4, T. Manke3, T. Pap2, A. Pospisilik3,
J. Hengstler5, J. Walter4, S. H. Meijsing1, H. Chung1,
M. Vingron1
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2University Hospital Münster, Münster,
Germany,3Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany,4University of Saarland,
Saarbrücken, Germany,5Leibniz-Institut für
Arbeitsforschung (ifADo), Dortmund, GermanyGene expression is to a large degree regulated by distal
genomic elements referred to as enhancers, which recruit a
combination of different factors to activate transcription
from a targeted core promoter. The activity state of
enhancers may change dynamically across distinguishableconditions, for instance across varying time-points, cell
lines or disease states. However, it remains a challenge to
identify these regulatory elements in a cell-type or evendisease-state dependent manner. Thus, rather than compar-
ing separated epigenetic signature tracks we propose an
approach to computationally map and compare enhancersacross different samples and conditions. Additionally, to get
a glimpse of the underlying causative regulatory mechan-
ism, these dynamic enhancer elements need to be furtherassociated with promoter activity across the same
conditions.
Here we present the three-step framework CRUP (Con-
dition-speci ﬁc Regulatory Units Prediction) to collapse
different layers of epigenetic information into a single list of
regulatory units consisting of dynamically changingenhancers and target genes. The work ﬂow includes a pre-
trained enhancer classi ﬁer that can be applied across dif-
ferent cell lines and species, solely based on histone mod-iﬁcation ChIP-seq data. Enhancers are subsequently
assigned to different conditions and correlated with gene
expression to derive regulatory units within the sametopologically associated domain.
We thoroughly test and then apply CRUP to murine
embryonic stem cells to capture dynamic enhancer regionsthat are associated with retinoic acid signaling. Finally, we
identify trait-associated regulatory elements in a mouse
study of rheumatoid arthritis and identify enhancer-genepairs comprising known disease genes as well as new
candidate genes.
V. Heinrich: None. A. Ramisch: None. L.V. Glaser:
None. A. Fuchs: None. X. Yang: None. P. Benner: None.
R. Schöp ﬂin:None. N. Li: None. S. Kinkley: None. A.
Hillmann: None. J. Longinotto: None. S. Heyne: None.
B. Czepukojc: None. S.M. Kessler: None. A.K. Kiemer:
None. C. Cadenas: None. L. Arrigoni: None. N. Gas-
paroni: None. T. Manke: None. T. Pap: None. A. Pos-
pisilik: None. J. Hengstler: None. J. Walter: None. S.H.
Meijsing: None. H. Chung: None. M. Vingron: None.
P17.15D
Deletion of FOXG1 transcriptional enhancers is
associated with Rett-like syndrome
R. Y. Birnbaum
1, R. Eshel1,E .D ’haene2, S. Vergult2,
B. Callewaert3, T. Kaplan417301Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-
Sheva, Israel,2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium,3Center for Medical Genetics,
Ghent University, Beer-Sheva, Belgium,43The Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Jerusalem, Israel
Gene regulatory elements such as enhancers dynamically
regulate gene expression in a tissue-speci ﬁc manner.
However, the transcriptional regulatory elements during
human inhibitory interneuron differentiation and their role
in neurodevelopmental disorders are unknown. Here, wegenerated gene regulatory element maps of human
inhibitory-like interneurons derived from embryonic stem
cells (H9-ESC), permitting large-scale annotation ofpreviously uncharacterized regulatory elements relevant to
inhibitory interneuron differentiation. Our analyses identify
neuronal progenitor enhancers that likely regulate theexpression of transcription factors that are essential for
interneuron differentiation. One of these transcription
factors is FOXG1 that is speci ﬁcally expressed in
interneuron progenitors. Haploinsuf ﬁciency of FOXG1, is
associated with Rett-like syndrome. Using in vivo enhancer
assay, we identi ﬁed eight transcriptional enhancers in the
FOXG1 locus with activity patterns that resembled FOXG1
expression. Using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, we
deleted two FOXG1 enhancers which reduced FOXG1
expression in human U251 cells and altered cell prolifera-
tion. Furthermore, a microdeletion proximal to FOXG1
encompassing these neuronal FOXG1 enhancers was foundin patient with Rett-like syndrome, supporting the role of
FOXG1 enhancers in this syndrome. Our study provides a
framework for understanding the impact of non-codingregulatory elements during inhibitory interneuron differ-
entiation, and highlights novel mechanisms underlying
neurodevelopmental disorders.
R.Y. Birnbaum: None. R. Eshel: None. E. D ’haene:
None. S. Vergult: None. B. Callewaert: None. T.
Kaplan: None.
P17.16A
Barrett ’s esophagus - functional annotation of genetic
associations using tissue-speci ﬁc gene expression and the
FUMA platform
A. C. Böhmer
1, J. Schröder1, V. Schüller2, J. Becker1,
T. Hess3, A. May4, C. Gerges5, N. Kreuser6, T. Schmidt7,
L. Veits8, C. Fuchs9, J. R. Izbicki10, B. Schumacher11,
M. Vieth8, H. Neuhaus5, T. Rösch12,C .E l l4,
M. M. Nöthen1, I. Gockel6, J. Schumacher3
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and
Epidemiology, University of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Center for
Human Genetics, University Hospital of Marburg,
Marburg, Germany,4Department of Medicine II, Sana
Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany,5Department of Internal
Medicine II, Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf,
Germany,6Department of Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic
and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of Leipzig,Leipzig, Germany,
7Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany,8Institute of Pathology, Klinikum
Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany,9Department of General,
Visceral, and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,10Department of General, Visceral, and
Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany,
11Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology,
Elisabeth Hospital, Essen, Germany,12Department of
Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Barrett ’s esophagus (BE) is a premalignant lesion that
predisposes to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA). Bothdiseases are multifactorial, and GWAS meta-analyses have
identi ﬁed 14 risk loci so far. All risk variants are located in
non-coding genomic regions and therefore our under-standing of biological mechanisms underlying these
associations is incomplete. Here, we aimed at (i) character-
izing BE/EA genetic associations using eQTL data fromtwo relevant tissues, and (ii) investigating the biological
function of eQTL genes. For this, we generated two eQTL
datasets from biopsies derived from healthy gastric cardiatissue (n =148), and from esophageal metaplasia tissue
(n=83). The eQTL analysis revealed 145,011 signi ﬁcant
cis-eQTLs in cardia and 50,517 signi ﬁcant cis-eQTLs in
metaplasia tissue. We cross-referenced the eQTL data with
genetic association data of BE/EA. Here, we identi ﬁed cis-
eQTL effects for genome-wide signi ﬁcantly associated BE/
EA risk variants regulating the expression of C2orf43 /
LDAH (2p24) in cardia tissue. In metaplasia, only
suggestively associated variants (P<5×10
-04) represented
cis-eQTLs, with regulating effects on SMPD2 (6q21) and
NADSYN1 (11q13). Next, we performed a functional
enrichment analysis with eQTL genes present in cardiatissue only (n =2,557), metaplasia tissue only (n =1,028),
and both tissues (n =585). We observed an enrichment of
metaplasia eQTL genes in immunological pathways,whereas cardia eQTL genes were enriched in metabolic
processes. eQTL genes expressed in both tissues were
enriched in pathways involved in degradation of extra-cellular matrix. In summary, our results point towards
speciﬁc biological pathways that play a role in healthy andAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1731disease states of tissues that are involved in the
pathophysiology of BE.
A.C. Böhmer: None. J. Schröder: None. V. Schüller:
None. J. Becker: None. T. Hess: None. A. May: None. C.
Gerges: None. N. Kreuser: None. T. Schmidt: None. L.
Veits: None. C. Fuchs: None. J.R. Izbicki: None. B.
Schumacher: None. M. Vieth: None. H. Neuhaus: None.
T. Rösch: None. C. Ell: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. I.
Gockel: None. J. Schumacher: None.
P17.17B
Droplet digital PCR-mediated evaluation of ESR1
promoter methylation in cell-free DNA
C. Mio1, F. Baldan1, E. Bregant2, A. Franzoni2,
N. Passon2, L. Gerratana3, F. Puglisi3, D. Fabbro2,
G. Damante1
1Department of Medicine, University of Udine, Udine, Italy,
2Institute of Medical Genetics, ASUI University Hospital of
Udine, Udine, Italy,3Department of Clinical Oncology,
IRCCS CRO Aviano - National Cancer Institute, Udine,
Italy
Introduction: The use of circulating cell-free DNA
(ccfDNA) is gaining momentum offering the possibility to
assess disease progression and therapeutic response in anon-invasive manner. Tumor expression of estrogen
receptor is an important marker of prognosis and is
predictive of response to endocrine therapy in luminalbreast cancer (BC). Indeed, promoter hypermethylation
could lead to a change in ESR1 gene expression pro ﬁle,
which interferers with endocrine therapy, leading toresistance.
Materials and Methods: ccfDNA was isolated from
plasma samples from 11 metastatic breast cancer patientsand 8 healthy volunteers. For absolute quanti ﬁcation of
ESR1 promoter methylation levels, bisul ﬁte-converted
ccfDNA was used and ddPCR was performed with twoprobes, one speci ﬁc for methylated DNA and one speci ﬁc
for un-methylated DNA.
Results: ESR1 promoter methylation status was tested on
ccfDNA samples using ddPCR. To avoid any effect of
incomplete bisul ﬁte conversion on accuracy of methylation
detection, primers pairs were designed to target only con-verted cytosine residues. ESR1 promoter resulted un-
methylated in all healthy donors ’ccfDNA samples. A
variable degree of methylation was assessed betweenpatients ’samples.
Conclusions: Droplet digital PCR methodology is an
endpoint PCR method that does not require standard curvesfor absolute quanti ﬁcation and can be easily optimized to
assess low-amount and fragmentated samples such asccfDNA. Our data demonstrated that ddPCR can be a
valuable tool for the precise and accurate detection of ESR1
promoter methylation on clinical samples, allowing the
assessment of small percentage of methylated DNA, with a
limit of detection of 2% methylation.
C. Mio: None. F. Baldan: None. E. Bregant: None. A.
Franzoni: None. N. Passon: None. L. Gerratana: None.
F. Puglisi: None. D. Fabbro: None. G. Damante: None.
P17.18C
New insights on the role of noncoding RNAs in the
pathology of Fragile X-associated disorders
A. A. Dolskiy, N. A. Lemskaya, D. V. Yudkin
FBRI SRC VB “Vector ”, Rospotrebnadzor, Koltsovo,
Russian Federation
Introduction: Currently, based on the size of the CGG
repeat in the FMR1 gene and the methylation status of its
promoter region, the variation in symptom severity inFragile X-associated disorders cannot be explained. In this
study, our hypothesis assumed that non-coding RNAs, such
as miRNAs and FMR1 antisense transcripts, are involved in
the pathology of Fragile X-associated disorders.
Materials and Methods: Immortalized B-lymphocyte
cell lines from patients with different
FMR1 gene alleles
were used. The expression of genes and miRNAs were
analyzed by SYBR and TaqMan PCR, respectively.
MicroRNAs were selected using the miRBase, microRNAand TargetScan databases.
Results: Using the databases, a number of miRNAs that
bind to the 3 ’-UTR of the FMR1 gene were selected. It was
shown that the expression of some miRNAs in groups with
different FMR1 gene activities changes relative to control
cell lines. Next, it was shown that the expression of theantisense transcript, ASFMR1 , which contains a GCC repeat
and is a potential source of miRNA, as well as the general
expression of all isoforms, also changes relative to controls.Based on the results, a new model is proposed for the
participation of noncoding RNAs in Fragile X-associated
pathologies. The reported study was funded by RussianScience Foundation project 18-15-00099.
A.A. Dolskiy: None. N.A. Lemskaya: None. D.V.
Yudkin: None.
P17.20A
Dissecting the gene regulatory landscape of humanadipose tissue
K. Rouskas
1, E. Katsareli2, C. Amerikanou2, S. Glentis1,
A. C. Dimopoulos1, D. Bielser3, A. Planchon3,
L. Romano3, N. Panousis3, O. Delaneau3, H. Ongen3,1732I. Griniatsos4, T. Diamantis4, P. Moulos1, E. Dermitzakis3,
J. Ragoussis5, G. Dedoussis2, A. S. Dimas1
1Biomedical Sciences Research Center Al. Fleming, Vari,
Greece,2Harokopio University of Athens, Department of
Nutrition and Dietetics, Athens, Greece,3Department of
Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland,4First Department of
Surgery, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,Medical School, Laiko Hospital, ATHENS, Greece,
5Genome Quebec Innovation Centre and Department of
Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC,Canada
Introduction: Subcutaneous (S) and visceral (V) fat share
extensive biology, but a fraction of molecular processes
remains particular to each tissue. Given the contribution of
adipose tissue to disease risk, we aimed to uncoverbiological signatures characteristic of each tissue, and to
explore ﬁne-scale gene regulation.
Materials and Methods: Blood and biopsies of S and V
fat were collected for 106 Greek individuals (GM study),
spanning the BMI range. We explored gene expression
(RNA-Seq) and chromatin accessibility (ATAC-Seq) inboth tissues, and applied QTLtools software to identify
regulatory variants (eQTLs). We explored replication of
ﬁndings in GTEX (pi1, bootstrapping) and across tissues
(pi1, RTC, linear models) to uncover associations char-
acteristic of the GM sample and of each tissue respectively.
Results: Gene expression and chromatin accessibility
differences across S and V fat reveal processes linked to
development, cell signaling, and immune and nervous
systems. Notably, we detected signi ﬁcant downregulation
of metabolic processes in S fat from obese individuals. We
report that ~90% of associations replicate in GTEX, but
deﬁne a subset of GM-detected ﬁndings likely driven by
environmental effects. Although ~95% of eQTLs are com-
mon across tissues, we uncover gene regulatory differences
at the ﬁne-scale, and highlight subtle differences in gene
regulation across tissues. We also report that ~30% of
eQTLs explain disease association signals.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings contribute to a better com-
prehension of fat depot-speci ﬁc biology providing insights
into biological mechanisms underlying adipose-related
disease pathogenesis. Funding sources: Marie Curie IEF,EMBO, Greek Ministry of Education “Thales ”grant,
Stavros Niarchos Foundation.
K. Rouskas: None. E. Katsareli: None. C. Amer-
ikanou: None. S. Glentis: None. A.C. Dimopoulos: None.
D. Bielser: None. A. Planchon: None. L. Romano: None.
N. Panousis: None. O. Delaneau: None. H. Ongen: None.
I. Griniatsos: None. T. Diamantis: None. P. Moulos:None. E. Dermitzakis: None. J. Ragoussis: None. G.
Dedoussis: None. A.S. Dimas: None.
P17.21B
A complete strategy for characterizing on- and off-
target CRISPR/Cas9 editing events via targetenrichment and high-resolution NGS analysis
A. Jacobi, G. Rettig, M. McNeil, R. Turk, M. Schubert,
M. Behlke, E. Gustafson-Wagner
Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, United StatesGenome editing with the CRISPR/Cas9 system is moving
towards therapeutic applications, which drives an increasedneed for in-depth characterization of both on- and off-target
genome editing events. Here we present a work
ﬂow and
useful guidelines for prediction, validation, quanti ﬁcation,
and analysis of on- and off-target editing events. First, we
provide comparison of several commonly-used off-target
prediction tools for in silico selection of target sites
throughout the genome. Then, using previously-published,
unbiased methods for experimental off-target validation, we
are able to compare these algorithm-based selections tobona ﬁde sites exhibiting editing mediated by more than
twelve guide RNAs. The unbiased detection methods are
carried out with experimental and bioinformatics advance-ments to improve the ef ﬁciency of empirical off-target
validation. A multiplexed, amplicon-based enrichment
method (rhAmpSeq
TM) for next-generation sequencing is
then employed for strict quanti ﬁcation of editing events at
validated as well as predicted off-target sites. The
rhAmpSeq technology enables interrogation of >1000genomic loci in a single reaction using RNase H2-
cleavable primers which facilitate almost complete suppres-
sion of non-target location and primer dimer ampli ﬁcation.
Moreover, amplicon coverage is uniform and reproducible,
removing the need for primer re-balancing. The relationship
between coverage depth and statistical con ﬁdence in
quanti ﬁcation of editing events was characterized. Finally,
we developed and rigorously validated a data analysis
package to con ﬁdently detect Cas9 edits via synthetic reads
that contain diverse editing events and varied genomic
target complexities.
A. Jacobi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Integrated DNA Technologies. G. Rettig: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies.
M. McNeil: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Integrated DNA Technologies. R. Turk: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies.
M. Schubert: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Integrated DNA Technologies. M. Behlke: A. EmploymentAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1733(full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies.
E. Gustafson-Wagner: None.
P17.23D
Functional characterization of a lncRNA in the
autoimmune disease-associated RGS1 region
A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia1,2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2,
J. R. Bilbao1,2,3, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2,3,4
1BioCruces, Barakaldo, Spain,2UPV-EHU, Leioa, Spain,
3CIBERDEM, Madrid, Spain,4IKERBASQUE, Basque
Fundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have helped in
the identi ﬁcation of SNPs associated to different disorders.
However, many of those variants are intergenic and some
are located on functionally uncharacterized long non-codingRNAs (lncRNAs), several of which have been described to
play crucial roles in many in ﬂammatory disorders.
rs2816316 (chr1:192567683) is located near the geneRGS1 (regulator of G protein signalling 1) that has been
related to the immune response. The variant has been
associated with Celiac Disease (CD) and Multiple Sclerosis(MS), while RGS1 has been related to CD, MS and Type 1
Diabetes (T1D). The aim of this study is to functionally
characterize the region under this associated SNP in order toexplain its implication in autoimmune disorders. The
expression of RGS1 is altered in the immune cells of
rs2816316-associated diseases. According to GTEXrs2816316 is an eQTL for RGS1 in gastroesophageal and
brain tissues. The UCSC Genome Browser features a
functionally uncharacterized lncRNA that contains the SNPand is close to RGS1 . We have observed that this lncRNA is
expressed both in immune and epithelial cells and localizes
to the nucleus, suggesting a transcription regulatory role.Additionally, CRISPR-Cas9 edition of cells showed that the
lncRNA and RGS1 present opposite expression trends.
Stimulation of Jurkat T cells with PMA and ionomicynprovoked a time-shifted activation of RGS1 and the
lncRNA. Our results suggest that the region around
rs2816316 is involved in RGS1 regulation, probably
through a nearby nuclear lncRNA. Funding: PI16/00258
(JRB), EJ-2017111082 and ACM (ACR) and
PRE_2017_1_0306(AOG).
A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia: None. N. Fernandez-
Jimenez: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. A. Castellanos-
Rubio: None.
P17.24A
Comparative effects of Dasatinib and Ponatinib onlncRNA expression in Chronic Myeloid LeukemiaC. Kayabasi
1, S. Yilmaz Susluer1, T. Balci Okcanoglu2,
B. Ozmen Yelken1, A. Asik1, Z. Mutlu1, C. Caliskan Kurt1,
B. Goker Bagca1, R. Gasimli1, C. Celebi1, E. Tayfur1,
C. Biray Avci1, F. Sahin3, G. Saydam3, C. Gunduz1
1Ege University, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir,
Turkey,2Near East University, Vocational School of Health
Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Ege University, Division of
Haematology, Izmir, Turkey
Chronic myeloid leukemia-(CML) is characterized by cells
carrying BCR-ABL1, so tyrosine kinase inhibitors-(TKIs) areideal for selective treatment. Although many studies are
conducted related to the mechanisms of action for TKIs like
Dasatinib and Ponatinib, their effects on long non-codingRNAs-(lncRNAs) expression pro ﬁles which are associated
with malignancies with their oncogenic/tumor suppressor
properties are largely unknown. In this study, we aimed todeﬁne lncRNAs involved in the treatment of CML with
Dasatinib and Ponatinib. Cytotoxicity, apoptosis and lncRNA
expression pro ﬁles were evaluated by WST-8 assay, APO-
DIRECT in ﬂow-cytometry and qRT-PCR, respectively.
Ponatinib exhibited higher cytotoxic and apoptotic activity
than Dasatinib in K562-cells. Apoptosis-regulating lncRNAsHULC, HOTAIR, HOXA3AS and ANRIL that suppresses
the DNA-damage response genes were down-regulated, while
transcription-controller 7S K was up-regulated with both TKIs.
Among lncRNAs associated with the pathways that are
activated by BCR-ABL1; BCMS and PTENP1 were regulated
with both TKIs, while GAS5 was only regulated withPonatinib. In addition to the up-regulation of WT1-AS that
suppresses WT1 oncogene by binding to its promoter, a
prominent increase in Zeb2NAT and devastating decreases inPSF-inhibiting-RNA, BC017743, SCA8, and HOTTIP were
speciﬁc to Ponatinib treatment. NCRMS, HOTAIRM1,
Gomafu alterations were associ ated with Dasatinib-speci ﬁc
response. Our study reveals that numerous lncRNAs are
involved in anti-leukemic activities of Dasatinib and Ponatinib
treatment. These results wil l contribute to understanding
signalization occurring in CML cells after standard treatment.
Expression pro ﬁle of lncRNAs in K562 cell line after treatment with Dasatinib or Ponatinib
lncRNAs similarly regulated with
Dasatinib and PonatiniblncRNAs regulated with
DasatiniblncRNAs regulated with
Ponatinib
lncRNA
SymbolsFold Change
with
Dasatinib
(Log2Transformed)Fold Change
with
Ponatinib
(Log2Transformed)lncRNA
SymbolsFold Change
with
Dasatinib
(Log2Transformed)lncRNA
SymbolsFold Change
with
Ponatinib
(Log2Transformed)
Zeb2NAT 2.13 15.91 TEA
ncRNAs18.63 WT1-AS 5.27
PTENP1 3.08 2.15 H19 16.44 HAR1B 4.88
7SK 3.11 2.14 NCRMS
(RMST)16.20 21A 3.55
PCAT-43 -13.29 -2.46 DLG2AS 12.42 LUST 2.60
BCMS
(DLEU1)-2.29 -2.55 PRINS 6.69 BACE1AS 2.261734LincRNA-
VLDLR-4.56 -2.61 DHFR
upstream
transcripts2.30 GAS5 2.21
HOTAIR -3.83 -2.77 ST7OT1 -2.00 NDM29 2.06
HULC -2.88 -2.92 HAR1B -2.09 TEA
ncRNAs-2.11
MER11C -4.98 -5.53 Sox2OT -2.52 aHIF -2.58
LincRNA-
SFMBT2-4.19 -5.76 ST7OT2 -2.53 BC200 -2.73
HOXA3AS
BE873347-4.34 -6.76 LUST -2.60 IPW -2.97
PCAT-29 -5.12 -7.16 BIC -2.68 TU_0017629 -3.35
ANRIL -12.64 -11.46 NEAT1 -2.83 DLG2AS -4.71
PCAT-1 -9.04 -12.36 anti-NOS2A -3.21 ST7OT4 -6.13
PCAT-14 -7.56 -12.40 PR-AT2 -3.35 PRINS -6.77
ST7OT3 -3.05 -14.47 L1PA16 -3.37 SCA8 -9.87
PCAT-32 -8.90 -16.16 LIT -3.39 HOTTIP -11.17
PSF
inhibitingRNA-2.25 -17.29 HOXA3AS
BI823151-4.11 AAA1 -14.29
NDM29 -5.23 BC017743 -16.53
HOTAIRM1 -6.01
Gomafu
(MIAT)-9.12
Air -18.14
C. Kayabasi: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. T. Balci
Okcanoglu: None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. A. Asik:
None. Z. Mutlu: None. C. Caliskan Kurt: None. B.
Goker Bagca: None. R. Gasimli: None. C. Celebi: None.
E. Tayfur: None. C. Biray Avci: None. F. Sahin: None.
G. Saydam: None. C. Gunduz: None.
P17.25B
Analysis of miRNA expression in non-small cell lung
cancer
V. Y. Petkova1, S. Giragosyan1, D. Kachakova1,
A. Mitkova1, D. Marinova2, Y. Slavova-Marinova2,
V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1
11Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2University Hospital for Pulmonary Diseases “St.
Soﬁa", Department of Bronchology, So ﬁa, Bulgaria., So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Introduction: MicroRNAs(MiRNAs) can help understand-
ing the carcinogenesis of lung cancer and serve as potentialdiagnostic biomarkers for differentiating adenocarcinoma
(ADC) and squamous cell lung carcinoma(SCC). Тhe aim of
the present study is to analyse and compare the expressionpatterns of miRNAs in ADC and SCC samples
Materials and Methods: Fresh frozen tissue samples
from 24 non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC) patients(12ADC,12SCC) and adjacent normal tissues were exam-
ined. The expression of miRNAs was evaluated by Sur-
ePrint human miRNA microarrays (Agilent Technologies).The normalization of data and the statistical analysis were
performed by GeneSpring GXsoftware.Results: We assessed the expression levels of 2549
human mature miRNAs and found 13 to be signi ﬁcantly
differentially expressed (fold change (FC)>2.0 and
FDR<0.005) between the ADC and adjacent normal tissues.
Hsa-miR-210-3p, hsa-miR-21-3p and hsa-miR-130b-3p
were upregulated. One hundred twenty eight miRNAswere signi ﬁcantly differentially expressed (FC>2.0 and
FDR<0.001) between the SCC and adjacent normal tissues
of which 56 were upregulated and 72 downregulated.Hsa-miR-30a-5p(FC =-6.48) and hsa-miR-195-3p(FC =-21.07)
were signi ﬁcantly downregulated in ADC,whilehsa-miR-
30a-3p(FC =-210.94) and hsa-miR-195-5p(FC =-154.26)in
SCC.In SCC we also identi ﬁed 6 aberrantly expressed miR-
5p/-3p pairs that potentially modulate the gene expression
of proteins:hsa-miR-140-3p/hsa-miR-140-5p,hsa-miR-143-3p/hsa-miR-143-5p,hsa-miR-145-3p/hsa-miR-145-5p,hsa-
miR-29c-3p/hsa-miR-29c-5p,hsa-miR-30b-3p/hsa-miR-
30b-5p and hsa-miR-532-3p/hsa-miR-532-5p.
Conclusions: The expression patterns of miRNAs and
their target genes revealed both common and subtype spe-
ciﬁc signal pathways for ADC and SCC. Our results were in
agreement with previous suggestions that miR-5p/-3ppairs
coregulated protein interaction networks critical to lung
cancer development. However further analysis of enlargedsample and validation of the microarray results by qRT-
PCR is necessary to ascertain their diagnostic potential in
NSCLC.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Grants
DH03/16/19.12.2016, DUNK01/2/2009,NSF/MES/Bulgaria.
V.Y. Petkova: None. S. Giragosyan: None. D. Kacha-
kova: None. A. Mitkova: None. D. Marinova: None. Y.
Slavova-Marinova: None. V. Mitev: None. R.
Kaneva: None.
P17.26C
Peripheral blood DNA methylation as prognostic tool inMalignant Pleural Mesothelioma
G. Cugliari
1,2, S. Guarrera1,2, C. Viberti1,2, F. Grosso3,
D. Ferrante4,5, A. Aspesi6, C. Casadio7, R. Libener8,
E. Piccolini9, D. Mirabelli10,11,12, C. Magnani4,5,12,
I. Dianzani6,12, G. Matullo1,2,12,13
1Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, IIGM, Turin, Italy,
2Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy,3Division of Medical Oncology, SS. Antonio e
Biagio General Hospital, Alessandria, Italy,4Medical
Statistics and Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Department ofTranslational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale,
Novara, Italy,
5Cancer Epidemiology Unit, CPO-Piemonte,
Novara, Italy,6Department of Health Sciences, University
of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy,7Thoracic Surgery
Unit, AOU Maggiore Della Carità, Novara, Italy,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 17358Pathology Unit, SS. Antonio e Biagio General Hospital,
Alessandria, Italy,9Pneumology Unit, Santo Spirito
Hospital, Casale Monferrato (AL), Italy,10Cancer
Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy,11Cancer Epidemiology
Unit, CPO Piemonte, Turin, Italy,12Interdepartmental
Center for Studies on Asbestos and Other Toxic
Particulates "G. Scansetti", University of Turin, Turin,
Italy,13Medical Genetics Unit, AOU Città della Salute e
della Scienza, Turin, Italy
Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a
rare and aggressive neoplasm, with limited systemic
therapeutic options and median survival time of approxi-
mately 12 months. The aim of this study was to evaluate theclinical value of DNA methylation (DNAm) in predicting
overall survival (OS) as compared to the lymphocyte-to-
monocyte ratio (LMR), which is the most usedinﬂammation-based prognostic score in MPM.
Materials and Methods: We investigated a cohort of 163
incident cases of MPM diagnosed between 2000 and 2010in the municipalities of Turin, and Casale Monferrato
(Piedmont region, Italy), an area with an exceptionally high
incidence of mesothelioma caused by asbestos occupationalexposure and contamination in the general environment
from the asbestos-cement Eternit plant that was operational
until 1986. Genome-wide methylation array (Human-Methylation450 Beadchip) to identify novel blood DNAm
markers related to overall survival in MPM was used.
Results: Kaplan-Meier survival curves highlighted
methylation levels at a single-CpG in a gene on 6p21.31
(DNAm cut-off =0.45, HR =2.14, Median Survival =243
vs 534, days; P =2.4 × 10
−05) as related to OS.
Conclusions: Our study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that a
single-CpG DNAm in a gene on 6p21.31 is an independent
marker of prognosis in patients with MPM and performsbetter than other in ﬂammation-based scores as prognostic
factor. DNAm evaluation will enable clinicians to better
predict clinically meaningful outcomes such as response tosystemic treatment and to select patients who are most
likely to bene ﬁt from intensive therapy.
G. Cugliari: None. S. Guarrera: None. C. Viberti:
None. F. Grosso: None. D. Ferrante: None. A. Aspesi:
None. C. Casadio: None. R. Libener: None. E. Piccolini:
None. D. Mirabelli: None. C. Magnani: None. I. Dia-
nzani: None. G. Matullo: None.
P17.27D
Methylation alterations in developmental and
differentiation genes drive resistance to immunotherapy
in a melanoma modelA. Kashef
1, S. Börno2, M. Renn3, J. Hausen4, T. Tüting5,
M. Hölzel6, B. Timmermann2, P. Krawitz4, J. Landsberg1
1Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2Sequencing Core Facility, Max-Planck-
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
3Rigontec GmbH, Planegg, Germany,4Institute for
Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,5Department of Dermatology, University
Hospital of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany,6Institute
for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology,
University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Background: Therapy resistance limits the ef ﬁcacy of
immunotherapy in melanoma patients. We have reportedthat phenotypic tumor cell plasticity in a pro in ﬂammatory
microenvironment drives therapy resistance to adoptive T
cell therapy (ACT). We suggest that pro-in ﬂammatory
responses induce a dedifferentiated phenotype and therapy
resistance by changing the epigenetic landscape. Here, we
performed an integrative analysis of exome, methylome andtranscriptome pro ﬁles of primary and ACT therapy resistant
cell lines in transgenic mouse model of melanoma.
Methods: To detect if ACT selects for common muta-
tions in resistant cell lines, we performed whole exome
sequencing (WES) in primary and therapy resistant cell
lines. We used Methylated DNA immunoprecipitationcoupled with next generation sequencing (MeDIP- Seq) to
track the distribution of methylation alterations in target
genomes. Genome wide expression data are generated usingRNA sequencing.
Results: We did not ﬁnd a driver alteration in somatic
mutation patterns. Differential methylation (DM) analysisfor all samples shows profound clustering for primary cell
lines against therapy resistant cell lines. Differential
expression (DE) analysis results are consistent with pro-found DM clustering in our cell lines. Gene set enrichment
and biological pathways analyses for signi ﬁcant DE and
DM genes show the highest enrichment scores for devel-opmental pathways and differentiation proteins.
Outlook: Our results supports the hypothesis that sig-
niﬁcant changes in methylation marks drive melanoma cell
plasticity and immunotherapy resistance in our experi-
mental model. Further functional studies would shed light
on the correlation of “inﬂammatory tumor microenviron-
ment ”and epigenetically driven “resistant phenotypes ”in
melanoma.
A. Kashef: None. S. Börno: None. M. Renn: None. J.
Hausen: None. T. Tüting: None. M. Hölzel: None. B.
Timmermann: None. P. Krawitz: None. J.
Landsberg: None.1736P17.28A
Identi ﬁcation of blood cisexpression quantitative trait
methylations (eQTMs) in children
C. Ruiz1,2,3, S. Marí1, M. Vives4,2,3, C. Hernandez-
Ferrer5,6, L. Maitre1,2,3, E. Martí7,3, X. Estivill8,Á .
Carracedo9, G. Escaramís7,3, M. Vrijheid1,2,3,
J. González1,2,3, M. Bustamante1,2,3, Human Early Life
Exposome (HELIX)
1ISGlobal, Barcelona Institute for Global Health,
Barcelona, Spain,2University Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP),
Madrid, Spain,4Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona,
Spain,5Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States,6Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,7University of
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain,8Sidra Medicine, Doha,
Qatar,9University Santiago de Compostela (USC),
Santiago de Compostela, Spain
The identi ﬁcation of expression quantitative trait methyla-
tions (eQTMs), de ﬁned as correlations between gene
expression and DNA methylation levels, might help the
biological interpretation of epigenome-wide associationstudies (EWAS). Here, we aimed to identify cis-eQTMs
in child blood using data from 832 children of the Human
Early Life Exposome (HELIX) project.
Blood DNA methylation and gene expression were
assessed with the 450K and the HTA v2 arrays, respec-
tively. The relationship between methylation levels andexpression of nearby genes (transcription start site within 1
Mb window from CpG) was tested by ﬁtting 13,615,882
linear regressions adjusting for sex, age, cohort and celltype composition.
After Bonferroni correction, we found 15,403 cis-eQTMs,
9,477 (61.5%) of them showing an inverse association.They included 8,907 unique CpGs and 3,790 unique genes,
and mean distance between them was 240 kb. Cis-eQTMs
were enriched for distant promoters, N and S CpG islandshores, and transcriptional and enhancer blood chromatin
states. Genome-wide genotypic data is available for these
same children and it will be used, in future steps, toinvestigate to which extend cis-eQTMs are determined by
genetic variants.
This catalogue of cis-eQTMs will be useful for under-
standing DNA methylation effects on blood gene expres-
sion during childhood.
Funding: ISCIII PI17/01225; FP7-ENVIRONMENT
308333; HORIZON2020 733206C. Ruiz: None. S. Marí: None. M. Vives: None. C.
Hernandez-Ferrer: None. L. Maitre: None. E. Martí:
None. X. Estivill: None. Á. Carracedo: None. G. Escar-
amís: None. M. Vrijheid: None. J. González: None. M.
Bustamante: None.
P17.29B
Methylation anticipation extends to the outside of ICR1
in familial Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome patientswith ICR1 mutation
F. Sun
1,2, K. Higashimoto1, H. Soejima1
1Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Saga University,
Saga, Japan,2Department of Ultrasound, Shengjing
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China
Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is
an imprinting disorder. Gain of methylation at ICR1 (ICR1-
GOM), one of the causative alterations for BWS, is found in
5% of patients, and 20% of ICR1-GOM patients havemutations of OCT-binding motif within ICR1. Methylation
anticipation of ICR1 upon maternal transmission of the
mutation in familial BWS patients was previously reported.However, the extent of anticipation within IGF2 /H19
imprinting domain is still unclear.
Materials and Methods: Members of BWS family with
an OCT mutation were subjected to this study. Methylation
statuses of 10 differentially methylated sites, such as IGF2 -
DMR0, IGF2 -DMR2, CTS1-7, and H19-promoter, were
analyzed by quantitative bisul ﬁte-pyrosequencing.
Results: A patient, mother, and aunt with the mutation
showed ICR1-GOM, however, grandmother with themutation and other normal family members did not. CTS2,
the second nearest CTS to the mutation, was the most
highly methylated site among all sites. Not only sites withinICR1 (CTS 1-6) but also sites outside ICR1 ( IGF2 -DMRs,
CTS7, and H19-promoter) were more methylated in the
patient than in mother and aunt, indicating the methylationanticipation. Furthermore, the extent of anticipation was
greater outside ICR1 than inside ICR1. In addition, IGF2 -
DMR0 was hypomethylated in normal young adults than innormal children, and it was maintained to middle-aged
adults.
Conclusions: Methylation anticipation of ICR1 might be
due to failure of maternal methylation erasure during female
gametogenesis. The extent of anticipation was greater at the
sites far from the mutation. Hypomethylation of IGF2 -
DMR0 normally occurred in people underage.
F. Sun: None. K. Higashimoto: None. H.
Soejima: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1737P17.30C
Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in two different
types of pituitary tumors
F. Polito1,V .D’argennio2, M. Capasso2, F. Ferrau1,F .D i
Maggio2, R. Oteri1, F. Angileri1, R. Di Giorgio1,
F. Esposito1, A. Asmundo1, L. Pastore2, S. Cannavò1,
M. Aguennouz1
1University of Messina, Messina, Italy,2University of
Naples, Naples, Italy
Pituitary neuroendocrine tumor (PitNETs), are benign
tumors, distinguished in "functioning" (secreting hormones,
causing a hormonal hyperfunction syndrome) such asGrowth hormone (GH) - secreting and "non-functioning
pituitary adenoma" NFPA. Usually, PitNETs are associated
with many health and mortality complications when notadequately treated. Transphenoidal surgery is considered
the treatment choice of PitNETs, followed by medical
therapy. Sometimes the treatment is limited to selectedcases, whereby, somatostatin analogs (SSA) are used in
GH-PitNET. However, 10-30% of patients are not respon-
der to SSA, suggesting that other molecular mechanismsmay be essential for the response to drug treatment.
Therefore, the identi ﬁcation of these mechanisms, allows
to classify into subgroups PitNET patients (responders vs.non-responders). Epigenetic mechanisms can play a
dynamic role in complex diseases such pituitary cancer.
These mechanisms, including DNA methylation, in ﬂuence
the regulation of genome and the cell function. Our goal is
to identify the differential methylation between GH-
secreting and NFPA tissues.
Methods: We analyze DNA methylation data across the
genome using (a) traditional coupled t-tests to identify
signiﬁcantly differentiated methylated loci (P ≤1 × 10-7
adjusted with Bonferroni) and (b) new combinatorial algo-
rithms to identify loci that distinguish between types of
fabrics.
Results: We obtained 178 target regions that were dif-
ferentially methylated (corrected P value ≤0.05). Further-
more, only two regions were signi ﬁcantly hypomethylated
in GH compared to NFPA. We have also elucidated gene-
centric annotations (with ANNOVAR software) to obtain
distances from the closest genes and other genomic infor-mation relative to the priority regions to fuse these 3 dif-
ferent pituitary diseases.
F. Polito: None. V. D ’argennio: None. M. Capasso:
None. F. Ferrau: None. F. Di Maggio: None. R. Oteri:
None. F. Angileri: None. R. Di Giorgio: None. F. Espo-
sito: None. A. Asmundo: None. L. Pastore: None. S.
Cannavò: None. M. Aguennouz: None.P17.33B
Mitoepigenetics and neurodegenerative diseases
A. Stoccoro
1, V. Nicolì1, R. Gallo1, L. Mosca2,
F. Baldacci3, C. Del Gamba3, C. Cereda4, I. Palmieri4,
S. Gagliardi4, A. R. Smith5, K. Lunnon5, F. Coppedè1,
L. Migliore1
1Department of Translational Research & New
Technologies in Medicine & Surgery, Medical Genetics
Laboratory, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,2ASST Grande
Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy,
3Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,4IRCCS Mondino
Foundation, Pavia, Italy,5University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, United Kingdom
Introduction: In recent years growing evidence on a
potential role of altered mitochondrial epigenetic mechan-
isms (mitoepigenetics) in several diseases have emerged but
until now little attention has been given to neurodegenera-tive diseases (NDs). Recently, we reported that methylation
levels of the mitochondrial displacement loop (D-loop)
region are impaired in peripheral blood of late-onsetAlzheimer ’s disease (AD) patients, and in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients with mutations in the SOD1
gene. The major aim of this research is to further improveour knowledge on the potential role of mitoepigenetic
imbalance in neurodegeneration.
Materials and Methods: Blood samples have been col-
lected from a new cohort of 80 AD and 50 ALS and in 80
Parkinson ’s disease (PD) patients as well as from matched
controls. DNA methylation analyses have been performedby means of MS-HRM and pyrosequencing and mtDNA
copy number by means of quantitative PCR.
Results: DNA methylation analysis showed that D-loop
methylation is able to discriminate disease patients and
control subjects, and that it is also sensitive to the stage of
the disease. Moreover, D-loop methylation levels have beenfound to be inversely correlated with mtDNA copy number
and to be highly related to age and gender of the individuals
enrolled.
Conclusions: Results presented in the current study
suggest a potential involvement of mitoepigenetics imbal-
ance in NDs detectable in peripheral blood. Moreover,current results suggest that mtDNA methylation could be
sensitive to different disease stages, thus adding a new layer
of interest in the search of peripheral mitoepigenetic bio-markers for neurodegeneration.
A. Stoccoro: None. V. Nicolì: None. R. Gallo: None. L.
Mosca: None. F. Baldacci: None. C. Del Gamba: None.
C. Cereda: None. I. Palmieri: None. S. Gagliardi: None.1738A.R. Smith: None. K. Lunnon: None. F. Coppedè: None.
L. Migliore: None.
P17.34C
Polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes contribute to
MTHFR promoter methylation levels
F. Coppedè, P. Tannorella, A. Stoccoro, R. Gallo,
V. Nicolì, L. Migliore
Dept of Translational Research and New Technologies in
Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Introduction: The MTHFR gene codes for methylenete-
trahydrofolate reductase, one of the major enzimes involvedin folate metabolism. Impaired MTHFR methylation levels
are increasingly recognized to contribute to several human
pathological conditions, including male infertility, miscar-riage, congenital heart defects, stressful events, cancer, and
diabetic complications among others. Previous studies have
clearly shown a correlation between circulating folate orhomocysteine levels and MTHFR promoter methylation and
gene expression, but little is still known concerning the
contribution of polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes toMTHFR promoter methylation levels.
Materials and Methods: Two published datasets con-
taining data on MTHFR promoter methylation and of major
polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes have been inves-
tigated searching for correlation between those poly-
morphisms and MTHFR promoter methylation levels, for a
total of 300 subjects. Both datasets had been previously
generated in our laboratory in the frame of a dementia case-
control study and of a screening for maternal risk factors forDown syndrome, respectively.
Results: In both datasets under investigation, as well as in
the merged samples, we observed a correlation betweenMTHFR promoter methylation levels and both TYMS
1494del6 ( P=0.007) and DNMT3B -149C>T ( P=0.004)
polymorphisms.
Conclusions: Present results reveal that certain poly-
morphisms of folate metabolic genes contribute to MTHFR
methylation, suggesting that the expression levels of theMTHFR gene are tightly regulated by both dietary and
genetic factors.
F. Coppedè: None. P. Tannorella: None. A. Stoccoro:
None. R. Gallo: None. V. Nicolì: None. L.
Migliore: None.
P17.35D
NSD1 Mutation in Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma and its effects on histone modi ﬁcation and
DNA methylationN. Farhangdoost, C. Horth, B. Hu, E. Bareke,
J. Majewski
McGill University, Montreal, QC, CanadaIntroduction: DNA alterations and the cell-signaling
pathways involved in HPV(-) HNSCC have been studied
extensively, but we are far from understanding the under-
lying mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Recently, a subgroupof HPV(-) HNSCC has been characterized by mutations in
the Nuclear Receptor-binding SET Domain protein 1
(NSD1), suggesting a possible epigenetic etiology of thosetumors.
Method: We used two HNSCC cell lines carrying NSD1
truncating mutations (SKN-3 and SCC-4) and comparedthem with two NSD1-wildtype cell lines (Detroit562 and
Cal27). In the next step, I produced isogenic cell lines by
knocking out NSD1 gene in three NSD1-wild type HNSCCcell lines (FaDu, Detroit562, and Cal27) using CRISPR-
Cas9 method to see the same result was observed or not.
Finally, I chose 2 samples from my Cal27 NSD1-knockouts
and knocked out NDS2using the same method, but with
differently designed primers.
Results: Firstly, disruption of NSD1 —in HNSCC sam-
ples where NSD1 is naturally disrupted —leads to a global
reduction in the H3K36me2 histone modi ﬁcation at the
intergenic regions, which is accompanied by a reduction inDNA methylation. Secondly, it was shown that the decrease
of H3K36me2 mark in intergenic regions is correlated with
increased H3K27me3 in those same regions.
Conclusion: So far, we demonstrated that a drastic and
global decrease in DNA methylation at intergenic regions is
directly associated with the lack of H3K36me2 mark in thesame regions. This study will more speci ﬁcally investigate
the role of NSD1 and H3K36me2 mark and will uncover its
correlation with H3K27me3 in HNSCC.
N. Farhangdoost: None. C. Horth: None. B. Hu: None.
E. Bareke: None. J. Majewski: None.
P17.36A
Identi ﬁcation of aberrantly expressed long non-coding
RNAs in osteoblastic cells from osteoporotic patients
F. Centofanti
1, M. Santoro2, M. Marini3, V. Visconti4,
A. Rinaldi3, M. Celi5, G. Novelli4, A. Orlandi1,
V. Tancredi3, U. Tarantino5, A. Botta4
1Dep. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Anatomic Pathology
Section, University of Rome “Tor Vergata ”, Rome, Italy,
2Don Gnocchi Foundation, Milan, Italy,3Dep. of Systems
Medicine, Centre of Space Bio-Medicine, University ofRome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy,
4Dep. of Biomedicine
and Prevention, Medical Genetics Section, University ofAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1739Rome “Tor Vergata ”, Rome, Italy,5Dep. of Orthopedic
Surgery, University of Rome "Tor Vergata Rome", PTV
Foundation, Rome, Italy
Introduction: Osteoporosis (OP) is a multifactorial disease
inﬂuenced by both genetic and environmental factors. The
major cause of the bone homeostasis alteration is in ﬂam-
mation. Epigenetic factors represent a link between
individual genetic susceptibility and environmental in ﬂu-
ences associated with osteoporosis risk. In particular, long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), have a crucial role in
regulating many important biological processes in bone,including in ﬂammation.
Materials and Methods: We designed our study to
identify lncRNAs misregulated in bone cells from OPpatients with the aim to predict possible RNA and/or protein
targets implicated in this multifactorial disease. Total RNA
was extracted from osteoblast primary cultures derived byOP (n=5), and CTRs (n =5) individuals. Gene expression
has been focused on 84 lncRNAs, validated or predicted, to
regulate the expression of in ﬂammatory genes and miR-
NAs. In silico analysis using validated bioinformatics tools
has been utilized to predict the interaction of lncRNAs with
miRNAs, mRNAs and proteins targets.
Results: Seven lncRNAs were signi ﬁcantly down-
regulated in OP patients compared to controls: GRM5-
AS1; CEP83-AS1; CTC-487M23.5; GAS5; RP11-84C13.1;NCBP2-AS2 and SDCBP2-AS1. Bioinformatics analyses
identi ﬁed two lncRNAs prediction targets that are impli-
cated in bone homeostasis and in OP: CTC-487M23.5 thatinteracts with HDAC2 mRNA (a key positive regulator of
bone resorption) and GAS5 a regulator of miR-21-5p,
which itself interact with PTX3 mRNA (a novel regulator ofbone homeostasis).
Conclusions: Altogether, these data open a new reg-
ulatory mechanism of gene expression in bone homeostasisand could direct the development of future therapeutic
approaches.
This work was supported by PRIN grant #201528E7CMF. Centofanti: None. M. Santoro: None. M. Marini:
None. V. Visconti: None. A. Rinaldi: None. M. Celi:
None. G. Novelli: None. A. Orlandi: None. V. Tancredi:
None. U. Tarantino: None. A. Botta: None.
P17.37B
Human placental expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTL) identi ﬁed among genetic variants linked to
complex traits and disease susceptibility
T. Kikas
1, K. Rull1,2,3, R. N. Beaumont4, R. M. Freathy4,
M. Laan11Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,2Women ’s Clinic, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,3Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia,4Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter,Exeter, United Kingdom
Introduction: The knowledge of genetic variants shaping
placental transcriptome is limited as only one whole
genome analysis of placental expression quantitative trait
loci (eQTLs) by Peng et al. (Human Molecular Genetics,2017) has been published. Current study aimed to
investigate the extent of placental eQTLs implicated in the
programming of fetal development, postnatal metabolismand disease susceptibility.
Materials and Methods: RNA sequencing and whole
genome genotyping datasets of 40 placental samples fromREPROMETA cohort (Sõber et al., 2015; Kasak et al.,
2015) were used for the cis-eQTL analysis in Matrix eQTL
(goo.gl/wHPxxf). Selected eSNP-eGenes pairs were vali-dated by Taqman RT-qPCR and tested for the association
with birth parameters. The association testing utilized
REPROMETA (n =336), HAPPY PREGNANCY (n =408)
and ALSPAC (n =7669) cohorts.
Results: Analysis of cis-eQTLs identi ﬁed 199 (88 inde-
pendent) placental cis-eSNPs (FDR <5%). Six identi ﬁed
eSNP-eGenes pairs have been directly associated with
blood metabolites, Parkinson ’s and Alzheimer ’s disease and
colorectal cancer. Overall, 58/63 eGenes were locatedwithin 100kb of loci associated with in (auto)immunity,
anthropometric parameters, blood parameters, neu-
ropsychiatric diseases. In the REPROMETA study, a sug-gestive association was detected between the AA-genotype
of rs11678251 (ALPG c.-318 G>A) and reduced placental,
newborn ’s and infant ’s weight, but this ﬁnding did not
replicate in other cohorts.
Conclusions: This is the second report cataloguing pla-
cental cis-eQTL landscape and addressing its potential linkto the fetal development and postnatal disease program-
ming.Funding: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Council);
HAPPY PREGNANCY, 3.2.0701.12-0047 (EuropeanRegional Development Fund); 102215/2/13/2 (UK Medical
Research Council, Wellcome Trust), Sir Henry Dale Fel-
lowship (WT104150).
T. Kikas: None. K. Rull: None. R.N. Beaumont: None.
R.M. Freathy: None. M. Laan: None.
P17.39D
Introducing miR-885-5p as a potential biomarker for
preeclampsia diagnosis: emphasizing the role of WNTsignaling pathway1740H. Saei Ahan1, M. Abiri1, M. Nourbakhsh2, S. Talebi1
1Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology,
Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University ofMedical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Preeclampsia is a heterogeneous condition
that can be challenging to diagnose, given the wide
spectrum of presentation and the current lack of a robust
diagnostic test. Aberrant placental miRNA expressionmight be associated with preeclampsia. One of the most
upregulated miRNA in the serum of PE patients is miR-
885-5p. Catenin-beta (CTNNB1) is the predicted target ofmiR-885-5p, which has been reported to have a relatively
low expression level in the placenta of PE patients. This
study was conducted to determine the aberrant expressionof miR-885-5p in women with preeclampsia vs. matched
healthy control. Also, the target and function of the
candidate miRNA was evaluated in HTR-8 and JEG-3 celllines. Study design: Quantitative comparison of miR-885-
5p expression in placenta and serum of 20 pregnant women
vs. control was conducted. miRNA target analysis was doneby in silico and functional assay. Expression analysis of
miRNA was veri ﬁed by studying cell proliferation, and
apoptosis by ﬂow cytometry, invasion, and migration by
Transwell assay.
Results: miR-885-5p and its target CTNNB1 was sig-
niﬁcantly up and down-regulated in the placenta of PE
patients respectively. Forced expression of miR-885-5p
suppressed CTNNB1 protein expression in HTR-8 cells.
The functional assay suggested that the over-expression ofmiR-885-5p alter invasion, migration, and cell proliferation
capacity of JEG-3 cells and induce apoptosis of HTR-
8 cells.
Conclusion: miR-885-5p involved in the pathogenesis of
preeclampsia by targeting CTNNB1 and regulating the
invasion and apoptosis of trophoblast cells. It can be sug-gested as a potential biomarker for risk assessment of
preeclampsia.
H. Saei Ahan: None. M. Abiri: None. M. Nourbakhsh:
None. S. Talebi: None.
P17.40A
Disease interpretation of regulatory variants with
GeneHancer
S. Fishilevich, R. Barshir, M. Twik, I. Bahir, T. Iny Stein,
M. Safran, D. Lancet
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, IsraelWhole genome sequencing (WGS) variant analysis and
interpretation requires an exploration of non-genic func-
tional genomic elements such as promoters and enhancers,
involved in development and implicated in disease. The
comprehensive identi ﬁcation of regulatory elements and
their gene targets is a signi ﬁcant challenge. We created
GeneHancer (PMID:28605766), a regulatory element
database within the GeneCards Suite ( https://www.geneca
rds.org/ ), with 250,000 enhancers and promoters. Informa-
tion is amalgamated from ENCODE, Ensembl, FANTOM5,
VISTA, dbSUPER, EPDnew, UCNEbase and GTEx.
GeneHancer creates a unique non-redundant and compre-hensive view of regulatory elements, including their target
gene associations, transcription factor binding sites, tissue
speciﬁcity and super-enhancer mapping. We recently focus
on phenotype/disease annotation of such elements, based on
variant-trait mappings from the GWAS Catalog, and
literature-curated evidence from DiseaseEnhancer andNCBI Entrez Gene. GeneHancer is now used by a
considerable fraction of GeneCards ’4 million user base to
annotate non-coding variants, and was recently included asa native regulation track at the UCSC genome browser,
where it is the only source for explicit regulatory regions
and gene associations. GeneHancer provides an indispen-sable augmentation for the GeneCards ’NGS disease
interpretation tools: VarElect, a phenotype interpreter, and
TGex, a VCF-to-report analyzer (PMID:27357693), usedby major clinical sequencing centers. Non-coding variants
are mapped to regulatory regions, and then prioritized with
respect to diseases and phenotype keywords via direct andtarget gene-mediated links. Such capacities provide a
comprehensive route to deciphering the clinical signi ﬁcance
of non-coding single nucleotide and structural variations,thus helping to elucidate unsolved disease cases. Support:
LifeMap Sciences grant
S. Fishilevich: None. R. Barshir: None. M. Twik:
None. I. Bahir: None.
T. Iny Stein: None. M. Safran:
None. D. Lancet: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; LifeMap Sciences.
P17.41B
Understanding Epigenetic relevance by evaluating
Genetic underpinnings of One Carbon metabolism in
Intracranial Aneurysm
S. CM
1, S. Sathyan1,S .K R1,P .S2, M. Banerjee1
1Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram, India,2Calicut Medical College,
Calicut, IndiaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1741Introduction: Intracranial aneurysm (IA) leads to a
devastating consequence called subarachnoid hemorrhage
and it is crucial to have an early detection. Possible genetic
or epigenetic biomarker identi ﬁcation is important to have a
proper management in case of IA.
Material and Methods: Ethnically and geographically
matched subject were selected and subjected to genomic
DNA isolation from peripheral blood using phenol-
chloroform method. Genotyping was carried out by San-ger’s dideoxy method. Various statistical and computational
methods like chi-square, LD analysis, Haploview were
performed. Evaluation of gene expression for risk allele wascarried out using In-silico approach by mining GTEx data.
Functional relevance of the associated SNPs were further
carried out by retrieving data from Ensembl and Haploregto identify possible mode of impact of SNP on the regula-
tion of the gene.
Results: MTHFR rs1801131 (A1286C) present in C-
terminal regulatory domain, was found to be signi ﬁcantly
associated with IA. Another variant MTRR rs10380 present
near to FADH2 binding pocket, which is in an active site forthe co-factor vit-B12 was also found to be signi ﬁcantly
associated. BHMT involves with the direct conversion of
homocysteine (HCy) back to methionine with the help ofbetaine and choline, here SNP rs3733890 was associated
with Aneurysm. GTEx data for the associated alleles do
indicate altered expression pro ﬁle suggesting a possible
accumulation of HCy.
Conclusions: Risk alleles in one carbon metabolism
genes are associated with IA indicating increased HCyaccumulation. Understanding this role of one carbon
metabolism in IA may suggest a genotype speci ﬁc vitamin
intervention in IA prevention.
S. Cm: None. S. Sathyan: None. S. Kr: None. P. S:
None. M. Banerjee: None.
P17.42C
Genome-wide circular RNA analysis of tMCAO rat
model: novel insight to the neurotransmission regulationin rat brain after cerebral ischemia
I. B. Filippenkov
1, V. V. Stavchansky1, A. E. Denisova2,
N. S. Ionov2, L. V. Valieva3, S. A. Limborska1,2,
L. V. Dergunova1,2
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian
National Research Medical University, Moscow, RussianFederation,
3D. Mendeleyev University of Chemical
Technology of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Ischemic brain stroke is one of the most
serious and socially signi ﬁcant diseases. The study ofregulatory RNAs in ischemia has exceptional importance
for the development of new strategies for neuroprotection.
The circular RNAs (circRNAs) have closed structure,
predominantly brain-speci ﬁc expression and remain highly
promising targets of research. CircRNAs can act as miRNA
sponges for protection of the encoding mRNA. The work isdevoted to the study of the circRNA functioning in the rat
brain after temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion
(tMCAO).
Materials and Methods: tMCAO model, magnetic
resonance imaging, histological examination, high-
throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), real-time RT-PCR, bioinformatics.
Results: Using RNA-Seq 11,134 circRNAs were ana-
lysed in the subcortical structures of the rat brain. Werevealed 395 circRNAs that changed their expression (Fold
change>1.5, padj<0.05) at 24h after tMCAO. They were
encoded by glutamate receptor (Gria1, Grm3), catalytic(Adcy5, Ntrk2), transporter (Kcnd2, Kcnq2) and other
genes associated mainly with neurotransmission signaling
pathway. Bioinformatic analysis predicted circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network which may determine the neuro-
transmission signaling regulation for stroke. The largest
number of competitive interactions with miRNAs wasfound between circRNAs of Marf1, Ppp4r4 and Plcb1
genes, as well as mRNAs of Stx1a and Ccnd1 genes that
changed their expression after tMCAO.
Conclusion: Genome-wide circRNA pro ﬁling reveals
novel insight to the neurotransmission regulation in rat brain
after cerebral ischemia. We assumed that circRNAs may bekey nodes of the regulation of the neurotransmission genetic
response and therapeutic targets for stroke.
This work was supported by grant from the Russian
Science Foundation 17-74-10189.
I.B. Filippenkov: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Modest; Grant from the Russian
Science Foundation 17-74-10189. V.V. Stavchansky:
None. A.E. Denisova: None. N.S. Ionov: None. L.V.
Valieva: None. S.A. Limborska: None. L.V.
Dergunova: None.
P17.43D
The T1D-associated lncRNA Lnc13 modulates
pancreatic beta cell in ﬂammation by allele-speci ﬁc
stabilization of STAT1 andSTAT2 mRNA
I. Gonzalez-Moro
1,2, A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia3,2,
I. Santin1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio3,2
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain,2Biocruces
Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain,17423Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and
Animal Physiology, University of the Basque Country,
Leioa, Spain
The majority of type 1 diabetes (T1D) association signals lie
in non-coding regions of the human genome and many havebeen predicted to affect the expression and secondary
structure of lncRNAs. However, the mechanisms by which
these molecules contribute to the pathogenesis of T1Dremain to be clari ﬁed.
Preliminary results of our group have demonstrated that
the expression of several T1D-associated lncRNAs ismodiﬁed by diabetogenic stimuli, such as viral infections
and pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines, in pancreatic βcells. Of
special interest are the results obtained in the characteriza-tion of Lnc13 , a lncRNA expressed and upregulated by viral
dsRNA in βcells that harbors a SNP associated with T1D
(rs917997).
Overexpression of Lnc13 in human βcells led to an
increase in STAT1/2 pathway activation that correlated with
increased production of pro-in ﬂammatory chemokines.
Interestingly, when the Lnc13 harboring the risk allele for
T1D (rs917997*C) was transfected, the increase in STAT1/
2 signaling was more pronounced than in cells transfectedwith the plasmid encoding the Lnc13 with the protection
allele (rs917997*T). In addition, the effect of Lnc13 upre-
gulation on chemokine production was also allele-speci ﬁc.
Our studies have shown that intracellular PIC induces
Lnc13 translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm,
increasing STAT1/2 mRNA stability by promoting its
interaction with a protein named PCBP2.
In conclusion, our results show that Lnc13 participates in
pancreatic βcell in ﬂammation via regulation of the STAT1/
2 signaling pathway, suggesting a functional effect of this
lncRNA in T1D pathogenesis.
This work was funded by Basque Health Department
and SED.
I. Gonzalez-Moro: None. A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia:
None. I. Santin: None. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None.
P18
Genetic epidemiology - Population genetics - Statistical
methodology - Evolutionary genetics
P18.01A
The demographic history of Afro-descendants in the
Vale do Ribeira region (São Paulo, Brazil), revealed bygenomic data
K. Nunes, L. Kimura, M. A. Silva, R. B. Lemes,
D. Rincon, D. Meyer, R. C. Mingroni-NettoInstituto de Biociências Universidade de S ão Paulo, S ão
Paulo, Brazil
Introduction: During Colonial Period, about four million
Africans were brought to Brazil as slaves. Throughout this
period, many runaway, abandoned and freed slaves foundedsmall isolated rural communities, the Quilombos . In the
state of São Paulo, most Quilombo remnants are located in
the Vale do Ribeira region.
Objective: To shed light on the admixture dynamics of
12 Quilombo
communities in Vale do Ribeira, we used a
genomics approach.
Material and Methods: 665 individuals were genotyped
with ~600K SNP array (Axiom Human Origins, Affyme-
trix), and analyzed to estimate ancestry and effectivepopulation sizes (Ne).
Results: African, European and Native American ances-
tries contribute, respectively, 44%, 40%, and 16% forautosomes, 49%, 2%, and 49% for mtDNA and 32%, 63%,
and 6% for the Y chromosome. This reveals directional
mating involving European men with African and Nativewomen. We further dissected timing of admixture and
ﬂuctuation in effective population sizes. Using ancestry
estimates of Ne based on IBD, we found the smallest Ne ~7generations ago, coinciding with the origin of these com-
munities. We inferred that admixture between Africans and
Europeans occurred with greatest intensity 13 generationsago (± 8-18), prior to the origin of these Quilombos.
However, admixture with Native Americans occurred 7
generations ago (±3-12).
Conclusion: TheQuilombo populations have a history of
directional mating between European men with African and
Native women, involving two main periods of admixture,13 (involving Africans and Europeans) and 7 (involving
Native Americans) generations ago.
Financial Support: FAPESP 12/18010-0, FAPESP-
CEPID 13/08028-1 and NIH grant GM-075091
K. Nunes: None. L. Kimura: None. M.A. Silva: None.
R.B. Lemes: None. D. Rincon: None. D. Meyer: None. R.
C. Mingroni-Netto: None.
P18.02B
Digenic autosomal Alport syndrome in the context of
isolated population
A. Zupan
1, G. Grubelnik1, A. Momirovska2
1Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2Synlab laboratories, Skopje, Macedonia, The
Former Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Studying population isolates in the context
of genetic and phenotypic variation can provide us a uniqueAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1743insight into genetic differentiation and phenotypic expres-
sions. One of the isolated communities is the Gali čnik
population. It is one of the oldest villages in Macedonia,
founded by the Slavic ethnic group called Mijaks around the
10thcentury. Among the individuals of Gali čnik population,
the nephropathy was detected with clinical manifestationslinked to the Alport syndrome.
Materials and Methods: In total, 111 saliva samples
were collected from Macedonian individuals with paternaland/or maternal origin from the Gali čnik village. For the
purpose of population analysis, 44 unrelated male samples
were obtained from the dataset. A total of 16 Y-chromosome biallelic markers and 17 Y-STR markers
were analysed using a high-resolution melt analysis and
capillary fragment analysis. For detection of the COL4A3,COL4A4, and COL4A5 mutations, custom-made NGS
panel was used.
Results and Conclusions: Analysis revealed two muta-
tions, both affecting autosomal chromosome 2. First muta-
tion was detected in exon 38 of the COL4A3 gene, resulting
in an in-frame deletion of three amino acids and the secondmutation in exon 13 of the COL4A4 gene, resulting in a
glycine substitution within Gly-X-Y triple helical domain.
Segregation analysis revealed that the two mutations wereinherited together on the same chromosome, like in cis
following digenic autosomal inheritance pattern. Population
analysis of the Gali čnik population showed a high level of
genetic homogeneity within Gali čnik population and strong
genetic af ﬁliations of Gali čnik population with West-Slavic
populations, especially the Polish population.
A. Zupan: None. G. Grubelnik: None. A.
Momirovska: None.
P18.03C
The GenomeAsia 100K Pilot Project: Enabling
Medically Relevant Genetic Discoveries Across Asia
E. Stawiski
1, GenomeAsia100K Consortium, A. Peterson2
1MedGenome, Foster City, CA, United States,2Genentech,
South San Francisco, CA, United States
Introduction: Population-scale genome sequencing pro-
jects designed to lay the foundation for furthering our
understanding of the genetic basis of disease are underwayin the US and Europe, but large-scale and in-depth
characterization of Asian genome variation has not yet
been attempted despite the incredible diversity across thecontinent. We describe here the ﬁrst stage of a project to
characterize genetic variation across Asian populations with
the ultimate goal of providing a rich resource for precisionmedicine.Materials and Methods: In this pilot phase we focused
on population isolates to capture a broad swath of genetic
diversity across the continent. We have characterized the
genomes of 1,739 individuals, including 1,236 newly
sequenced high coverage whole genomes, representing 64
countries and more than 200 ethnic groups.
Results: We identi ﬁed 63 million SNPs, 29 million of
which have not been previously described, and nearly 4
million indels. The underlying samples have GIS coordi-nates indicating their origin, allowing variant frequencies to
be displayed geographically. To evaluate the eventual value
of a population-scale catalogue of Asian variants to preci-sion medicine and molecular diagnostics, we generated
pharmacogenomic predictions, identi ﬁed Asian speci ﬁco r
enriched disease alleles and demonstrated the value of usingAsian allele frequency ﬁlters in disease gene discovery such
as MODY, familial disease and cancer.
Conclusions: The dataset provides resources that will
greatly increase the ability to carry out genetic studies in
Asian populations and provides a reference point for scaling
efforts towards a much larger catalogue of Asian geneticvariation.
E. Stawiski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; MedGenome. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
MedGenome. A. Peterson: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Genentech. E. Ownership Interest (stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Genentech.
P18.04D
Estimated autozygosity in Norwegian family trios and its
relation to the timing of birth
P. Sole-Navais
1, J. Bacelis1, G. Zhang2,3, Ø. Helgeland4,5,
D. Modzelewska1, M. Vaudel5,6, S. Johansson5,6,
P. R. Njølstad5,7, L. J. Muglia2,3, B. Jacobsson1,4
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of
Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,2Cincinnati Children ’s
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States,
3Human Genetics Division, Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States,4Division of
Health Data and Digitalization, Department of Geneticsand Bioinformatics, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Oslo, Norway,
5KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen,Bergen, Norway,
6Center for Medical Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway,7Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway1744Inbreeding leads to autozygosity in long segments of the
genome, and increases the probability of carrying deleter-
ious homozygous mutations with recessive effects. Because
heritability of birth timing has a strong dominant compo-
nent, we hypothesized that genes involved in parturition
would display higher recessive effects, driving estimatedautozygosity to shorten gestational duration.
We investigated runs of homozygosity (ROH) in relation
to spontaneous delivery in 13000 family trios.
We estimated maternal, fetal and paternal autozygosity as
the percentage of autosomal SNP mappable distance cov-
ered by ROH (F
ROH) and mapped ROHs to protein-coding
genes by the percentage of overlapping length between
ROH and gene coordinates (ROH gene). We used survival
analysis to estimate the effect of F ROHand ROH geneon time-
to-spontaneous delivery in ~9000 (discovery) and ~4000
(replication) triads of Norwegian ancestry from the MoBa
cohort.
While we observed a correlation between parental and
fetal F ROH (R=0.14), the correlation was not detected
between maternal and paternal F ROH(R=0.06). Evidence
from estimated autozygosity analysis suggests an effect of
maternal F ROH on spontaneous delivery risk (HR, 1.008;
95%CI, 1.003-1.014), despite failing the replication attempt(1.003; 0.994-1.011). Consistent with our hypothesis,
maternal ROH
gene mapping revealed six protein-coding
genes associated with higher spontaneous delivery risk(pvalue<7.3x10
-6, no replication) and a right skewness of z-
scores (>55% of genes increased spontaneous delivery risk;
χ2pvalue<2.2x10-16).
Estimated autozygosity highlights the role of maternal
genome on, and the dominant component of gestational
duration. Whether this is due to speci ﬁc genes or homo-
zygous segments spread throughout the genome remains
unknown.
P. Sole-Navais: None. J. Bacelis: None. G. Zhang:
None. Ø. Helgeland: None. D. Modzelewska: None. M.
Vaudel: None. S. Johansson: None. P.R. Njølstad: None.
L.J. Muglia: None. B. Jacobsson: None.
P18.05A
Whole genome sequencing data increases power andprecision to genome wide association studies
J. Höglund, N. Rafati, M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson,
W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden
Introduction: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identi ﬁed associations between thousands of geneticvariants and human traits. However, these associations only
explain a limited fraction of the heritability of most traits.
Additionally, the contribution of rare variants is still largely
unknown, one reason being that they usually are not tagged
by common tagSNPs used in GWAS. A powerful resource
for identifying trait-associated variants is by whole genomesequencing (WGS) in cohorts comprised of families or
individuals from a limited geographical area.
Materials and Methods: GWAS were performed in a
kinship-structured population-based cohort from northern
Sweden (N =1021) with WGS data. Genetic associations
were tested for 85 in ﬂammatory biomarker proteins mea-
sured in blood plasma samples.
Results: We identi ﬁed 44 independent associations, that
comprised 5813 single nucleotide variant-protein associa-tions for 42 in ﬂammatory markers. Six of the lead variants
were low frequency variants (MAF<5%), and one associa-
tion with a rare variant (MAF<1%) was identi ﬁed. Here, we
report 19 novel regions as well as 25 loci that were not
detected in the same cohort in analyses on genotyped and
imputed SNPs.
Conclusions: Even in a GWA approach, we gain power
and precision by using WGS data. This is suggestive of a
more accurate determination of genotypes using WGScompared to imputations. However, the limited sample size
did not allow for identifying further associations with rare
variants.
The research was funded by SSMF, VR and SciLifeLab,
as well as the Kjell and Märta Beijers, the Göran Gus-
tafssons, the Borgström/Hedström, the Åke Wiberg, and theSwedish Heart-Lung Foundation.
J. Höglund: None. N. Rafati: None. M. Rask-Ander-
sen: None. T. Karlsson: None. W.E. Ek: None. Å.
Johansson: None.
P18.07C
Genome-Wide Association Study of Body Fat
Distribution identi ﬁes Novel Adiposity Loci and Sex-
Speci
ﬁc Genetic Effects
M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson, W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
In this study, we performed genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) for the distribution of body fat to the
arms, legs and trunk. Fat mass for each compartment were
estimated from segmental bio-electrical impedance analysis(sBIA) for 362,499 individuals from the UK Biobank. A
total of 98 loci, were identi ﬁed to be associated with body
fat distribution, 29 of which have not previously beenassociated with an anthropometric trait. A high degree of
sex-heterogeneity was observed and associations wereAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1745primarily observed in females, particularly for distribution
of fat to the legs and trunk. Enrichment analysis indicates
involvement of mesenchyme derived tissues and cell types.
In conclusion, GWAS of sBIA-determined body fat
distribution revealed a genetic architecture that in ﬂuences
the distribution of body fat throughout the human body andshowed that genetic variation has a stronger in ﬂuence on the
proportion of fat stored in the trunk and legs in females.
Determining the genetic determinants and mechanisms thatlead to a favorable distribution of body fat may help in risk
assessment and in identifying novel venues for intervention
to prevent or treat obesity-related disease. The work wassupported by grants from the Swedish Society for Medical
Research (SSMF), the Kjell and Märta Beijers Foundation,
Göran Gustafssons Foundation, the Swedish MedicalResearch Council (Project Number 2015-03327), the
Marcus Borgström Foundation, The Swedish Heart-Lung
foundation, and the Åke Wiberg Foundation.
M. Rask-Andersen: None. T. Karlsson: None. W.E.
Ek:None. Å. Johansson: None.
P18.08D
The human-speci ﬁcBOLA2 duplication modi ﬁes iron
homeostasis and anemia predisposition
G. Giannuzzi
1, E. Porcu1,2, G. Willemin1, X. Nuttle3,
D. Risso3, J. Chrast1, K. Hoekzema3, 16p11.2 Consortium,
Y. Herault4, R. Bernier3, Z. Kutalik1,2, E. Eichler3,5,
A. Reymond1
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland,
3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,
4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Illkirch, France,5Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States
Recurrent pathogenic copy-number variation (CNV) at
chromosome 16p11.2 is mediated by human-speci ﬁc
duplications under positive selection. This duplication is
copy-number variant and includes 3 to 8 copies of BOLA2 ,
which encodes a protein involved in the maturation of iron-sulfur cytosolic proteins.
To investigate the potential human advantage of BOLA2
duplication, we assessed hematological traits and iron-related phenotypes of 379385 controls, 89 16p11.2 deletion
and 56 duplication carriers in the UKBiobank, as deletion
and duplication individuals have, respectively, less andmore copies of BOLA2 than controls. We found that
16p11.2 deletion is strongly associated with anemia (18/89
carriers, 20%, P=3e-10), particularly iron-de ﬁciency ane-
mia. To gauge whether this phenotype was due to BOLA2 ,
we collected clinical information of 16p11.2 deletioncarriers with varying numbers of BOLA2 copies, and found
an association between low BOLA2 dosage and anemia
(P=1e-4). In particular, 8 out of 15 (53%) individuals with
three copies needed iron supplementation and/or were
anemic. To con ﬁrm our ﬁndings, we analyzed hematolo-
gical traits and plasma iron level in mouse models carryingthe 16p11.2 orthologous deletion and, more speci ﬁcally,
Bola2
+/-andBola2-/-mice. Agreeing with human data, all
models showed signi ﬁcantly lower blood iron and hemo-
globin levels and smaller red blood cells than wild-type
littermates, with a linear relation with Bola2 dosage when
comparing Bola2+/+,Bola2+/-andBola2-/-mice.
Our results show that BOLA2 participates in iron home-
ostasis and a lower dosage is associated with anemia. These
data highlight a potential adaptive role of the human-speciﬁc expansion of BOLA2 in improving iron metabolism.
G. Giannuzzi: None. E. Porcu: None. G. Willemin:
None. X. Nuttle: None. D. Risso: None. J. Chrast: None.
K. Hoekzema: None. Y. Herault: None. R. Bernier:
None. Z. Kutalik: None. E. Eichler: None. A.
Reymond: None.
P18.09A
The variety of genetic variants of the CFTR gene
according to the 2017 Register of the Russian Federation
E. Kondratyeva
1, S. Krasovsky1,2, N. Kashirskaya1,
E. Amelina2, A. Chernyak1, A. Polyakov1,
T. Ivashchenko3, A. Pavlov4, R. Zinchenko1, E. Ginter1,
O. Odinokova5, L. Nazarenko5, N. Kapranov1,
V. Sherman1, A. Voronkova1, M. Starinova1,
V. Izhevskaya1, A. Zodbinova1, Y. Melyanovskaya1,
S. Kutsev1
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2FMBA Research Institute of Pulmonology,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Research Institute of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine them.
D.O. Otta, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation,4Parsek
Lab, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation,5Tomsk National
Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation
Objective: To determine the diversity and frequency of the
identi ﬁedCFTR pathogenic variants in the Russian
Federation (RF) based on 2017 CF Registry data.
Material and Methods: Information used from the
national CF Register 2017. The CF Register included data
about 3096 Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patients. Genetic tests wereperformed in 92.4% of patients (92.6% of adults, 87.0% of
children).
Results: 196 genetic variants were identi ﬁed. 44 genetic
variants are not described in the CFTR data bases. The ten
most common genetic variants are F508del (52.8%),1746CFTRdele2.3 (6.2%), E92K (3.0%), 2143delT (2.1%), 3849
+10kbC->T (2.0%), W1282X (1.9%), 2184insA (1.8%),
1677delTA (1.8%), N1303K (1.5%), G542X (1.3%). Two
pathogenic alleles were identi ﬁed in 80.2%, one in 16.1%,
and no allele could be detected in 3.7% of patients. The
proportion of F508del homozygotes was 29.6%, hetero-zygotes - 46.4%, genotypes without F508del - 24.0%. The
distribution of variants according to the mutation types was
as follows: in frame deletions/insertions prevailed (61.3%);frameshift deletions/insertions - 10.3%; missense mutations
- 6% (more common in adults); nonsense mutations - 6.6%
(more frequent in children); splicing disorders - 8.3% (twiceas often in adults); large in/del - 7.5% (found with the same
frequency in both adults and children).
Conclusion: The most common genetic variant is
F508del - 52.8%. There have been identi ﬁed genetic var-
iants that are not found in international CFTR bases, their
clinical signi ﬁcance is further con ﬁrmed. The work was
performed as part of the state assignment of the Ministry of
Education and Science of Russia.
E. Kondratyeva: None. S. Krasovsky: None. N.
Kashirskaya: None. E. Amelina: None. A. Chernyak:
None. A. Polyakov: None. T. Ivashchenko: None. A.
Pavlov: None. R. Zinchenko: None. E. Ginter: None. O.
Odinokova: None. L. Nazarenko: None. N. Kapranov:
None. V. Sherman: None. A. Voronkova: None. M.
Starinova: None. V. Izhevskaya: None. A. Zodbinova:
None. Y. Melyanovskaya: None. S. Kutsev: None.
P18.10B
Phenotypic trait association study and population
history inference from 90, 737 Chinese individuals
X. Yao, A. Lan, L. Wang, H. Weng, S. Tang, G. Chen
WeGene, Shenzhen, ChinaA recent study of large scale non-invasive prenatal testing in
Chinese women has yielded new insights of phenotypic traitassociations and population history by extremely low
coverage sequencing data. Extending to microarray data
from 90,737 samples with all genders, population geneticsand association studies were performed on self-reported
phenotypes of both men and women. In all minorities and
randomly selected Han Chinese, a principal componentanalysis showed similar genetic population structure with
the previous study. We also replicated the private allele
sharing patterns, where levels of allele sharing with CEUand ITU from 1000 genome project are higher in northwest
and southwest respectively. In the genetic adaption of
Chinese population, all the 14 adaptive reported SNPs arevalidated signi ﬁcantly differentiated from north to south
China. And for replicated genome-wide association studyresults, 69.6% (32 of 46) reported SNPs are signi ﬁcantly
associated with height, and 69.2% (9 of 13) SNPs for BMI.
Our study extended the main conclusions of the previous
study to all genders and showed the potential of self-
reported data for population study and phenotypic associa-
tion study in China.
X. Yao: None. A. Lan: None. L. Wang:
None. H.
Weng: None. S. Tang: None. G. Chen: None.
P18.11C
Human genetic determinants of chronic low-grade
inﬂammation in the general population
F. Hodel1,2, P. Marques-Vidal3, P. Vollenweider3,
J. Fellay1,2,4
1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland,3Service of Internal Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,4Precision
Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Chronic low-grade in ﬂammation plays an important role in
the initiation and clinical course of many complex human
diseases. To better understand the contributions of humangenetic variation to chronic in ﬂammation, we performed
genome-wide association studies of plasma levels of four
inﬂammatory biomarkers (CRP, IL-1 β, IL-6 and TNF- α)
using data collected in the context of the CoLaus study, a
large population-based cohort including >5,000 individuals
in Lausanne, Switzerland. Using general linear models, wesearched for associations between 9 million genetic variants
and the natural log-transformed plasma levels of the four
biomarkers. We identi ﬁed multiple genome-wide signi ﬁcant
associations (p<1.25E-8) with CRP levels at 5 previously
identi ﬁed genomic loci, encompassing the genes APOE
(p=2.01E-16), CRP (p=3.11E-12), HNF1A (p=1.83E-11),
IL6R (p=2.04E-09) and LEPR (p=3.95E-09). Interestingly,
we observed that people carrying the ApoE4 genotype,
known as the leading genetic risk factor for Alzheimer ’s
disease, have lower CRP levels, suggesting that the
modulating role of APOE variants in Alzheimer ’s patho-
genesis is not mediated through chronic in ﬂammation. On
the other hand, we did not identify any genome-wide
signiﬁcant association with IL-1 β, IL-6 and TNF- αlevels
after correction for multiple testing, which suggest thatthese cytokines are less tightly genetically controlled than
CRP and that common genetic variants of large effect do
not play a major role in their regulation. Together, theresults of this study provide further insights into human
genetic control of chronic in ﬂammation, which could leadAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1747to better disease prediction models and to the identi ﬁcation
of potential novel targets for diagnostics or therapeutic
development.
F. Hodel: None. P. Marques-Vidal: None. P. Vollen-
weider: None. J. Fellay: None.
P18.12D
Copy number variants correlate with socio-economic
status
G. J. Burghel1,2, U. Khan1, W. Lin3, W. Whittaker4,
S. Banka1,5
1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester,
United Kingdom,2School of Health Science, Faculty of
Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom,3Northern Institute for
Cancer Research, Medical School, Newcastle University,Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,
4Division of
Population Health, Health Services Research & Primary
Care, University of Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom,
5Division of Evolution and Genomics, School of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom
Introduction: Socioeconomic status (SES) is a measure of an
individual ’s or a family ’s economic and social status based on
multiple factors including income, education, and occupation.
SES is a major determinant of health and related outcomes.Lower SES confers increased risk for stroke, cardiovascular
disease, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and obesity. Early life
adversity produces lasting and deleterious effects on devel-opmental outcome. The correlation of genetic variants and
SES is only beginning to be understood.
Results: We curated an anonymised database of results
from over 17,000 postnatal clinical array comparative
genomic hybridisation (aCGH) performed at the Manche-
ster Centre for Genomic Medicine between 2010 and 2017.From this database we identi ﬁed 473 unique cases of
pathogenic or likely-pathogenic autosomal copy number
variants (CNVs) with complete inheritance status (218 caseswith inherited and 255 cases with de novo CNVs) and
postcode information. We obtained indices of deprivation
associated with each of these postcodes. We found thatindividuals with inherited pathogenic/likely-pathogenic
CNVs were signi ﬁcantly more likely to be living in areas of
higher deprivation when compared to individuals with denovo CNVs (p
x2
trend=2.1x10-6) or with the general popu-
lation of North-West England (p x2
trend=4.3x10-14).
Conclusions: We show that inheritance of pathogenic
CNVs and lower SES are correlated. Our results demon-
strate the need to quantify the secondary social and medicalconsequences of lower SES of individuals with inherited
CNVs. These results have important implications for plan-
ning of medical and social services and provide unique
insights into determinants of SES.
G.J. Burghel: None. U. Khan: None. W. Lin: None. W.
Whittaker: None. S. Banka: None.
P18.13A
Higher polygenetic predisposition for asthma in cow ’s
milk allergic children
P. HennemanAmsterdam University Medical Centers, location AMC,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Cow ’s milk allergy (CMA) is an early-onset allergy of which
the underlying genetic factors r emain largely undiscovered.
CMA has been found to co-occur with other allergies and
immunological hypersensitivity disorders, suggesting a shared
genetic etiology. We aimed to (1) investigate and (2) validatewhether CMA children carry a highe r genetic susceptibility for
other immunological hypersen sitivity disorders using poly-
genic risk score analysis (PRS) and prospective phenotypicdata. Twenty-two CMA patien ts of the Dutch EuroPrevall
birth cohort study and 307 reference subjects were genotyped
using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. Differen-tially genetic susceptibility wa s estimated using PRS, based on
multiple P-value thresholds for SNP inclusion of previously
reported genome-wide associa tion studies (GWAS) on asthma,
autism spectrum disorder, atopic dermatitis, in ﬂammatory
bowel disease and rheumatoid a rthritis. These associations
were validated with prospective data outcomes during a six-year follow-up in 19 patients. We observed robust and
signiﬁcantly higher PRSs of asthma in CMA children
compared to the reference set. Association analyses usingthe prospective data indicated signi ﬁcant higher PRSs in
former CMA patients suffering from asthma and related traits.
Our results suggest a shared genetic etiology between CMA
and asthma and a considerable predictive sensitivity potential
for subsequent onset of asthma which indicates a potential use
for early clinical asthma intervention programs.
P. Henneman: None.
P18.14B
Association of AMPD1 andCKMM polymorphisms with
physical performance phenotype of Lithuanian elite
athletes
V. Ginevi čienė
1, K. Milasius2, A. Utkus1
1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of
Biomedical science, Department of Human and Medical1748Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Vytautas Magnus University
Education Academy, Vilnius, Lithuania
Introduction: Adenosine monophosphate deaminase 1
(encoded by AMPD1 gene) and muscle-speci ﬁc creatine
kinase (encoded by CKM gene) involved in regulation of
muscular energy metabolism. The aim of this study was to
determine the impact of AMPD1 (c.133C>T, p.Gln45Ter,
rs17602729) and CKM (c.*800A>G, rs8111989) poly-
morphisms on physical performance of Lithuanian elite
athletes.
Materials and Methods: The study involved 150
Lithuanian athletes (60 females, 90 males; strati ﬁed into:
endurance-oriented (n =63), sprint/power-oriented (n =65),
mixed (n =22) groups) and 150 controls (60 females, 90
males, healthy unrelated non-athletes). Anthropometric
measurements and muscle strength (grip strength, short-
term explosive muscle power (STEMP), anaerobic alacticmuscle power (AAMP)), and maximum oxygen uptake
(VO
2max) were measured. Genotyping was performed by
RT-PCR (for CKM polymorphism) and RFLP-restriction
enzyme digestion (for AMPD1 ).
Results: The phenotypic measurements were signi ﬁcantly
different and speci ﬁc to each sports groups (p<0,05). The
frequencies of the CKM genotypes were signi ﬁcantly dif-
ferent between the male and female sprint/power-oriented
athletes (AA/AG/GG: 37.8/54.1/8.1% vs50.0/25.0/25.0%,
p=0.035). CKM AA and AG genotyped athletes had sig-
niﬁcantly higher STEMP than GG genotyped athletes
(p=0.005). AMPD1 CC genotyped endurance-oriented
males athletes had signi ﬁcantly lower values of AAMP
than the heterozygous athletes (p =0.04). Moreover,
AMPD1 CC genotyped endurance-oriented female had
signiﬁcantly higher VO 2max than heterozygous female
(p=0.01).
Conclusions: CKM and AMPD1 genetic variants have
different effect on Lithuanian male and female physical
capacity. CKM AA genotype confers ability to achieve
better muscle ef ﬁciency in short-term, maximum-effort
requiring physical activity and AMPD1 CC genotyped
athletes have better aerobic capacity.
V. Ginevi čienė:None. K. Milasius: None. A.
Utkus: None.
P18.15C
Association between MBL2 haplotypes and dengue
severity in children from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
A. M. M. Ornelas1, C. Xavier-de-Carvalho2, L. Alvarado-
Arnez3, M. Ribeiro-Alves4, A. Tanuri1, R. S. Aguiar1,
M. O. Moraes2, C. C. Cardoso11Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil,2Instituto Oswaldo Cruz - Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil,3Universidad Privada Franz Tamayo - UNIFRANZ,
Cochabamba, Bolivia, Plurinational State of,4Instituto
Nacional de Infectologia Evandro Chagas - Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil
Introduction: Dengue is an arthropod-borne viral disease
with clinical manifestations varying from asymptomatic tosevere forms including dengue shock syndrome (DSS). An
increasing number of genetic studies have outlined the
association between host genetic variations and dengueseverity. Mannose-binding lectin acts in ﬁrst line response
to dengue virus (DENV). However, data regarding the
association between MBL2 gene and dengue severity are
still controversial.
Materials and Methods: We have investigated the
association between 7 single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs) at MBL2 gene (rs7095891, rs1800450, rs1800451,
rs4935047, rs930509, rs2120131, rs2099902) and dengue
severity in children from Rio de Janeiro. The case group(N=87) included children with severe disease (DSS) and a
control group (N =197) was selected among neighbors and
cases ’household members matched by age. Statistical
analyses were performed using conditional logistic regres-
sion models. Proportions of European, African and Native
American ancestries were also determined to adjust forconfounding.
Results: No associations were observed in single SNP
analysis. However, when MBL2 SNPs were combined in
haplotypes, the allele rs7095891G/rs1800450C/rs1800451C/
rs4935047A/rs930509G/rs2120131G/rs2099902C was sig-
niﬁcantly associated with risk of severe dengue (OR =4.02;
95%CI:1.23-13.09; p =0.02) as compared to the most frequent
haplotype (A/C/C/A/G/T/T). A second haplotype carrying
rs4935047G and rs7095891G alleles was also associated torisk (OR =1.91;
95%CI:1.02-3.6; p =0.04).
Conclusion: MBL2 haplotypes are associated to dengue
severity in Brazilian children even after adjustment forgenetic ancestry. These results reinforce the role of mannose
binding lectin in immune response to DENV and suggest
that variations at MBL2 gene may help predict disease
course. Financial support: CNPq, CAPES.
A.M.M. Ornelas: None. C. Xavier-de-Carvalho: None.
L. Alvarado-Arnez: None. M. Ribeiro-Alves: None. A.
Tanuri: None. R.S. Aguiar: None. M.O. Moraes: None.
C.C. Cardoso: None.
P18.16D
Inﬂuence of genetic ancestry on the human serum
proteomeAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1749J. Sjaarda1, H. C. Gertsein1, P. Mohammadi-Shemirani1,
M. Pigeyre1, S. Hess2, G. Pare1
1McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada,2Sano ﬁ
Aventis, Frankfurt, Germany
Background: Disease risk varies signi ﬁcantly between
ethnicities, however, it is unknown if these observations are
a consequence of environmental or genetic factors.Investigating ethnic differences within the human proteome
may shed light on the impact of ancestry on health and
disease.
Methods: Admixture mapping was used to explore the
impact of ancestry on a panel of 237 cardiometabolic bio-
markers in 2,216 Latin American participants within theORIGIN-trial. We developed a variance component model
to determine the proportion of variance explained by local
ancestral differences, and applied this model in ORIGIN.Multivariable linear regression was used to identify genetic
loci affecting biomarker variability between ethnicities.
Results: Variance component analysis revealed 5% of
biomarkers to have a signi ﬁcant effect of ancestry, including
C-peptide and apolipoprotein-E. We also identi ﬁed 46 local
ancestry associations across 40 biomarkers. Independentanalyses revealed 34 of these regions were associated at
genome-wide signi ﬁcance with their respective biomarker in
either ORIGIN Europeans (n =1,931) or Latins. Finally, we
found that a genetic risk score in Latins based on ancestral
differences of C-peptide levels, was associated with an
increased risk of diabetes (OR =4.47 per SD, 95% CI 1.70 to
11.76, p =0.002) and measures of insulin resistance.
Discussion: Our results demonstrate the importance of
ancestry on biomarker levels, suggesting some of theobserved differences in disease prevalence likely has a
biological basis, and that use of reference intervals should
be tailored to ancestry. Speci ﬁcally, our results suggest a
role of ancestry in insulin metabolism and diabetes risk.
Supported by Sano ﬁand CIHR.
J. Sjaarda: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
CHUV. H.C. Gertsein: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; McMaster University. B. Research Grant (prin-
cipal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; CIHR.
C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of
drugs or other in-kind support); Signi ﬁcant; Sano ﬁ.F .C o n -
sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Sano ﬁ, Nova Nordisk, Lilly,
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline. P.
Mohammadi-Shemirani: None. M. Pigeyre: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; McMaster University. S.
Hess: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Sano ﬁ.
G. Pare: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
McMaster University. B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; CIHR. C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or
other in-kind support); Signi
ﬁcant; Sano ﬁ.F .C o n s u l t a n t /
Advisory Board; Modest; Sano ﬁ, Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Lexicomp, Amgen.
P18.17A
Increasing incidence of the Down syndrome in the Czech
Republic: Long-term population-based study
A. Sipek Sr1,2,3,4, V. Gregor1,2, J. Horacek4, J. Klaschka5,6,
M. Maly5,7, A. Sipek Jr1,8
1Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic,2Department of Medical Genetics,
Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic,3Institute of
Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic,4GENNET, Prague,
Czech Republic,5Institute of Computer Science of the Czech
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic,6Institute of
Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
7National
Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic,
8Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Down syndrome is the most common
chromosomal aneuploidy syndrome, therefore it is one of
the main targets for the prenatal screening/diagnostics
programmes worldwide. The main goal for this study wasto investigate the effect of increasing maternal age (the result
of the known and ongoing demographic change in the Czech
Republic) on the population incidence of Down syndrome.
Methods: Data were obtained from the of ﬁcial National
Registry of Congenital Anomalies of the Czech Republic.
We evaluated the incidence of Down syndrome (ICD-10code Q90) in the livebirths and in the prenatally diagnosed
cases (time period 1994-2017). We were also investigating
other related variables (like maternal age, diagnostic/screening methods). The registration process is country-
wide and compulsory by national law.
Results: The overall incidence of Down syndrome in
livebirths decreased from 7.79 in 1994 (relative incidences
per 10.000 live births) to 3.48 in 2017 (p<0.05). The inci-
dence of prenatally diagnosed (and electively terminated)cases increased rapidly from 5.35 in 1994 to 25.53 in 2017
(p<0.05). The average maternal age increased from 22.9 in
1994 to 30.2 in 2017.
Discussion: The overall incidence of Down syndrome in
the Czech Republic is increasing (the incidence is increas-
ing in prenatally diagnosed and terminated cases, the inci-dence in births is decreasing). We identi ﬁed two main
reasons: 1) gradual implementation of combined screening1750of the ﬁrst trimester; 2) rapidly increasing maternal age in
the Czech Republic during the last 30 years.
Acknowledgments: Supported by the Ministry of Health of
the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A
A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Ministry of Health of
the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. V. Gregor:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J. Horacek: None. J.
Klaschka: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col-
laborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the CzechRepublic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. A. Sipek Jr: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A.
P18.18B
XRCC1 and ERCC1 DNA repair gene de ﬁciency leads
to an increase in complex conversion frequency during
meiosis
A. Heissl
1, A. J. Betancourt2, I. Tiemann-Boege1
1Institut of Biophysics, Linz, Austria,2Institut of Integrative
Biology, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Introduction: The repair of DNA lesions, mismatches or
double strand breaks (DSBs) during meiosis plays a critical
role for maintaining genome stability and integrity. Meiotic
recombination is initiated via programmed DSBs inhotspots, which are repaired as crossovers (COs) or non-
crossovers (NCOs). Regions of heteroduplex DNA, formed
during strand invasion in DSB repair, can lead totransmission biases. Of particular interest is this bias in
terms of repeat instability, such as microsatellites, which are
often linked to genetic disorders. Unfortunately, theassociation between meiotic recombination and repeat
instability is not well understood.
Method: Therefore, thousands of single COs and NCOs
collected via pooled sperm typing in nine different donors
were analyzed for transmission biases of two different poly-
A repeats: a 6A/7A and a 9A/19A.
Results: Heterologies between heterozygous poly-As
strongly in ﬂuenced the transmission: an insertion bias forthe short heterology (6A/7A) was observed in contrast to
the deletion bias for the long heterology (9A/19A). One
donor was of particular interest, showing in addition 12x
more complex COs (unconverted SNPs between converted
ones). Whole Exome sequencing of this donor showed a
missense mutation c.1196A>G at XRCC1 involved in base-excision repair and a synonymous mutation c.354T>C at
ERCC1 involved in nucleotide excision repair.
Discussion: This indicates that mismatch repair has a
major impact in the transmission of microsatellites during
meiotic recombination and that mutations in repair genes
can lead to aberrant recombination products and a massiveincrease in complex events.
This work was funded by the FWF30867000,
FWF27698000 and by the OeAW.
A. Heissl: None. A.J. Betancourt: None. I. Tiemann-
Boege: None.
P18.19C
Whole exome pro ﬁle of Bulgarians
S. K. Karachanak-Yankova
1,2, L. Balabanski1,3,
D. Serbezov1, R. Vazharova3,4, O. Antonova1,
D. Nikolova1, M. Mihaylova1, R. Staneva1,
V. Damyanova1, D. Nesheva1, Z. Hammoudeh1,
S. Hadjidekova1, D. Toncheva1,3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty,
Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of
Genetics, Faculty of Biology, So ﬁa University "St. Kliment
Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Gynecology and assisted
reproduction hospital “Malinov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Department of Biology, Medical genetics and
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, So ﬁa University “St
Kliment Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: In order to further characterize Bulgarian
exome structure we have performed whole exome sequen-
cing of healthy unrelated Bulgarian subjects and analyzedthe obtained results in different contexts.
Materials and Methods: We have studied two DNA
pool samples of 32 Bulgarian centenarians and 61 healthycontrols (aged 18 to 30). Samples were sequenced at BGI.
Statistical analyses were undertaken with the R package on
frequencies of ﬁltered variants from the present study -
biallelic autosomal single nucleotide variants and gnomAD
genome data. GnomAD genome data were chosen for
comparison, since our results include many non-codingvariants and furthermore, gnomAD exome includes exomes
of 1335 Bulgarians out of 7718 non-Finish
Europeans (NFE).
Results: The Bulgarian exome contains 131 private var-
iants, with frequency >20%, not included in the gnomADAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1751genome database. Principal component analysis clusters
Bulgarians with NFE, Finns and Ashkenazi Jews setting
them apart from Americans, Africans and East Asians. The
pair-wise correlation/Fst values between populations in the
cluster are as follows: Bulgarians/NFE - 0.95/0.0021; Finns/
NFE - 0.98/0.001 and Bulgarians /Finns - 0.95/0.0034. Thegreatest differences between Bulgarians/Fins (populations
marking the northwest/southeast genetic gradient of Eur-
ope) are mostly due to variants in genes of the immunesystem; lipid, protein and carbohydrate metabolism; cell
cycle and cell-cell communication.
Conclusions: The peculiarities of the Bulgarian exome
will require the establishment of a Bulgarian National
Genome Project for more precise characterization of the
phenotypic effect of genetic variants. Acknowledgment -DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 - National Science Fund of
Bulgaria.
S.K. Karachanak-Yankova: None. L. Balabanski:
None. D. Serbezov: None. R. Vazharova: None. O.
Antonova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Mihaylova:
None. R. Staneva: None. V. Damyanova: None. D.
Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. S. Hadjidekova:
None. D. Toncheva: None.
P18.20D
Resolving the complex variation of the human inhibitory
Fc receptor FCGR2B
H. Ozturk, E. J. Hollox
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom
Segmental duplications in the human genome are enriched
for genes involved in immunity and host defence.
Characterisation of sequence variation within these regions
using high throughput sequencing can be challenging due toextensive copy number variation, gene conversion, and
mismapping of sequence reads to alternative paralogues.
Fc-gamma Receptors (Fc γRs) are a family of glycoproteins
that bind to the Fc portion of the Immunoglobulin G (IgG)
and mediate the response of effector cells to immune
complexes. The genes encoding the low-af ﬁnity Fc γRs
(FCGR2A ,FCGR2B ,FCGR2C ,FCGR3A , and FCGR3B )
are located in an 82.5 ‐kb segmental tandem duplication on
chromosome 1q23.3 and characterized by extensive copynumber and sequence variation and high sequence similar-
ity. There is a 92%-96% sequence homology among
FCGR2A ,FCGR2B andFCGR2C genes. FCGR2B encodes
the Fc gamma receptor IIb (Fc γRIIb) (CD32B), the only
inhibitory Fc γR that leads to the downregulation of B-cell
activation and immunoglobulin production. Genomewideassociation studies have highlighted variants in FCGR2B
associated with disease phenotypes, but the context andconsequence of these variants within the larger landscape of
variation of this region remains unclear. Here, we assay
FCGR2B sequence variation using targeted paralogue-
speci
ﬁc high throughput sequencing, and place this
variation in the context of recently-identi ﬁed gene conver-
sion variants, expression variation of FCGR2B , and GWAS
association signals.
H. Ozturk: None. E.J. Hollox: None.
P18.21A
Genetic epidemiological study of hereditary ophthalmic
pathology in children of the Karachay-CherkessRepublic, Russia
V. V. Kadyshev
1, A. V. Marakhonov1, T. A. Vasilyeva1,
S. I. Kutsev1,2, R. A. Zinchenko1,3
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation,3Moscow
Regional research and clinical Institute, Moscow, RussianFederation
Objectives: Clinical and molecular genetic epidemiological
study of non-syndromic hereditary ophthalmic pathology
(NSHOP) is one of the promising areas of genetics due to
the high ﬁtness and survival of genotypes and the
possibility of treatment and rehabilitation when the disease
is detected in childhood. To our best knowledge, these
studies are conducted in a limited format, within theframework of individual diseases or generalized data from
individual sources.
Materials and Methods: 90,793 children from the
Karachay-Cherkess Republic (KChR) were examined. 121
patients from 109 families from the KChR were included in
the clinical, molecular, epidemiological analysis. Geneticepidemiological, clinical, paraclinical, molecular genetic,
and statistical methods were used in the work.
Results: The total prevalence of NSHOP in child popu-
lation of KChR appeared to be 1:671 children. 45 clinical
and genetic forms were revealed, frequent of which are
congenital ptosis (1:11342), microphthalmia (1:22685),aniridia (1:30246), congenital cataract (1:5671), retinal
pathology (1:22685), optic nerve pathology (1:11342).
DNA diagnosis revealed a novel nucleotide variants in thePAX6 gene: c.607C>T, (p.Arg203Ter), c.747_750del (p.
Pro250Lysfs*21) associated with congenital aniridia; in the
CHST6 gene: c.610C>T (p.Pro204Ser) and c.1124delT (p.
Val375Glyfs*6) associated with corneal dystrophy; as well
as in the gene PRPF8 gene: c.428A>G, (p.Gln143Arg)
associated with retinal pathology.
Conclusions: Occurrence of NSHOP in child population
of KChR was 1:671. Congenital malformations and1752pathology of the posterior segment of the eye are prevalent
in the structure of pediatric disorders spectrum. DNA
diagnosis revealed several novel variants in the genes
associated with NSHOP. Supported by RFBR grant №18-
015-00090.
V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. T.A.
Vasilyeva: None. S.I. Kutsev: None. R.A.
Zinchenko: None.
P18.22B
Differences in complex trait architecture between
multiple ethnic human populations revealed bypathway-based epistatic interactions
M. C. Turchin
1,2, I. Tung1,3, L. Crawford1,4,5,
S. Ramachandran1,2
1Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown
University, Providence, RI, United States,2Department of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University,
Providence, RI, United States,3Department of Computer
Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, United States,
4Department of Biostatistics, Brown University,
Providence, RI, United States,5Center for Statistical
Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, United States
Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identi ﬁed
thousands of signi ﬁcant genetic associations in humans
across a number of complex traits. However, the vast
majority of these studies use datasets of predominantlyEuropean ancestry. It has generally been thought that
complex trait genetic architecture should be transferable
across populations of different ancestries, but recent workhas shown a number of differences between ethnic groups,
including heterogeneity in both the identi ﬁed causal variants
and estimated effect sizes. Here, we reveal further evidencethat complex trait genetic architecture is fundamentally
different between human ethnic groups by jointly lever-
aging pathway and epistasis analysis.
Under the assumption that a given complex trait may have
differential polygenic architectures across human ancestries,
we hypothesize that human populations may also be enri-ched for differences in epistatic effects. However, since
polygenic traits tend to have smaller GWA effect sizes,
combining variants via pathway analysis may allow us tobetter reveal these signals. To accomplish this, we build on
a recently published method for identifying marginal epis-
tasis (MAPIT), moving from testing single variants totesting groups of variants for nonlinear association with a
trait of interest.
We apply our new method to multiple ancestries present
in the UK Biobank and explore many pathway-related
interaction models. Using morphometric traits we ﬁndevidence for differential architecture among African, Indian,
and British individuals. We also ﬁnd evidence that these
associations contain heterogeneous signals for epistatic
effects. Lastly, we ﬁnd preliminary evidence that complex
trait regulatory architecture may be enriched for epistatic
interactions.
M.C. Turchin: None. I. Tung: None. L. Crawford:
None. S. Ramachandran: None.
P18.23C
Does the doubly-weighted genetic risk score improve the
prediction of type 2 diabetes in the Lifelines&EstonianBiobank cohorts?
K. Pärna
1,2, H. Snieder1, K. Läll2, K. Fischer2,3, I. Nolte1
1Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center of
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen,Netherlands,
2Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,3Institute of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Introduction: It is speculated that up to half of T2D cases
are undiagnosed since it mostly starts without acutesymptoms. Developing a powerful tool for early detection
of high-risk individuals would allow postponing or even
preventing T2D. Since genetic markers are ﬁxed for life,
they have high potential for early detection. Therefore, it is
important to ﬁnd the optimal genetic prediction method.
Our aim is to test the performance of the recently developeddoubly-weighted genetic risk score (dwGRS) for incident
T2D in two European cohorts.
Materials and Methods: Data from Lifelines
(n=12,027) and the Estonian Biobank (n =41,107) were
used. The dwGRS for T2D uses an additional weight based
on the probability for the SNP to belong to the top 1,000associated ones thus correcting for the Winner ’s curse bias.
The additional value of dwGRS to the incident T2D pre-
diction model was tested using survival analyses on top ofpredictors from the FINDRISC model. Hazard ratios and
corresponding 95% con ﬁdence intervals (CI) were calcu-
lated. The net reclassi ﬁcation index was used to investigate
the value of dwGRS.
Results: Preliminary results in Lifelines show that every
standard deviation higher dwGRS increased the risk forT2D by 1.25 (95%CI 1.10 −1.44) compared to 1.20 (95%CI
1.05−1.37) for the traditional GRS. Similar analyses will be
applied in the Estonian Biobank.
Conclusion: The dwGRS has a signi ﬁcant additional
value to the prediction of incident T2D. Implementation of
such risk scores in personalized risk prediction could lead toearly detection of high-risk individuals, resulting in better-
targeted preventive measures.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1753K. Pärna: None. H. Snieder: None. K. Läll: None. K.
Fischer: None. I. Nolte: None.
P18.25A
Evidence of thicker epidermal layer in individuals
heterozygous for mutation c.-23 +1G&gt;A in GJB2
gene (Cx26)
A. V. Solovyev1,2, N. A. Barashkov1,2, F. M. Teryutin1,2,
V. G. Pshennikova1,2, G. P. Romanov1,2, A. M. Rafailov1,
N. N. Sazonov1, O. L. Posukh3,4, E. K. Khusnutdinova5,
S. A. Fedorova1,2
1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Natural
Sciences, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal U,Yakutsk, Russian Federation,
2Yakut Scienti ﬁc Center of
Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,
3Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and
Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,4Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,5Ufa
Federal Research Center of Russian Academy Sciences,
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian
Federation
Mutations in the GJB2 gene encoding transmembrane gap
junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26) are known to accountfor a signi ﬁcant proportion of recessive genetic deafness.
The Cx26 expresses not only in the inner ear but also in the
skin epidermis and other tissues. The high carrier frequencyof the GJB2 mutations in many ethnic populations may be
explained by a heterozygous advantage of the GJB2
mutations carriers due to their thicker epidermal layer thatmay provide a protective mechanism against pathogen
invasion and hostile environment. We analyzed (by skin
ultrasonography) the epidermis thickness in 152 Yakutindividuals with different GJB2 -genotypes ([Wt];[Wt],
[Wt];[Mut], [Mut];[Mut]) for mutation c.-23 +1G>A (Mut)
that was found with extremely high carrier frequency(10.3%) in the indigenous Yakut population of Eastern
Siberia. Individuals who were homozygous (genotype
[Mut];[Mut]) and heterozygous (genotype [Wt];[Mut]) forc.-23+1G>A have the thicker epidermal layer (0.245 mm
and 0.269 mm, respectively) compared with individuals
with genotype [Wt];[Wt] (0.193 mm) (p<0.05). These datamay support the hypothesis about the selective advantage of
theGJB2 mutant alleles carriers and partly explain the
extremely high carrier frequency of the c.-23 +1G>A
mutation in Yakut population in Eastern Siberia. This study
was supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of
the Russian Federation №6.1766.2017, the Project NEFU
M.K. Ammosov, the Programs of Bioresource collections of
the FASO Russia BRK: 0556-2017-0003 and the RussianFoundation of Basic Research (grants #17-29-06016-o ﬁ_m,
#18-54-16004_NCNIL_a, #18-015-00212_ А, #18-013-
00738_ А, #18-05-60035_Arctica).
A.V. Solovyev: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. F.M.
Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. G.P. Roma-
nov: None. A.M. Rafailov: None. N.N. Sazonov: None. O.
L. Posukh: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. S.A.
Fedorova: None.
P18.26B
Heritability and genome-wide association study of
orbital telorism
N. Terzikhan
1, T. E. Evans1,2, E. Hofer3,4, M. J. Knol1,
L. Pirpamer3, R. Schmidt3, M. A. Pawlak5,H .H .H .
Adams1,2,6
1Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,2Department of Radiology and Nuclear
Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,3Clinical
Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurology,Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria,
4Institute for
Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria,5Department of
Neurology and Cerebrovascular Disorders Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,
6Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
Netherlands
Background: The interocular distance, or orbital telorism,
is a clinically informative measure. While its extremes,
hypo- and hypertelorism, have been linked to genetic
disorders, little is known about the genetic determinants ofinterocular distance within the general population. We
aimed to study the heritability and perform a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) of telorism.
Methods: Telorism was de ﬁned as the distance between
the eyeball center of gravity identi ﬁed on cranial MRI
images. First, we used a population-based and a family-based cohort studies to estimate the narrow-sense herit-
ability (h
2) and broad-sense heritability (H2). Second, we
performed a GWAS using HRC-imputed genotypes. Mod-els included adjustment for age, sex, height and head size.
Results: Heritability of telorism ranged between h
2=31%
and H2=74% in the fully adjusted model (Table1). GWAS
of telorism identi ﬁed an intronic genetic variant on chro-
mosome 15 (rs62357458, MAF =0.19, P-value =5.00E-
08).
Conclusion: Telorism is a heritable polygenic trait. We
identi ﬁed an intronic variant on chromosome 15 that was
signiﬁcantly associated with telorism. Replication is ongo-
ing in ~20,000 individuals, with subsequent genetic corre-
lation and enrichment analyses planned next. Identi ﬁcation1754of the underlying genetics of normal variation of telorism
might help us understand the pathophysiology of the related
genetic disorders.
Table Narrow-sense and broad-sense heritability of
orbital telorism
Population-based study Family-based study
N=3,222 unrelated
individualsN=364 with known familial
relationships
Orbital telorismh
2(SE) P-value H2(SE) P-value
Model 10.31 (0.10) 9.72E-04 0.76 (0.12) 1.79E-08
Model 20.32 (0.11) 9.55E-04 0.75 (0.12) 1.37E-08
Model 30.31 (0.11) 1.17E-03 0.74 (0.13) 1.00E-07
h2: Narrow-sense heritability. H2: Broad-sense heritability. Model 1:
Adjusted for age and sex. Model 2: Adjusted for age, sex and height.
Model 3: Adjusted for age, sex, height and head size. SE:
Standard error.
N. Terzikhan: None. T.E. Evans: None. E. Hofer:
None. M.J. Knol: None. L. Pirpamer: None. R. Schmidt:
None. M.A. Pawlak: None. H.H.H. Adams: None.
P18.27C
The length of the expressed 3' UTR is an intermediatemolecular phenotype linking genetic variants to complex
diseases
E. Mariella
1, F. Marotta1, E. Grassi1, S. Gilotto1,
P. Provero1,2
1University of Turin, Turin, Italy,2San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc
Institute IRCCS, Milan, Italy
Introduction: The investigation of the genetic determinants
of intermediate molecular phenotypes can provide useful
insights about the mechanisms of action of genetic variantsthat have been identi ﬁed by genome wide association
studies (GWAS). We propose a computational strategy to
discover genetic variants affecting the relative expression ofalternative 3' untranslated region (UTR) isoforms, generated
through alternative polyadenylation (APA), a post-
transcriptional regulatory mechanism known to haverelevant functional consequences.
Material and Methods: We analyzed whole genome
sequencing and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data that wereobtained for 373 European individuals (GEUVADIS data-
set). RNA-Seq data were used, together with an annotation
of alternative 3 ’UTR isoforms, to compute the expression
ratio between the short and long isoform (m/M value) of
each gene in each individual. Then, the association betweenthe m/M values of a gene and the genotype of the indivi-
duals for each in-cis genetic variant was evaluated by linear
regression.
Results: We identi ﬁed 2,530 genes with alternative
polyadenylation quantitative trait loci (apaQTLs) and we
subsequently performed a deep investigation of the possiblemechanisms of action of these variants. In addition, we
observed that apaQTLs are signi ﬁcantly enriched in GWAS
hits, in particular those associated to immune-related andneurological disorders.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that genetic variants
have a widespread effect on the relative expression ofalternative 3 ’UTR isoforms in human. In addition, they
point to an important role for genetically determined APA
in affecting predisposition to complex diseases and suggestnew ways to extract functional information from
GWAS data.
E. Mariella: None. F. Marotta: None. E. Grassi: None.
S. Gilotto: None. P. Provero: None.
P18.28D
Genome-wide association analysis of 350,000 Caucasians
from the UK Biobank identi ﬁes novel loci for asthma,
hay fever and eczema
W. E. Ek, M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson, Å. Johansson
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala, Sweden
Introduction: Even though heritability estimates suggest
that the risk of asthma, hay fever and eczema is largely due
to genetic factors, genetic variants identi ﬁed previous
studies have failed to explained a major part of the genetics
behind these diseases.
Material and Methods: In this GWAS, we include
346,545 Caucasians from the UK Biobank to identify novel
loci for asthma, hay fever and eczema. We further investi-
gate if associated lead SNPs have a signi ﬁcantly larger
effect for one disease compared to the other diseases, to
highlight possible disease speci ﬁc effects.
Results: We identi ﬁed 141 loci, of which 41 are novel, to
be associated (P ≤3x10
-8) with asthma, hay fever or eczema,
analysed separately or as combined phenotypes. The largest
number of loci were associated with the combined pheno-type (asthma/hay fever/eczema). However, as many as 19
loci had a signi ﬁcantly larger effect on hay fever/eczema-
only compared to their effects on asthma, while 24 lociexhibited larger effects on asthma compared with their
effects on hay fever/eczema. At four of the novel loci,
TNFRSF8, MYRF, TSPAN8 ,andBHMG1 , the lead SNPs
were in LD (> 0.8) with potentially casual missense
variants.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1755Conclusions: Our study shows that a large amount of the
genetic contribution is shared between the diseases. None-
theless, a number of SNPs have a signi ﬁcantly larger effect
on one of the phenotypes suggesting that part of the genetic
contribution is more phenotype speci ﬁc.
Grants: SSMF, VR, the Borgström Hedström Founda-
tion, Kjell and Märta Beijers Foundation
W.E. Ek: None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. T. Karls-
son: None. Å. Johansson: None.
P18.29A
Cross-trait analysis of brain volume and intelligenceidenti ﬁes shared genomic loci and genes
P. Jansen, M. Nagel, T. Polderman, M. van den Heuvel,
S. van der Sluis, D. Posthuma
Centre for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: The phenotypic correlation between human
intelligence and brain volume (BV) is considerable ( r≈0.40)
and has been shown to be due to shared genetic factors.
Large-scale GWAS for these traits have identi ﬁed many
novel loci and genes that explain their genetic architecture.
However, it is unknown which shared loci and genes
explain the genetic overlap between these traits.
Materials and Methods: To further examine the nature
of this correlation, we present genomic analyses of the
genetic overlap between BV and intelligence using genome-wide association study (GWAS) results. We conducted a
GWAS meta-analysis of a collated dataset on measurements
of BV (N =54,407), followed by extensive functional
annotation and gene-mapping, and study of the overlap with
GWAS results of intelligence (N =269,867) performed by
our group.
Results: GWAS meta-analysis identi ﬁed 35 genomic
loci, 362 genes and 23 biological pathways for BV. We
estimated the genetic correlation between BV and intelli-gence of. r
g=0.24. This overlap is driven by physical
overlap in 5 genomic loci. By using several gene-mapping
strategies (including FUMA), we observed 67 overlappinggenes for both traits. Of these, several are involved in cell-
cycle regulation ( ERBB3 ,USP19 ), neuron morphology
(INA), or genes involved in neurodegenerative disorders
(MAPT ). We highlight cortical areas of the brain where
these genes are expressed.
Conclusions: These results provide new information on
the genetics of BV and insight into the biology of its shared
genetic aetiology with intelligence. These results illustrate
how large-scale GWAS and subsequent gene-mapping aidin understanding the genetic cross-section between see-
mingly distinct traits.P. Jansen: None. M. Nagel: None. T. Polderman:
None. M. van den Heuvel: None. S. van der Sluis: None.
D. Posthuma: None.
P18.30B
Prevalence and distribution of human knockouts inMiddle Eastern populations with a high rate of
consanguinity
H. Mor-Shaked, D. Rahat, T. Harel
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel
Introduction: Homozygous loss of function (HLOF)
variants, or naturally occurring “human knockouts (KO) ”,
provide an invaluable opportunity to gain scienti ﬁc and
clinical insights into gene function, as well as an inventoryof human genes that are dispensable in healthy individuals.
Genomic data obtained from consanguineous and bottle-
necked populations, as found in the Middle East, areparticularly useful for HLOF analyses, as they are enriched
in homozygous variants.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing data
from 2663 Middle-Eastern individuals were queried for
HLOF variants. Stop-gain, high-quality frameshift, and
splice-site variants, with a read depth of 15X or greater incanonical transcripts, were included. No ﬁlter was placed on
minor allele frequency.
Results: Querying HLOF variants in 2663 exomes (2030
affected, 633 healthy) yielded 107,393 variants, represent-
ing 1155 unique variants in 952 genes. These included
378 stop-gain, 520 frameshift, and 257 splice-site variants.An average of 40.33 HLOF variants were identi ﬁed per
exome. 413/952 (43.4%) of the unique genes identi ﬁed in
this study were previously reported as human KO genes.Rare HLOF variants in affected individuals included pre-
viously published disease-associated genes, such as
WDR16 ,SNX10 ,PLD1 ,CARD11 , and several candidate
disease genes.
Conclusion: Rare HLOF variants in affected individuals
are potentially disease-causing variants, whereas HLOFvariants in healthy individuals may have bene ﬁcial effects
and thus are potential drug discovery targets. Reassuringly,
only 43.4% of the genes identi ﬁed in this study overlap with
previously reported human KO genes, underscoring the
potential utility of the current research.
H. Mor-Shaked: None. D. Rahat: None. T.
Harel: None.
P18.31C
Heritability estimates in recently admixed populations:
insights from the Greenlandic population1756G. Athanasiadis1, D. Speed2, A. Albrechtsen1
1University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
Finding an ef ﬁcient framework for estimating narrow-sense
heritability in admixed populations with high relatedness
remains an open question. We used extensive simulations to
evaluate the performance of existing classical and linearmixed model frameworks in estimating narrow-sense
heritability in two population-based cohorts from Greenland
and compare it to data from unadmixed individuals fromDenmark. When our analysis focused on Greenlandic sib
pairs, the model with two relationship matrices, one
capturing identity by state and one capturing identity bydescent, returned heritability estimates close to the true
simulated value, while using each of the two matrices alone
returned more biased estimates. When phenotypes corre-lated with ancestry, heritability estimates were in ﬂated.
Based on these observations, we propose a PCA-based
adjustment in order to recover the true simulated herit-ability. Finally, we estimated heritability of ten quantitative
traits from the two Greenlandic cohorts and report
differences such as lower heritability for height in Green-landers compared to Europeans. In conclusion, total narrow-
sense heritability in recently admixed populations is best
estimated using a mixture of genetic relationship matriceson individuals with at least one ﬁrst-degree relative included
in the sample.
G. Athanasiadis: None. D. Speed: None. A.
Albrechtsen: None.
P18.32D
High con ﬁdence HLA resource based on 1000 Swedish
genomes
J. Nordin
1, A. Ameur2, K. Lindblad-Toh1,3,
U. Gyllensten2, J. R. S. Meadows1
1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical
biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala, Sweden,2Science
for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Geneticsand Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden,
3Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States
Introduction: Recently genome variation from 1000
individuals of Swedish ancestry was reported based on
short read 30x Illumina NGS data. From this curateddataset, a high con ﬁdence (HC) HLA (classical eight genes:
A,B,C,DPA1 ,DPB1 ,DQA1 ,DQB1 ,DRB1 ) resource was
constructed for the use of the wider research community.
Materials and Methods: A combination of software
(HLA-VBSeq, HLAscan, OptiType, SNP2HLA) was usedto call HLA alleles from BAM ﬁles, followed by con-
cordance to determine the ﬁnal HC set (minimum of n-1
software calls the same four digit allele). The population
frequency of HC alleles was compared to published
Swedish lab typed values where available, and eight gene
haplotypes contrasted to Caucasian cohorts.
Results: The complete set of classical eight HC alleles
were typed in 608 samples, improved to 926 when con-
sidering only Class I alleles ( A,B,C). This was due to a
combination of software and IMGT/HLA availability.
Comparison with the lab typed cohort showed the HC
alleles re ﬂected expected values (r
2=0.81-0.99, ﬁve genes),
with minor differences perhaps due to reference versions.
Four of the top ﬁve haplotypes found in the HC set were
also top ranked in the Caucasian cohorts.
Conclusion: The Swedish HC HLA dataset adds to the
growing set of population resources available to interrogate
variation within the MHC. The HC allele frequencies (andindividual calls at request), plus calls from each software,
will be made available via https://swefreq.nbis.se/ .
Funding: Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse, Swedish
Research Council FORMAS
J. Nordin: None. A. Ameur: None. K. Lindblad-Toh:
None. U. Gyllensten: None. J.R.S. Meadows: None.
P18.33A
The relevant role of Italian genetic isolates for the studyof Human Knockouts
F. Sirchia
1, M. Cocca1, F. Faletra1, G. Girotto1,2,
B. Spedicati2, A. Morgan1,2, R. Palmisano2, C. Barbieri3,
D. Toniolo3, P. Gasparini1,2
1IRCCS Materno Infantile Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Trieste,
Italy,2Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health
Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,3Division of
Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan, Italy
Introduction: Rare (MAF<1%) Loss of Function (LoF)
variants have been characterised with huge study effort on
large cohorts and isolated communities, thanks to theirenrichment for biallelic knockout events. A sub-category of
LoF variants is represented by human knockouts (HKO).
Materials and Methods: Low coverage whole genome
sequence data of 946 samples from three Italian isolated
cohorts was performed. All the LoF variants with at least
one homozygous carrier in the whole dataset and a CADDscore>=20 or “not available ”were considered.
Results: We obtained a total of 506 variants, 205 clas-
siﬁed as total LoF and 301 as partial LoF (i.e. predicted as
LoF only in some gene transcripts). We selected LoF var-
iants from 30 interesting genes involved in mendelianAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1757diseases. A rare partial LoF mutation in FANCL (associated
with Fanconi anaemia) was detected in homozygosis in one
individual and in heterozygosis in four additional subjects,
from the same isolated village. We further investigated the
subjects ’clinical history: the FANCL KO subject shows a
long history of head and neck cancer without the classicalFanconi haematological features, while the FANCL carriers
are healthy.
Conclusions: HKO study has already shown great
potential despite being in its very early stages. Thanks to
our large cohort of genetic isolates, analysed by WGS, we
highlighted the role of one LoF variant in FANCL , parti-
cularly enriched in one of our villages and not being asso-
ciated to the expected phenotype. Functional studies to
evaluate the potential phenotypic consequences of thisvariant will be performed.
F. Sirchia: None. M. Cocca: None. F. Faletra: None. G.
Girotto: None. B. Spedicati: None. A. Morgan: None. R.
Palmisano: None. C. Barbieri: None. D. Toniolo: None.
P. Gasparini: None.
P18.34B
Trait aggregation analysis in families with large
pedigrees: techniques, assessment and examples
C. X. Weichenberger, J. Rainer, B. M. Motta, M. De
Bortoli, V. Vukovic, C. Pattaro, A. Rossini,P. P. Pramstaller, F. S. Domingues
Eurac Research, Bolzano, ItalyIntroduction: In epidemiological studies, familial aggrega-
tion (FA) analysis provides an important early means fordetermining promising phenotypes, which may be in ﬂu-
enced by genetic factors. Availability of comprehensive
ancestral information is especially valuable for detectingremote relationships in otherwise disconnected families. We
have implemented and assessed FamAgg, an R package for
detecting related individuals affected by some trait in largepedigrees. We furthermore demonstrate its capabilities by
examining traits in the context of the Cooperative Health
Research in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study.
Materials and Methods: In order to assess the ability to
correctly detect FA, we de ﬁne families affected by a
Mendelian trait (cases) and challenge ﬁve different FA
methods to identify these families within a large set of
pedigrees with randomly chosen affected individuals (con-
trols). Method performance evaluation is based on varyingtrait prevalence and penetrance, and on the number of
affected generations within the case families. The CHRIS
study is a population-based study with pedigree data on>10,000 participants carried out in an alpine valley in theNorth of Italy. Here, participants have been investigated for
FA for ~80 traits.
Results and Conclusions: Tests performed equally well
for cases with low prevalence, high penetrance and many
generations of affected individuals. We were able to identify
tests with superior performance under more challengingconditions (e.g. 6.25% trait prevalence and 60% penetrance
in three generations of affected individuals) and give
recommendations on test usage and interpretation. Based onthese observations, we discuss examples from the
CHRIS study.
Availability: http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/Fa
mAgg
C.X. Weichenberger: None. J. Rainer: None. B.M.
Motta: None. M. De Bortoli: None. V. Vukovic: None. C.
Pattaro: None. A. Rossini: None. P.P. Pramstaller: None.
F.S. Domingues: None.
P18.35C
No effects of high-resolution population-speci ﬁc genetic
map on downstream genomic analyses
S. Hassan1, I. Surakka1, P. Palta1, M. Wessman1,
M. Pirinen1, A. Palotie1,2,3, S. Ripatti1,4
1Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM), Helsinki,
Finland,2Analytic Translational Genetics Unit, Department
of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital USA, Boston,
MA, United States,3Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States,
4Public Health, Clinicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland
Introduction: Recombination is an important part of
meiosis as it facilitates chromosomal aggregation. Founder
population size, demographic changes like multiple bottle-necks or rapid expansion can lead to variation in
recombination rates across different populations like in the
case of Finland. Previous research has shown populationspeciﬁc settings has a signi ﬁcant effect on downstream
population genomic analysis like haplotype phasing,
genotype imputation and association.
Materials and Methods: Here, we examined high-
resolution recombination rate variation at 10 and 50kb
scales using deep whole genome sequences (20-30X cov-erage) of 55 trios all over from Finland. We then tested the
downstream effects of the population-speci ﬁc effective
population sizes and lower recombination rates in statisticalphasing, genotype imputation and disease association
mapping in Finns in comparison with non-Finnish
Europeans.
Results: Population-speci ﬁc effective population sizes
were found to have no effect in haplotype phasing (switch1758error rates ~ 2%) and average imputation concordances (97-
98%). Similarly, we found no effect of population-speci ﬁc
recombination maps in phasing with comparable switch
error rates (SER) across all autosomes. Downstream popu-
lation genetic analyses depend on population-speci ﬁc con-
texts like appropriate reference panels and their sample sizebut not on recombination maps or effective
population sizes.
Conclusions: Currently available HapMap recombination
maps seem quite robust for population-speci ﬁc phasing and
imputation pipelines. Grants: Academy of Finland
(251217 & 255847), Center of Excellence for ComplexDisease Genetics, Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular
Research, Biocentrum Helsinki & Sigrid Jusélius Founda-
tion grants to S.R. FIMM-EMBL doctoral funding to S.H.and Academy of Finland Postdoctoral Fellowship to I.S.
(298149).
S. Hassan: None. I. Surakka: None. P. Palta: None. M.
Wessman: None. M. Pirinen: None. A. Palotie: None. S.
Ripatti: None.
P18.36D
Genetically predicted gene expression reveals candidate
genes for In ﬂammatory Bowel Disease risk
R. Carreras-Torres
1,2,3, V. Díez-Obrero1,2,3, F. Moratalla-
Navarro2,3, M. Devall4, G. Casey4, V. Moreno2,1,3
1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, L'Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain,2Catalan Institute of Oncology,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,3Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red, Madrid, Spain,4University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States
Introduction: Genome-wide association studies have
identi ﬁed a large number of genetic variants associated to
complex diseases. However, most of these variants lay in
intronic or intragenic regions and do not provide a clear
target gene. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL)studies and transcription-wide association analyses (TWAS)
may contribute to explain the observed associations
between genetic regions and complex diseases such asCrohn ’s disease and ulcerative colitis. In this study, we
conducted a summary-based TWAS for In ﬂammatory
Bowel Diseases (IBD) risk using RNA-seq data form alargest set of colon tissue biopsies from healthy volunteers.
Materials and Methods: Colon tissue biopsies were
obtained from 191 healthy volunteers at colonoscopy.Genetic predictive models for the expression of ~6,000
genes were obtained through penalized elastic-net models
using PredXcan software. Subsequently, summary-TWASwas performed combining genetic prediction models andgenome-wide association results for IBD risk published by
the International IBD Genetics Consortium.
Results: TWAS analysis identi ﬁed one novel IBD locus
association (INPP5E gene at 9q34.3 region; P =1.2x10-19)
and eleven new candidate genes in known GWAS loci
(P<1x10-8). We envisage enlarging the analyzed data set tonearly 500 samples during the following months.
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings help to explain observed
association results for diseases affecting colon tissue andprovide target genes for further functional analyses. Grant
references: NIH/NCI CA143237; NIH/NCI CA204279;
NIH/NCI CA201407; ISC III - FEDER PI14-00613;CIBERESP CB07/02/2005; Catalan Government DURSI
2014SGR647; EU H2020 - MSC grant No 796216. FPU16/
00599.
R. Carreras-Torres: None. V. Díez-Obrero: None. F.
Moratalla-Navarro: None. M. Devall: None. G. Casey:
None. V. Moreno: None.
P18.37A
Estimating additive and non-additive geneticcomponents from low-depth sequencing data
A. F. Herzig
1,2, M. Ciullo3,4, A. L. Leutenegger1,2,
H. Perdry5
1Inserm, U1141, NeuroDiderot, Equipe GenMedStroke,
Paris, France,2Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Paris, France,3Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A.
Buzzati-Traverso - CNR, Naples, Italy,4IRCCS Neuromed,
Pozzilli, Insernia, Italy,5Université Paris-Saclay,
Université Paris-Sud, Inserm, CESP, Villejuif, France
A variety of methods for estimating coef ﬁcients of pairwise
relatedness from genotype data have been proposed. For
each pair of individuals, this allows estimates of both theirkinship coef ﬁcient φand their probability ψof sharing two
alleles Identical-By-Descent. Estimating relatedness is an
important step for many genetic study designs. For instance,estimates of φandψare necessary to assess the respective
roles of additive and non-additive genetic components in
the study of complex traits. However, when dealing withlow-depth sequencing or imputation data, individual level
genotypes cannot be con ﬁdently called. To ignore such
uncertainty is known to result in biased computations.Accordingly, methods have recently been developed to
estimate kinship from uncertain genotypes. Here, we make
an extension to include non-additive variance by derivingorthogonal genetic components from uncertain genotype
data and proposing new estimators for both the coef ﬁcients
φandψ. By construction, our estimators are robust to
departures from Hardy-Weinberg principles, and thus could
be of interest for samples that present inbreeding orAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1759population structure. For an additional application, the
orthogonality of the components allows for association
testing of non-additive genetic effects without having to call
genotypes. We have simulated low-depth genetic data for a
sample of individuals with extensive relatedness by using
the complex pedigree of the known genetic isolates ofCilento. Though this simulation, we explore the behaviour
of our estimators, demonstrate their properties, and show
potential advantages over alternative methods.
A.F. Herzig: None. M. Ciullo: None. A.L. Leute-
negger: None. H. Perdry: None.
P18.40D
Variants in genes related to telomere maintenance in
Bulgarian centenarians
R. V. Vazharova
1, L. Balabanski2,3, D. Serbezov4,
S. Karachanak-Yankova4, R. Staneva4, M. Mihailova4,
V. Damyanova4, D. Nesheva4, Z. Hammoude4,
O. Boyanova4, D. Nikolova4, S. Hadjidekova4,
D. Toncheva4
1Soﬁa University "St. Kl. Ohridski", Department of Biology,
Medical genetics and Microbiology, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3GARH Malinov MD, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical
University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: The Bulgarian genome has been largely
studied in the postgenomic era. The GnomAD_exome
database includes 1335 Bulgarian exomes and a series of
international research studies involve Bulgarian exomes andgenomes. In this study we further characterize genomic
variations in centenarians, focusing on variants in genes
related to telomere maintenance. Telomeres are complexDNA-protein structures that form protective caps at the end
of eukaryotic chromosomes. They prevent chromosome
degradation and form part of cellular mechanisms respon-sible for maintaining genomic integrity and cell longevity.
Materials and Methods: Case-control WES pool ana-
lysis of 32 centenarians and 61 young healthy controls andWGS was performed in 16 centenarians.
Results: After quality ﬁltering a total of 610 variants were
found in 82 genes known to be involved in regulation oftelomere maintenance. 22 variants were found to be more
prevalent in Bulgarian centenarians than in controls and for
one of them (rs75803132) the P value was below 5.0 х10
-8
(MAF G =0,267 in BG centenarians versus MAF G =0,07
in controls). The variant rs75803132 (NM_003668.3:c.661-
63A>G) in intron 8 of the gene MAPKAPK5 has been
observed at MAF 0,076 (GnomAD_genome NFE) and
seems to be enriched in Bulgarian centenarians. Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 5 acts as a
tumor suppressor by mediating Ras-induced senescence and
phosphorylating p53/TP53.
Conclusion: This pilot case-control study reveals new
insights in complex genetic background of human long-
evity. Acknowledgment to DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 -National Science Fund of Bulgaria
R.V. Vazharova: None. L. Balabanski: None. D. Ser-
bezov: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Sta-
neva: None. M. Mihailova: None. V. Damyanova: None.
D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoude: None. O. Boyanova:
None. D. Nikolova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D.
Toncheva: None.
P18.42B
MR-link: Identifying known and novel causality from
gene expression to complex traits, while accounting for
pleiotropy and linkage
A. van der Graaf, A. Claringbould, H. Westra, BIOS
Consortium, Y. Li, C. Wijmenga, S. Sanna
Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen,Netherlands
Mendelian Randomization (MR) is a widely used method to
identify causality from genetic data, but its application to
gene expression traits is challenging. Widespread pleiotropy
and linkage between expression quantitative loci (eQTL)often result in violations of the assumptions behind MR. In
simulations, existing MR methods demonstrate uncalibrated
false positive rates (FPR) or low power to detect causality.
Here, we introduce MR-link, a novel two-sample MR
method that incorporates variants in linkage disequilibrium
with conditionally independent (CI) eQTL, to correct forlinkage and unobserved pleiotropy. In simulations, MR-link
has consistently calibrated FPR (median: 0.05) and higher
power over other tested methods (max: 0.96), even whenonly a single CI eQTL variant is detectable.
We have now applied MR-link to LDL-cholesterol (LDL-
C) measurements, joined to eQTL datasets derived fromblood (2), liver, and coronary artery tissue. This identi ﬁed
25 genes causal to LDL-C, including the known and vali-
dated SORT1 transcript, along with genes that were missed
by genome-wide association studies on lipids but none-
theless validated in-vivo. For example, MR-link implicates
NEGR1 , involved in the lipid storage disorder Nieman Pick
disease as well as DEPP1 expression, lowering insulin
levels, which consequently affects lipids. Beside genes with
known biological function, MR-link identi ﬁed 15 novel
genes causal to LDL-C levels, interesting candidates for
follow-up experiments.1760These results demonstrate that MR-link successfully
identi ﬁes known causal relationships between gene
expression and complex traits while also revealing novel
causal genes that may further improve our understanding of
the etiology of complex traits from observational data.
A. van der Graaf: None. A. Claringbould: None. H.
Westra: None. Y. Li: None. C. Wijmenga: None. S.
Sanna: None.
P18.43C
Causal relevance of obesity on the leading causes of
death in women and men: A Mendelian randomizationstudy
J. C. Censin
1,2, J. Bovijn1,2, T. Ferreira1, S. L. Pulit1,3,4,
R. Mägi5, A. Mahajan2,6, M. V. Holmes7,8,9,
C. M. Lindgren1,2,4
1Big Data Institute at the Li Ka Shing Centre for Health
Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom,2Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics,
Nufﬁeld Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom,3Department of Genetics, Center
for Molecular Medicine, University Medical CenterUtrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
4Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA,
United States,5Estonian Genome Center, Institute of
genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,6Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,Oxford, United Kingdom,
7NIHR Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, Oxford,United Kingdom,
8Medical Research Council Population
Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Nuf ﬁeld
Department of Population Health, University of Oxford,Oxford, United Kingdom,
9Clinical Trial Service Unit &
Epidemiological Studies Unit (CTSU), Nuf ﬁeld Department
of Population Health, Big Data Institute Building,Roosevelt Drive, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Obesity traits have been causally linked with
cardiometabolic disease risk, but the extent to which obesity
traits affect risk of other leading causes of death has notbeen comprehensively evaluated. It is also unclear if any
such causal effects differ between men and women.
Materials and Methods: We constructed sex-speci ﬁc
genetic risk scores for the obesity traits: body mass index
(BMI), waist-hip-ratio (WHR), and WHR adjusted for BMI,
including 565, 324 and 338 genetic variants, respectively.Using Mendelian randomization, we investigated for asso-
ciations between these obesity traits and leading causes ofmortality from non-communicable diseases in the UK
Biobank. Sex-differences in the effect estimates were
assessed using Cochran ’s Q test (P
het).
Results: Up to 194,697 men and 227,717 women were
included, with mean (SD) age 57.0 (8.1) and 56.6 (7.9)
years, BMI 27.9 (4.2) and 27.0 (5.1) kg/m2and WHR 0.94
(0.07) and 0.82 (0.07), respectively. Obesity traits causally
increased the risks of coronary artery disease, stroke,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), lung can-cer, type 1 and type 2 diabetes (T2D), and acute and chronic
renal failure. BMI increased T2D risk more in women than
in men (P
het=5.1×10-6), whereas WHR increased risks of
COPD (P het=5.5×10-6) and chronic renal failure
(Phet=1.3×10-4) more in men than in women.
Conclusions: Obesity traits increase the risk of the
majority of the leading causes of mortality. There are sex-
differences in the effects of obesity traits on COPD, T2D,
and chronic renal failure, which may have implications forhealth policy and provision of health services.
J.C. Censin: None. J. Bovijn: None. T. Ferreira: None.
S.L. Pulit: None. R. Mägi: None. A. Mahajan: None. M.
V. Holmes: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; has collaborated with
Boehringer Ingelheim in research, did not accept any per-
sonal payment. C.M. Lindgren: B. Research Grant (prin-
cipal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; has
collaborated with Novo Nordisk in research, and in accor-
dance with the policy of University of Oxford, did notaccept any personal payment.
P18.44D
Prognostic value of expression quantitative trait loci in
multiple myeloma prognosis
A. Macauda
1,2, C. Piredda1, G. Buda1, F. Gemignani1,
M. Pelosini1, R. M. Reis3, J. Sainz4, W. Tomczak5,
D. Zawirska6, M. Rymko7,M .R a źny8, M. Dudzi ński9,
A. Druzd-Sitek10, R. Garcia-Sanz11,M .W ątek12,
E. Subocz13, J. Martinez Lopez14, W. Prejzner15,
K. Jamroziak16, L. Hyldahl Ebbesen17, A. Butrym18,
C. Dumontet19, N. Abildgaard20, G. Mazur21, A. Suska22,
J. Varkonyi23, M. Kruszewski24, A. J. Vangsted25,
M. Markiewicz26, F. Canzian2, D. Campa1
1Universitá di Pisa, Pisa, PI, Italy,2German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany,
3University of Minho, Braga, Portugal,4Genomic Oncology
Area, GENYO, Granada, Spain,5Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland,6University Hospital of, Cracow,
Poland,7N. Copernicus Town Hospital, Torun, Poland,
8Rydygier Specialistic Hospital, Cracow, Poland,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 17619Teaching Hospital No 1, Rzeszów, Poland,10Centre of
Oncology-Institute of Maria Sk łodowska-Curie, Warsaw,
Poland,11University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain,12Holycross Cancer Center, Kielce, Poland,
13Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland,
14Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain,15Medical
University of, Gda ńsk, Poland,16Institute of Hematology
and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland,17Aarhus
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,18Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland,19Cancer Research
Center of Lyon, Lyon, France,20Odense University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Poland,21Medical University
Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland,22Jagiellonian University
Medical College, Cracow, Poland,23Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Poland,24University Hospital
Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland,25Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark,26Silesian
Medical University, Katowice, Poland
Introduction: Owing to many advances in therapy during
the last decade, the survival of multiple myeloma (MM)patients improved considerably, although it remains an
incurable disease. Gene expression pro ﬁling (GEP) is
widely used for tumor classi ﬁcation and survival prediction
and can effectively identify patients who can bene ﬁt from
particular types of therapy. A recent study has identi ﬁed a
GEP related to the response of MM patients to the ﬁrst line
treatment based on bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexa-
methasone (VTD). The variability of gene expression
depends in part on germline genetic polymorphisms.Germline variants called expression quantitative traits loci
(eQTLs) can affects gene expression. If there are eQTLs for
the above mentioned GEP, they could be used as prognosticmarker in MM.
Materials and Methods: We genotyped 6 expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in ENTPD1, CCND1,
CCND2, ARK3, HELLS , and ACTR2 genes in 1284 MM
cases from the International Multiple Myeloma rESEarch
(IMMEnSE) consortium, and analyzed their involvement inprogression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and
response to ﬁrst line therapy.
Results: Carriers of the minor (C) allele of ENTPD1-
rs2153213 showed a consistent better survival (PFS: HR =
0.59, 95%CI =0.38-0.91, p =0.018; OS; HR =0.7, 95%CI =
0.54-0.94,p =0.017).
Conclusion: According to GTEx the C allele of
rs2153213 is associated with decreased level of ETPD1 .
Lower levels of ENTPD1 have been suggested to be
involved in immune modulation response against several
cancers leading to a better outcome. This may explain our
ﬁnding and in part the variability of MM patient ’s survival.
A. Macauda: None. C. Piredda: None. G. Buda: None.
F. Gemignani: None. M. Pelosini: None. R.M. Reis:None. J. Sainz: None. W. Tomczak: None. D. Zawirska:
None. M. Rymko: None. M. Raźny:None. M. Dudzi ński:
None. A. Druzd-Sitek: None. R. Garcia-Sanz: None. M.
Wątek: None. E. Subocz: None. J. Martinez Lopez:
None. W. Prejzner: None. K. Jamroziak: None. L. Hyl-
dahl Ebbesen: None. A. Butrym: None. C. Dumontet:
None. N. Abildgaard: None. G. Mazur: None. A. Suska:
None. J. Varkonyi: None. M. Kruszewski: None. A.J.
Vangsted: None. M. Markiewicz: None. F. Canzian:
None. D. Campa: None.
P18.45A
Genetic predisposition to co-morbid depression and
anxiety in diabetes using multi-omics framework
approach
Z. Balkhiyarova1, M. A. Kaakinen1, H. H. M. Draisma1,
M. D. Anasanti1, A. Ulrich1,2, M. Timonen3, J. Veijola4,
M. Järvelin3,5, A. Nouwen6, I. Prokopenko1
1Section of Genomics of Common Disease, Department of
Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom,2Centre for Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
3Center for Life Course Health Research, University of
Oulu, Oulu, Finland,4Unit of Clinical Neuroscience,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,5School of Public
Health, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom,6Department of Psychology, Middlesex
University, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Depression and anxiety are highly prevalent
in individuals with type 2 diabetes (T2D), affecting qualityof life and well-being. Epidemiological studies suggest
shared aetiology between these conditions. Genetic variants,
reportedly associated with them, affect lipid metabolism,cell proliferation, immune and in ﬂammatory response, and
oxidative stress, thus suggesting shared pathophysiological
processes. However, the phenotypic variance responsiblefor T2D and depression captured by genome-wide associa-
tion studies (GWAS) explains only ~5% of susceptibility to
these conditions. We aimed to identify genetic factorscontributing to their co-morbidity using multi-variable
analytical framework.
Methods: We analysed data from population-based
Northern Finland birth cohort using 46 years-old clinical
examination from 3,597 participants, Haplotype Reference
consortium imputed genome-wide IlluminaHumanCNV370DUO platform data was quality controlled
providing >10M autosomal SNPs for analysis. Using
SCOPA software, we performed the multiple-phenotypeGWAS (MP-GWAS) as linear combination of residuals for
T2D, anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale)1762and depressive symptoms (Beck Depression Inventory)
score, obtained after adjusting for sex and three principal
components to control for population structure.
Results: Three loci, at MICAL2 (rs10765927), INPP5K
(rs145536147) and ZNF599 (rs7259475) reached genome-
wide signi ﬁcance (P<5×10-8). Expression of target genes at
these loci, involved in cell growth, insulin metabolism and
transcriptional regulation, takes place primarily in the brain
and is decreased in presence of depression. rs10765927,rs145536147 and rs7259475 were associated in GWAS
with neuroticism, Parkinson ’s and Alzheimer ’s diseases,
respectively.
Conclusion: The results of this MP-GWAS provide ﬁrst
evidence for a shared aetiology between T2D, depressive
symptoms and anxiety.
Funding: WT205915.
Z. Balkhiyarova: None. M.A. Kaakinen: None. H.H.
M. Draisma: None. M.D. Anasanti: None. A. Ulrich:
None. M. Timonen: None. J. Veijola: None. M. Järvelin:
None. A. Nouwen: None. I. Prokopenko: None.
P18.46B
Implementation of a scalable framework for the
identi ﬁcation of regulatory variants at non-coding risk
loci: Follow-up of GWAS ﬁndings in orofacial clefting
F. Thieme
1, L. Henschel1, N. Ishorst1, N. Hammond2,
A. Biedermann1, A. Hoischen3,4,5, C. Gilissen3,
E. Mangold1, M. J. Dixon2, K. U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of
Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences Centre, Michael Smith Building,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Department of
Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Radboud Institute for Molecular
Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
GWAS have yielded unprecedented insights into the genetic
etiology of multifactorial disorders. Main outcomes were
that associated common risk variants are primarily locatedin non-coding regions, have low to moderate effect sizes,
and show extended stretches of LD. For functional
translation of these ﬁndings, approaches such as eQTL
analyses are often applied, but this approach is restricted to
traits for which disease-relevant cell types/tissues are
available.
An alternative approach is via the identi ﬁcation of rare,
deleterious mutations in individual families, and/or theincreased burden of low-frequency variants in affecteds. As
whole-genome sequencing is currently too expensive for
large cohorts, targeted approaches (e.g., single-molecule
molecular inversion probes (smMIPs)) have emerged as
strong alternative. Selection criteria for candidate regions
include integrated functional and genomic data.
In this study we applied this strategy to non-syndromic
cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P), a frequent birth
defect with multifactorial etiology. We selected three riskloci that had shown association with nsCL/P in previous
GWAS ( P<10-05) and identi ﬁed twelve candidate elements
in the credible SNP regions, based on functional data fromneural crest cells and craniofacial tissue. SmMIPs-based
resequencing of these regions in 1,061 nsCL/P cases and
1,591 controls yielded 1,835 variants with a MAF<1%.These variants are currently analyzed both individually and
in aggregate (burden analyses). Furthermore, different non-
coding variant annotation tools are evaluated, and pedigreeanalyses will be performed. Our framework is largely
scalable and can be extended to other disorders where
access to relevant tissue is similarly dif ﬁcult.
F. Thieme: None. L. Henschel: None. N. Ishorst: None.
N. Hammond: None. A. Biedermann: None. A. Hoi-
schen: None. C. Gilissen: None. E. Mangold: None. M.J.
Dixon: None. K.U. Ludwig: None.
P18.47C
Population-based assessment of the phenotypic pro ﬁle of
Melanocortin-4 Receptor mutation carriers
A. M. Yiorkas
1,2, O. Leinhard3,4,5, A. I. Blakemore1,2
1Brunel University London, London, United Kingdom,
2Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
3Advanced MR Analytics AB, Linköping, Sweden,4Centre
for Medical Image Science and Visualization (CMIV),Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden,
5Department of
Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden
Introduction: The hypothalamic leptin-melanocortin path-
way constitutes the primary central control mechanism foreating behaviour. Rare mutations in MC4R - the commonest
monogenic cause of obesity - have been mainly discovered
in severely obese individuals, and the phenotypic pro ﬁle of
mutation carriers not ascertained for obesity is unknown.
Thus, our understanding of the penetrance and expressivity
ofMC4R mutations in the general population is very
limited.
Materials and Methods: Data from 329,419 unrelated
White British individuals in the UK Biobank were analysedto compare anthropometric and metabolic-relatedAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1763phenotypes between carriers of rare, complete loss of
function (cLOF) MC4R mutations and non-carriers.
Results: The prevalence of MC4R cLOF mutations was
0.08%. The 276 carriers differed from 314,2017 non-
carriers in: height ( P=0.033), BMI ( P=1.20E-05), WHR
(P=0.016), various measures of body fat and muscle mass,
and basal metabolic rate ( P=3.12E-07) after adjustment for
age and sex. Since only 31% of carriers were obese, and
25% were within the “healthy ”BMI range, we sought to
investigate genetic factors in ﬂuencing penetrance. GRS for
BMI did not appear to modulate penetrance. Co-carriage of
the protective V103I MC4R variant moderated the effect the
cLoF mutation, such that 50% of cLoF carriers, who also
had V103I had normal BMI compared to 25%
without V103I.
Conclusions: Our appreciation of phenotypic variability
among MC4R cLOF mutation barriers is compromised by
ascertainment bias. An unexpectedly high proportion ofmutation carriers in the UK Biobank are not obese. This
may be at least partly due to epistatic effects.
A.M. Yiorkas: None. O. Leinhard: None. A.I.
Blakemore: None.
P18.48D
Does genetic predisposition to higher fat expandability
attenuate the impact of weight gain on cardiometabolic
risk?
G. D. Carrasquilla
1, A. Linneberg2, T. Jørgensen1,
N. Grarup1, O. Pedersen1, T. Hansen1, T. I. A. Sørensen3,
T. O. Kilpeläinen1
1Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Center for Clinical
Research and Prevention, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark,3Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Obesity is linked to cardiometabolic comor-
bidities, but many obese, often called “metabolically
healthy obese ”(MHO), seem protected. Recent studies
suggest that genetic variants associated with higher “fat
expandability ”contribute to this paradox by higher storage
of metabolically inert, subcutaneous fat. Whether these
variants attenuate the impact of long-term weight gain oncardiometabolic risk remains unknown.
Objective: We examined whether a “fat expandability ”
genetic risk score (GRS) attenuates the detrimental impactof weight gain on cardiometabolic risk during a 5-year
follow-up. We also examined whether the GRS predicts
MHO baseline status and the persistence of such status.
Methods: The GRS was constructed by combining 24
genetic loci robustly associated with increased BMI butdecreased waist-hip-ratio. The interactions of the
GRS*weight gain on quantitative cardiometabolic traits and
associations with MHO status were examined in 5,348
participants of the Danish Inter99 cohort. MHO was de ﬁned
as BMI ≥25 kg/m
2in the presence of none or only one
component of metabolic syndrome.
Results: The GRS attenuated the impact of weight gain
on fasting insulin by 0.03 pmol/L per allele per each kg of
body weight gained during the follow-up (P interac-
tion=0.031). The GRS was associated with higher odds of
being MHO at baseline (OR =1.04 per allele, P =0.0002)
but did not reduce the odds of converting from MHO to ametabolically unhealthy state by 5-year follow-up
(OR=1.00 per allele, P =0.679).
Conclusion: Genetic predisposition to higher “fat
expandability ”attenuates the impact of weight gain on
insulin resistance.
Funding body: Novo Nordisk Foundation support grant
number NNF18CC0034900
G.D. Carrasquilla: None. A. Linneberg: None. T.
Jørgensen: None. N. Grarup: None. O. Pedersen: None.
T. Hansen: None. T.I.A. Sørensen: None. T.O.
Kilpeläinen: None.
P18.49A
Epigenome-wide association study of change in blood
metabolite and glycaemic trait levels and in obesitymeasures from young- to middle adulthood in 595
Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 participants
H. H. M. Draisma
1, M. Kaakinen1, L. Prelot1,
M. D. Anasanti1, Z. Balkhiyarova1, M. Wielscher1,
S. Sebert1,2, M. Jarvelin1,2, I. Prokopenko1
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
2Center for Life Course Health Research, Oulu, Finland
A number of associations between adiposity, metabolite and
glycaemic trait levels and DNA methylation (DNAm) havebeen reported. However, the relationship between long-
itudinal changes in these phenotypes and differential
methylation is underexplored. We assessed associationsbetween DNAm and change over time in 228 blood
metabolomics-based variables and waist/hip ratio; body
mass index (BMI); fasting blood plasma glucose (FG),blood insulin, and serum triglyceride and cholesterol levels.
For 595 non-diabetic individuals from the Northern Fin-
land Birth Cohort 1966 for whom phenotype data wereavailable at both ages 31 (T1) and 46 (T2) as well as con-
current blood DNAm data at T2, we calculated the average
change in phenotype value per year between T1 and T2. Weused our methylSCOPA software, which can also perform
multi-phenotype epigenome-wide association study1764(EWAS), for single-phenotype EWAS of change residuals –
corrected for sex –for each phenotype versus DNAm for
832,569 markers on the Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA)
MethylationEPIC BeadChip. We quality-controlled, resi-
dualized, and normalized the DNAm data, and mapped
genomic locations to CGCh37/hg19.
Speci ﬁcally, for BMI change we detected epigenome-
wide signi ﬁcant associations ( P<1×10-7) at established loci
PHGDH (cg14476101|chr1:120,255,992; β=-0.05,
SE=9.1×10-3) and SLC43A1 (cg11376147|
chr11:57,261,198; β=-0.01, SE=2.6×10-3), and for FG
change at cg20367077 (chr11:19,224,117; β=0.11,
SE=0.02) annotated to CSRP3 , which has a role in obesity-
induced insulin resistance in murine and human skeletal
muscle.
We implemented a novel method to detect associations
between change in phenotype over time and DNAm and
provide account of its use for a range of phenotypes.
Funding: WT205915
H.H.M. Draisma: None. M. Kaakinen: None. L. Pre-
lot:None. M.D. Anasanti: None. Z. Balkhiyarova: None.
M. Wielscher: None. S. Sebert: None. M. Jarvelin: None.
I. Prokopenko: None.
P18.51C
Variants within OCA2 andHERC2 genes associated
with eye color and iris features in a Brazilian admixedpopulation sample
C. T. Mendes-Junior
1, G. Debortoli2, E. J. Parra2,
L. Marcorin3, A. L. E. Pereira3, N. C. A. Fracasso3,
M. G. Oliveira3, J. D. Massaro4, E. A. Donadi4,
A. L. Simões3, E. C. Castelli5
1Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Filoso ﬁa,
Ciências e Letras de Ribeir ão Preto, Universidade de S ão
Paulo, Ribeir ão Preto, Brazil,2Department of
Anthropology, University of Toronto Mississauga,
Mississauga, ON, Canada,3Departamento de Genética,
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeir ão Preto, Universidade de
São Paulo, Ribeir ão Preto, Brazil,4Departamento de
Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeir ão Preto,
Universidade de S ão Paulo, Ribeir ão Preto, Brazil,
5Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina de
Botucatu, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, Brazil
Introduction: OCA2 andHERC2 are considered the main
genes associated with the normal variation of eyepigmentation in humans. We sequenced their regulatory
and coding regions, associating genetic polymorphisms
with qualitative and quantitative measurements of eye color,as well as the presence or absence of iris features.Materials and Methods: A sample of 340 individuals
from São Paulo State, Brazil, was strati ﬁed according to eye
pigmentation and presence or absence of iris features. DNA
libraries were prepared using Haloplex (Agilent) and
sequenced at the MiSeq platform (Illumina). CutAdapt,
BWA and GATK were used for trimming, alignment andgenotype calling, respectively.
Results: 170 polymorphisms were called and eleven were
associated with one or more qualitative and quantitative eyecolor phenotypes, as well as with iris features. The HERC2
rs12913832 polymorphism was associated with the largest
number of phenotypes, with its "G" allele associated withblue/green eyes. Additionally, this polymorphism was
associated with iris features for the ﬁrst time, such as
Wolfﬂin's nodes ( p=1.0x10
-4), contraction furrows ( p=
5.0x10-4) and iris pigmentation spots ( p=0.0013). The
HERC2 polymorphism rs58358300 was associated with
sclera pigmentation ( p=1.0x10-4), hitherto not reported.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed previously unknown asso-
ciations of polymorphisms with some eye pigmentation
characteristics, which reinforces the need for studies inhighly admixed populations such as the Brazilian, which
presents favorable conditions for the identi ﬁcation of new
variation sites that may have a functional effect on pig-mentation genes. Grants and fellowships: CAPES
(88881.197124/2018-01), FAPESP (2013/154470) and
CNPq/Brazil (448242/2014-1 and 309572/2014-2).
C.T. Mendes-Junior: None. G. Debortoli: None. E.J.
Parra: None. L. Marcorin: None. A.L.E. Pereira: None.
N.C.A. Fracasso: None. M.G. Oliveira: None. J.D.
Massaro: None. E.A. Donadi: None. A.L. Simões: None.
E.C. Castelli: None.
P18.52D
Accounting for cryptic relatedness between subjects
with no genotype data across families
M. Saad
1, E. Ullah1, E. Wijsman2
1Qatar Computing Research Institute, Doha, Qatar,
22Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine,
and Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington,Seattle, WA, United States
Complex traits continue to provide challenges for identify-
ing genes responsible for variation in disease risk. Genome
sequencing has become inexpensive and fast. This provides
opportunities for investigation of rare variation. In thesearch for disease-associated rare variation, family-based
designs have again become common, because high-
penetrant genotypes segregate in pedigrees.
Association testing is typically used to identify associa-
tion with rare variants. When related subjects are includedAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1765in the sample, a kinship matrix must be used to account for
relatedness between subjects. Relationships may be known
from the pedigree structure, or can be inferred using
observed genotypes. For subjects without genotype data,
however, no approach is able to infer relatedness.
Pedigree-based imputation increases the sample size and
thus association power, and provides genotype probabilities
in subjects without genotype data. If phenotypes are avail-
able for such subjects, including them in the analysis islikely to maximize power to detect association between
genotypes and phenotype. However, knowing the relation-
ship between such subjects and the remaining ones, espe-cially across pedigrees, is crucial to control type 1 error.
Here, we propose a solution for inferring cryptic relat-
edness between subjects with complete missing genotypes.Our approach uses GIGI to estimate the probabilities of
missing genotypes, and integrates them in an Expectation-
Maximization approach to estimate kinship coef ﬁcients.
Through simulation, our approach succeeds to infer many
types of relationships with relatively high con ﬁdence. It
yields an average kinship estimates of 0.19, 0.1, and 0.05for an underlying kinship of 0.25, 0.125, and 0.0625,
respectively, for subjects without genotype data.
M. Saad: None. E. Ullah: None. E. Wijsman: None.
P18.54B
Discovery of novel Viking sequences in Swedishgenomes
J. Eisfeldt
1, G. Mårtensson2, A. Ameur3, D. Nilsson1,
A. Lindstrand1
1Karolinska institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Royal institute
of technology, Stockholm, Sweden,3Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden
Abstract Novel sequences, not present in the human
reference genome, are abundant and remain largely
unexplored. Here, we utilize de novo assembly to study
novel sequences present in 1000 Swedish individuals ﬁrst
sequenced as part of the SweGen project revealing a total of
51Mbp in 69098 distinct contigs of sequences not present inGRCh38. The contigs were then aligned to the comprehen-
sive blast database, a recently published catalogue of
Icelandic novel sequences, the unmappable sequences of thePan-African genome, as well as the chimpanzee genome,
revealing a great diversity of shared sequences. Addition-
ally, the unmappable sequences were searched for repeatsand repeat elements: revealing a majority (58%) of
repetitive sequence, consisting mainly of satellites (19%)
and simple repeats (26%). Clustering all 1000 individualsbased on their novel sequences resulted two clusters of
similar size. One cluster is characterized by a higher degreeof shared novel sequences, while the other was found to be
diverse: as if sampled from a founder population, as well as
a large, and diverse minority population. Finally, by
aligning publicly available low coverage whole genome
sequencing data from 23 Viking age individuals to our
modern Swedish novel sequence catalogue, we show thatgenome sequences from Viking age individuals are
enriched in novel sequences from modern day Swedes.
J. Eisfeldt: None. G. Mårtensson: None. A. Ameur:
None. D. Nilsson: None. A. Lindstrand: None.
P18.55C
Identifying signatures of positive selection in the
Lithuanian population from high-density SNP data
A. Urnikyte
1, M. Mondal2, A. Molyte1, E. Bosch3,
V. Ku činskas1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Biomedical
Science Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of Genomics, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-
CSIC), Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la
Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de RecercaBiomèdica de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
A characterization of the adaptive history in particular
populations is of great importance as it provides knowledge
of the genes that have been targeted by positive natural
selection at a local geographical scale. We carried outgenome-wide scans for different signatures of positive
selection in a total of 399 individuals from the Lithuanian
population.
We analysed Illumina 770 K HumanOmniExpress-12
v1.1 and In ﬁnium OmniExpress-24 array data from
Lithuania and combined it with that of the CEU, FIN andYRI populations from the 1000G project. Signatures of
positive selection were then investigated using three statis-
tics: Tajima's D, F
STand XP-EHH.
We detected a total of 42 candidate regions with sig-
natures of recent selection in the Lithuanian population.
Few new strong signals of selection comprising severalinteresting genes were identi ﬁed when comparing LT to the
YRI population. One of such signals was found in chro-
mosome 3, which comprises the COL6A5 and COL6A6
genes encoding for the collagen type VI alpha 5 and alpha 6
chains, respectively. Moreover, a non-synonymous variant
inCOL6A5 (rs12488457) with a CADD value of 23.2 was
found among the top XP-EHH and F
SToutliers along the
region.
As expected, other candidate regions for positive selec-
tion identi ﬁed in the Lithuanian population were related
with pigmentation ( SLC24A5, TYRP1 ), the immune1766response ( BRD2, HLA-DOA, IL26, IL22 ) and other traits
and were partly shared with other European populations.
This work supported by the LITGEN project (VP1-3.1-
ŠMM-07-K-01-013), funded by the European Social Fund
under the Global Grant Measure.
A. Urnikyte: None. M. Mondal: None. A. Molyte:
None. E. Bosch: None. V. Kučinskas: None.
P18.56D
Time-related differences in pregnancy duration
distributions of relatives and its effect on heritability
estimates
D. Modzelewska1, P. Sole-Navais1, G. Zhang2,3,
L. Muglia2,3, S. Nilsson4, B. Jacobsson1,5
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of
Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, GothenburgUniversity, Gothenburg, Sweden,
2Human Genetics
Division, Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, United States,3Center for Prevention of
Preterm Birth, Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States,4Mathematical
Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg,Sweden,
5Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics,
Domain of Health Data and Digitalisation, Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway
Background: In determining the contribution of genetic
factors to variation in pregnancy duration, it has beensuggested that the core assumption underlying heritability
estimation, equal environmental conditions in which
relatives grow, might not be met when analyzing relativescoming from different generations.
Aim: Exploration of time-related environmental dis-
tributional differences, their detection and signi ﬁcance for
the assessment of similarity in pregnancy duration between
relatives.
Methods: 454435 parent-child, 2247065 full-siblings,
405116 maternal- and 469995 paternal- half-siblings pairs
were retrieved from the Swedish Birth Register. The pre-
sence of time-related environmental changes was deter-mined by analyzing the shape of pregnancy duration
distribution over the years 1973 - 2012. The effect on the
correlation estimate was evaluated by analyzing variation inthe magnitude of correlation estimates between the relatives
born in periods of time with differently shaped pregnancy
duration distributions, and relatives with different age-gapsin between.
Results: Over the years, the distribution of pregnancy
duration is left-shifting. Distributional differences wereobserved among relatives born in largely spaced periods of
time. Decreasing correlation estimates together withincreasing age-gap was observed among all siblings pairs.
On the other hand, among full-siblings born within 2 years
of one another, the correlation estimate increases sig-
niﬁcantly over the years, with some decrease in the mid-
1990s.
Conclusion: The assumption of equal environmental
conditions, in the case of pregnancy duration, is dif ﬁcult to
be met due to broad palette of environmental factors
affecting the outcome. Caution when interpreting the her-itability estimates must be taken.
D. Modzelewska: None. P. Sole-Navais: None. G.
Zhang: None. L. Muglia: None. S. Nilsson: None. B.
Jacobsson: None.
P18.58B
Colonexpress browser: An interactive web application
for exploring gene and transcript expression in normal
colon tissue
V. Diez-Obrero
1,2,3, F. Moratalla-Navarro1,3, R. Carrera-
Torres1,2,3, M. Devall4, G. Casey4, V. Moreno1,2,3
1Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), L'Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain,2Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,3Consortium
for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public
Health (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain,4University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States
Introduction: Understanding the genetic regulation of
healthy tissues may contribute to explain the missing
heritability of complex diseases. In this study, we conducted
quantitative trait locus (QTL) analyses to associate geneticvariation to gene and transcript expression in normal colon
tissue and developed an interactive web application to
explore in deep the results.
Materials and Methods: Colon biopsies were obtained
from 191 healthy volunteers at colonoscopy. Normalized
gene and transcript expression, obtained from RNA-Seq,and ~5 million Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms were
analyzed using the R packages MatrixEQTL and
sQTLSeekeR for expression and transcript ratio QTL ana-lyses, respectively. Shiny was used to develop the appli-
cation. We envisage enlarging the analyzed data set to
nearly 500 samples during the following months.
Results: The web app Colonexpress browser allows to
explore colon gene and transcript expression levels and
download custom plots, such as scatter plots colored byvariables of interest or annotated heatmaps where the spli-
cing diversity can be observed. Lowly expressed transcripts
can be grouped at a desired threshold. Also, the applicationallows to browse the QTL catalog and downloading tablesAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1767with statistics. It will be available at https://shiny.snpstats.
net/colonexpress_browser .
Conclusion: Colonexpress browser allows the interactive
visualization of a useful data resource for conducting further
functional studies, which may help understanding associa-
tion studies for diseases affecting colon tissue.
Grant references: NIH/NCI CA143237; NIH/NCI
CA204279; NIH/NCI CA201407; ISC III - FEDER PI14-
00613; CIBERESP CB07/02/2005; Catalan GovernmentDURSI 2014SGR647; EU H2020 - MSC grant No 796216;
FPU16/00599.
V. Diez-Obrero: None. F. Moratalla-Navarro: None.
R. Carrera-Torres: None. M. Devall: None. G. Casey:
None. V. Moreno: None.
P18.59C
Towards estimating the incidence of rare diseases in a
paediatric population, born in Ireland in the year 2000
E. A. Gunne
1, C. McGarvey1, K. Hamilton1, A. Ward2,
E. Treacy3, D. Lambert3, S. A. Lynch1,3,2
1Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland,2Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, Dublin,
Ireland,3National Rare Disease Of ﬁce, Mater Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland
Introduction: The EU recognises Rare Diseases as chronic,
life threatening illnesses. National epidemiological studies
of RD prevalence are uncommon. This study aims to derivethe incidence of paediatric RD and its mortality case
number for children born in the year 2000.
Materials and Methods: Cases were identi ﬁed using
electronic/manual records from: National Paediatric Mor-
tality Registry of ﬁce; Clinical, Cytogenetics and Molecular
genetics database; Radiology and the Hospital In-PatientEnquiry system (HIPE). In addition, a detailed analysis of
10years national death registration information for RDs
from 2006-2016 was undertaken along with a 2year study(2015-2016) of inpatient RD deaths.
Results :There were 54,789 livebirths in 2000. Clinical,
Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetics identi ﬁed 603, 121 and
77 cases of RDs respectively. HIPE searches (two major
centres) identi ﬁed 370 and 702 additional cases of RD.
Mortality data (2006-2016) revealed 65.7% of 105 deathsfrom the 2000 cohort had a RD. Of all deaths on the Reg-
ister (2006-2016), (n =4044) aged 0-14, 58.56% (n =2368)
had a RD diagnosis. Of the total hospital days used by thiscohort (n =5566.5) 84%(n =4668.5) of the total day usage
and 77% (3137/4059) of ICU days used were by RD
patients.
Conclusions: This study has identi ﬁed > 1,800 RD
patients presenting by age 17 giving a minimum incidenceof 3.3% for paediatric RDs. 65.7% of paediatric mortality
cases for the year 2000 cohort and 58.6% of all cases from
2006-2016 had a RD. It con ﬁrms that the use of acute
hospital services by RD patients far exceeds that expected
by their numbers.
E.A. Gunne: None. C. McGarvey: None. K. Hamilton:
None. A. Ward: None. E. Treacy: None. D. Lambert:
None. S.A. Lynch: None.
P18.60D
Estimating global point prevalence of rare diseases:
analysis of the Orphanet database
S. Nguengang-Wakap
1, D. M. Lambert2, A. Olry1,
C. Rodwell1, C. Gueydan1, V. Lanneau1,Y .L eC a m3,
A. Rath1
1INSERM, US14-Orphanet, Paris, France,2Orphanet
Ireland, National Rare Diseases Of ﬁce, Dublin, Ireland,
3EURORDIS, Plateforme Maladies Rares, Paris, France
Introduction: Rare diseases (RDs) are an emerging global
public health priority. These chronic, degenerative and life-
threatening diseases are scarce and diverse, resulting in alack of knowledge and expertise. Orphanet ( www.orpha.
net) is a publicly accessible RD knowledge base containing
curated epidemiological indicators. Accurate epidemiologi-cal information about RDs as a group is necessary to inform
public policy.
Methods: Univariate analysis of Orphanet data ( www.
orphadata.org ). Global point prevalence of RDs was deter-
mined from the ‘Orphanet Epidemiological File ’by
selecting RDs described by ‘point prevalence ’from pre-
deﬁned geographic regions for analysis, and summing point
prevalences.
Results: Point prevalence is the appropriate epidemiolo-
gical indicator for 85.9% (n =5304) of RDs and annual
incidence for 14.1% of RDs. 71.7% (n =4425) of RDs are
genetic (known/suspected familial; inherited or de novo
single gene disorders; mitochondrial diseases; and chro-
mosomal rearrangements). 11.9% of RDs are exclusively
adult-onset. The minimum cumulative point prevalence ofRDs was calculated of 3.5-5.9%, or 263 to 446 million
persons affected worldwide by RDs at any point in time.
While 84.5% of the 3585 RDs analysed had a point pre-valence of < 1/1,000,000, 77.3-80.7% of the population
burden of RDs was attributable to 149 (4.2%) diseases with
prevalence of 1-5 per 10,000; and >95% of the populationburden of RDs was attributable to 390 diseases.
Conclusion: Our conservative estimate of 3.5% to 5.9%
is the ﬁrst evidence-based estimate of the population pre-
valence of RDs. Future RD registry research and the1768implementation of RD codi ﬁcation in healthcare systems
will further re ﬁne these estimates.
S. Nguengang-Wakap: None. D.M. Lambert: None. A.
Olry: None. C. Rodwell: None. C. Gueydan: None. V.
Lanneau: None. Y. Le Cam: None. A. Rath: None.
P18.61A
Rare variant association tests in presence of
heterogeneity between cases
O. Bocher1, G. Marenne1, H. Perdry2, E. Génin1
1Inserm UMR1078, Brest, France,2Univ Paris-Sud,
Villejuif, France
The wide availability of Next Generation Sequence data
opens new opportunities to discover rare variants associated
to rare or common diseases. Rare variants association testshave been proposed speci ﬁcally to this end. To obtain a
higher statistical power, they test association between a
whole genomic region (usually encompassing one gene)and the disease. These tests can be broadly classi ﬁed in two
categories: burden tests (CAST, WSS) and variance tests
(SKAT).
However, even these tests may have an unsatisfactory
power, due to the limited size of case samples and to the
large number of genes to be tested when an agnosticapproach is used. In this context, incorporating information
on clinical heterogeneity among cases, e.g. differences in
disease presentation, severity or age at onset, is an appeal-ing way to build association tests with a higher sensitivity.
We propose extensions of both burden and variance tests
to the situation where the cases are divided in such sub-groups. The burden tests were extended by means of a
multinomial logistic regression. A geometrical interpreta-
tion of the SKAT test for binary phenotypes was used toconstruct a natural extension of this test to our setting. The
power of these tests was investigated under various simu-
lation scenarios. They were also applied on some real dataexamples.
An ef ﬁcient implementation of the proposed tests has
been made available in an R package, Ravages, which isdeposited on github ( https://github.com/genostats/Ravages ).
O. Bocher: None. G. Marenne: None. H. Perdry: None.
E. Génin: None.
P18.62B
Exploring the overlap between rheumatoid arthritissusceptibility loci and long non-coding RNA annotations
J. Ding
1, C. Shi1, J. Bowes1,2, S. Eyre1,2, G. Orozco1,21Arthritis Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics.
Division of Musculoskeletal and Dermatological Sciences,
School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine
and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom,2NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research
Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust,Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester,
United Kingdom
Introduction: The interrogation of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) susceptibility loci has focussed on disruption of
protein-coding genes and enhancers, however these featuresare unlikely to mediate the association with disease risk at
all identi ﬁed loci. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) have
previously been demonstrated to be enriched within genomewide association study (GWAS) loci, however the sig-
niﬁcance of this enrichment, its relevance, and its
generalisability to individual traits is unknown.
Materials and Methods: Using fgwas, the ability of
individual annotations to improve a probabilistic model of
disease susceptibility was tested. Publicly available lncRNAannotations, including lncRBase, lncipedia and the
miTranscriptome assembly, were incorporated, in addition
to cell type speci ﬁc chromatin states annotations.
Results: Using fgwas it is possible to reproduce a pre-
viously reported enrichment of enhancers active in primary
T helper cells amongst RA GWAS loci (log
2enrichment
2.96, 95% con ﬁdence interval [2.01, 3.69]), however esti-
mates for enrichment of lncRNA are statistically insignif-
icant. Interestingly, the miTranscriptome assembly,previously used to demonstrate an enrichment of lncRNA
amongst GWAS loci, is demonstrated to be depleted
amongst RA loci, using fgwas (log
2enrichment -0.80, 95%
conﬁdence interval [-1.70, -0.08]). The enrichment estimate
associated with alternative databases of lncRNA seems to
vary based on the protein-coding potential threshold appliedto discriminate against protein-coding transcripts and
appears to be independent of chromatin state annotations.
Conclusions: Whilst at speci ﬁc GWAS loci, long non-
coding RNA may represent interesting candidates for
functional interrogation we found no evidence to support an
enrichment of long non-coding RNA amongst RAsusceptibility loci.
J. Ding: None. C. Shi: None. J. Bowes: None. S. Eyre:
None. G. Orozco: None.
P18.63C
Distribution of Runs Of Homozygosity (ROHs) along thehuman genome is shaped by recombination and
purifying selectionAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1769K. Popadin1, D. Iliushchenko2, E. Zezyulya2,
P. Makrythanasis3, M. Ansar4, S. E. Antonarakis4,
A. Reymond1
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
2Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad,
Russian Federation,3academy of Athens, Athens, Greece,
4University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Whereas the higher fraction of the human genome, covered
by Runs Of Homozygosity (ROHs), was associated with
decreased height, decreased educational attainment andother phenotypes, the mapping position of the contributing
ROHs was not assessed in details. Here, analysing genome-
wide distribution of ROHs in offsprings of 100 consangui-neous families we observed a non uniform distribution.
Using multiple linear model we demonstrated that this
variation could be explained by (i) recombination level, i.e.the higher the recombination in a given region, the less the
number of ROHs; and (ii) selection, i.e. the higher the pLI
score (which estimates loss of function intolerance) of theembedded genes the less the number of ROHs. The
observed selection component might be explained by
elimination of carriers of homozygous recessive loss offunction mutations in genes with high pLI. To examine the
selection component further we strati ﬁed ROHs by age and
length following a previously suggested classi ﬁcation: class
A (old and short: < 0.6 Mb), class B (intermediate in age
and length: 0.6 - 1.6 Mb) and class C (young and long: >
1.6 Mb) and rerun our analyses. We observed that while thedistribution of all three classes is shaped by recombination,
only the class C ROHs showed a strong negative relation-
ship with pLI, suggesting that younger ROHs are understronger selection. Altogether our results provide additional
metrics (properties of affected genes, ROH classes), which
should be taken into account inferring deleterious effect ofROHs in GWAS and genetic medicine.
K. Popadin: None. D. Iliushchenko: None. E. Zezyu-
lya:None. P. Makrythanasis: None. M. Ansar: None. S.
E. Antonarakis: None. A. Reymond: None.
P18.64D
Secondary ﬁndings - should we focus only on those
relevant for individual health, or also on those with
implications for further reproduction in the family?
K. Prochazkova
1, M. Havlovicova1, M. Vlckova1,
A. Baxova2, D. Prchalova1, M. Hancarova1, S. Bendova1,
V. Stranecky3, Z. Sedlacek1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University Second Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,2Department ofBiology and Medical Genetics, Charles University First
Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Paediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for
Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine
and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
The increasing implementation of exome sequencing (ES)
leads to growing number of secondary ﬁndings (SF).
Following the recommendations of the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) we started to
build a pilot algorithm for SF management based on ES datafrom families analysed in research setting due to intellectual
disability in their children. The ACMG recommendations
focus on genes in ﬂuencing health risks for individuals
themselves. However, most families are tested as trios, and
the couples are often young and planning to have another
child. The data contain information on parental carrier statusfor severe hereditary disorders, and SF may also be
extended to variants with implications for future children
and reproductive choices. Therefore, our pilot SF algorithmcombines evaluation of ACMG-recommended genes and
analysis of parental carrier status for risk variants in
recessive and X-linked genes. Until now, 260 individualsfrom 77 families have been analysed. The data show that at
least 2.3 % of individuals carry variants in ACMG-
recommended genes reported in ClinVar as pathogenic/likely pathogenic (e.g. BRCA2, RET), and couples may
exist where both partners carry variants causing a recessive
disorder (e.g. VPS13B). We propose discussion on theextension of SF to variants associated with risks for future
reproduction. The next stage of the algorithm will be to
explore the inclusion of this extension into informedconsent and genetic counselling. Discrepancies in variant
classi ﬁcation, need of expert analyses of individual genes
and high time demand represent further obstacles in thiseffort. Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203.
K. Prochazkova: None. M. Havlovicova: None. M.
Vlckova: None. A. Baxova: None. D. Prchalova: None.
M. Hancarova: None. S. Bendova: None. V. Stranecky:
None. Z. Sedlacek: None.
P18.65A
Admixture mapping study of sepsis in an African-
admixed population from southwestern Europe
I. Marcelino-Rodriguez
1, T. Hernandez-Beeftink1,2,
B. Guillen-Guio1, H. Rodriguez-Perez1, A. Corrales1,
I. Garcia-Laorden2,3, D. Dominguez4, E. Espinosa4,
J. Villar2,3, C. Flores1,3,5
1Research Unit, HUNSC, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
2Research Unit, H.U. de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrin, Las1770Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,3CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,
4Department of Anesthesiology, HUNSC, Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Spain,5Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico
y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
Spain
Introduction: Sepsis is a severe systemic in ﬂammatory
response to an infection that is accompanied by organdisfunction. Although the ancestral background is an
important factor for sepsis susceptibility and prevalence,
no study has leveraged the genetic footprint of a recentadmixture in the population for the identi ﬁcation of loci
involved in sepsis susceptibility. Here we describe the
results of the ﬁrst admixture mapping study in sepsis.
Material and Methods: Local ancestry blocks obtained
from genome-wide data from 113,414 SNPs genotyped in
343 sepsis cases and 410 unrelated controls, ascertained forgrandparental origin in the Canary Islands (Spain), were
used for the analysis. Signi ﬁcance was declared based on
the number of ancestry blocks (p<1.82e-4). Fine mappinganalysis were assessed with logistic and conditional
regressions on HRC-imputed data.
Results and Conclusions: A signi ﬁcant hit was identi ﬁed
in a region spanning 1.2 Mb of chromosome 8q23.1 for the
European ancestry supported by 114 SNPs (lowest
p=1.37e-4; OR =0.51; 95%CI =0.40-0.65). 8q23.1 contains
MFHAS1 gene, which encodes a regulator of the Toll-like
receptor 2 and 4 signaling pathways. MFHAS1 has been
proposed as a biomarker for sepsis and genetic variants ofthe gene have been associated with immune diseases. Our
results revealed a new genetic locus with plausible impli-
cations in sepsis susceptibility.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI14/00844, PI17/
00610, FI17/00177, FI18/00230), co- ﬁnanced by the Eur-
opean Regional Development Funds, “A way of making
Europe ”from the EU; ACIISI (TESIS2015010057) co-
funded by European Social Fund; Agreement OA17/008
with Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables(ITER).
I. Marcelino-Rodriguez: None. T. Hernandez-Beef-
tink: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. H. Rodriguez-Perez:
None. A. Corrales: None. I. Garcia-Laorden: None. D.
Dominguez: None. E. Espinosa: None. J. Villar: None. C.
Flores: None.
P18.66B
Transcriptome-wide causal analyses reveals sex-speci ﬁc
biomarkers for complex human traits
E. Porcu
1,2, K. Lepik3,2,4, S. Rüeger5,2, eQTLGen
Consortium, F. A. Santoni6, A. Reymond1, Z. Kutalik4,21Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland,3Institute of Computer Science,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,4University Center for
Primary Care and Public Health, Lausanne, Switzerland,
5Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland,6Endocrine, Diabetes, and Metabolism
Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV),Lausanne, Switzerland
The prevalence of many diseases differs between men and
women. Identi ﬁcation of sex-speci ﬁc GWAS loci can help
understanding the mechanisms underlying such sex differ-
ences. To address this challenge, we applied atranscriptome-wide summary statistics-based Mendelian
Randomization approach (TWMR) to waist hip ratio
(WHR) combining whole-blood eQTLs and sex-speci ﬁc
GWAS summary statistics from UKBiobank. Our results
recapitulated the marked sexual dimorphism known for
WHR: in the sex-combined analysis, we found 203 genescausally associated with WHR; of note, 38 and 26 genes
were causally associated to WHR in women or men only,
respectively (top genes: ENTPD6 ,P
TWMR=7.9E-11 in men;
CALCRL ,PTWMR=4.6E-12 in women). Consistently, 16 of
these 64 genes showed signi ﬁcant sex-difference ( P-
diff<0.05/203 =2.5E-04). Conducting TWMR separately in
men and women not only improves power to identify sex-
speciﬁc associations, but also allows testing for sex
differences. As might be expected, we did not observe thesame power improvement when we applied TWMR to traits
not showing sexual dimorphism, such as educational
attainment (EA). Out of the 49 genes causally associatedwith EA, only 4 and 5 were speci ﬁc to women and men,
respectively. Although previous data indicate that eQTL
effects are not strongly in ﬂuenced by sex, it will be crucial
to perform the same analyses with sex-speci ﬁc eQTL data
generated from larger data sets to dissect sex-speci ﬁc effects
appearing up- vsdown-stream of gene regulation. Our
ﬁndings demonstrate the importance of investigating sex
differences, which may lead to a better understanding of
disease mechanisms facilitating treatment options andprecision medicine.
E. Porcu: None. K. Lepik: None. S. Rüeger: None. F.A.
Santoni: None. A. Reymond: None. Z. Kutalik: None.
P18.68D
High-dimensional analysis of SNP array data revealsmajor subdivisions in the Canary Islands (Spain)
population
B. Guillen-Guio
1, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez1, A. Muñoz-
Barrera2, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez2, A. Corrales1,3, A. Díaz-Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1771de Usera2, R. González-Montelongo2, J. M. Lorenzo-
Salazar2, C. Flores2,1,3
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria,
Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
2Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER),
Genomics Division, Granadilla de Abona, Spain,3CIBER
de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Based on SNP array data, model-based
ancestry estimations, and principal component (PC) analy-sis, we have recently conducted a detailed genomic analysis
of the current inhabitants of the Canary Islanders (Spain),
revealing the existence of a signi ﬁcant African in ﬂuence
and population isolation. Here we have reassessed their
genomic diversity and structure based on alternative high-
dimensional analysis techniques.
Materials and Methods: A total of 117K variants from
618 unrelated subjects from the seven main islands of the
archipelago ascertained based on grandparental birthplacewere compared. Topological data analysis (TDA) was
conducted using umap v0.2.0 R library both based on raw
genotyping data and 2-to-20 PCs derived with PLINK v1.9.
Results: Three main population-aggregated clusters were
identi ﬁed: two corresponding to the smallest islands of the
archipelago (El Hierro and La Gomera), and a Y-shapedcluster aggregating the rest of Canary Islanders. In addition,
TDA based on six PCs showed intriguing subdivisions
within La Gomera, the population showing the largest NorthAfrican in ﬂuences described so far for a southwestern
European population.
Conclusions: High dimensional data analysis suggests
that extreme isolation in the populations from El Hierro and
La Gomera is a major source of genetic sub-structure in
Canary Islanders.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni-
versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER,
UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships byACIISI co-funded by European Social Fund to B.G.G.
(TESIS2015010057) and Spanish Ministry of Education,
Culture and Sports to A.D.U. (FPU16/01435).
B. Guillen-Guio: None. I. Marcelino-Rodríguez: None.
A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A. Rubio-Rodríguez: None.
A. Corrales: None. A. Díaz-de Usera: None. R. Gonzá-
lez-Montelongo: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C.
Flores: None.
P18.69A
The association between telomere length and cardio-
metabolic components: a Mendelian randomizationstudyM. Lin
1, P. Weng1, S. Kao1,T .W u2,W .W u1, S. Chen3,
A. Yen3, Y. Lee4,C .T s e5, T. Liu6, H. Chen7
1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan,2Department of Public Health, Chung-Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan,3School of Oral
Hygiene, College of Oral Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan,4Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,Taiwan,
5Bureau of Health and Welfare, Lienchiang
County Government, Matsu, Taiwan,6Lienchiang County
Government, Matsu, Taiwan,7Institute of Epidemiology
and Preventative Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Introduction: Telomeres are the tips of chromosomes and
are composed of proteins and several thousand copies of a
hexamer repeat sequence (TTAGGG)n. Telomere length(TL) is shortened progressively with age. Many studies
revealed that age, sex, ethnicity, smoking, obesity, lack of
exercise could result in shorter telomere length. However,these factors associated with TL are also contributed to
cardio-metabolic components/diseases. Several genetic loci
associated with telomere length have been identi ﬁed. The
study was aimed to assess whether telomere length causally
affects cardio-metabolic components using Mendelian
randomization design.
Methods: A total of 2543 adults were recruited from the
Matsu community-based integrated health screening pro-
ject. Five SNPs ( TERC rs12696304, rs16847897, TERT
rs2736100, FTO rs9930506, rs9939609) associated with
telomere length were used as instrument variables to esti-
mate the causal effect of telomere length on cardio-metabolic components by Mendelian randomization analy-
sis using two-stage least-square instrumental variable (IV)
regression.
Results: We found that both FTO rs9930506 and
rs9939609 SNPs were signi ﬁcantly associated with telo-
mere length (p<0.05), but not the other three telomerelength related SNPs. The results of linear regression showed
that telomere length was not signi ﬁcantly associated with
waist circumference, body mass index, blood pressures,fasting glucose, lipid levels (all with p>0.05). Mendelian
randomization using two-stage least-square IV regression
did not show that telomere length instrumented by the twoFTO SNPs, were associated with any cardio-metabolic
components (p>0.05).
Conclusion: Our study could not con ﬁrm the previous
knowledge of the causal effects of telomere length on
cardio-metabolic components. Grant No: MOST 106-2314-
B-010-020-MY31772M. Lin: None. P. Weng: None. S. Kao: None. T. Wu:
None. W. Wu: None. S. Chen: None. A. Yen: None. Y.
Lee: None. C. Tse: None. T. Liu: None. H. Chen: None.
P18.70B
A large spectrum of variants identi ﬁed in moderate
thrombocytopenic French blood donors: results of the
ABC study
A. Dupuis1, P. Guéguen2,J .P y3, A. Desprès2, C. Gachet1,
C. Férec4,2
1EFS Grand-est - Inserm UMR 1255, Strasbourg, France,
2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire - Inserm UMR
1078, Brest, France,3EFS Centre-Atlantique, Orléans,
France,4EFS Bretagne - Inserm UMR 1078, brest, France
Moderate thrombocytopenia (less than 150G/l) is a reason
for donors deferral for blood donation in France. We aimed
at exploring potential genetic variations responsible for
these defects and to de ﬁne their prevalence in a blood donor
population from 3 French regions: Alsace, Centre-
Atlantique and Bretagne. We collected a saliva sample
from 448 donors with platelet counts <150 G/l on twoconsecutive blood donations. Following DNA extraction
the coding sequences and intron/exon junctions of 17
candidate genes were ampli ﬁed by PCR Ampliseq ™and
sequenced on a Ion Proton©. Annotation of the variants was
performed (SeqNext© software). The pathogenicity of the
variants was assessed using data from the literature andbioinformatics prediction tools. Most donors (59%) were
aware of their low platelet count but only 17% knew a
family history. 84 heterozygous variants of interest spreadover 12 genes. 23 variants are deleterious, the rest of the
variants being of unknown signi ﬁcance 59 variants were
found on gene already studied in patients with inheritedthrombocytopenia (8 GPIBA ,2GPIBB ,3WF,9MYH9 ,1 1
TUBB1 ,9 ACTN1 ,1 3 ITGA2B and 5 FLNA ) with a
surprisingly high frequency of ITGA2B and TUBB1variants. The remaining 24 variants where identi ﬁed on
genes suspected to be responsible for thrombocytopenia in
human or already studied in mouse models (7 TUBA8 ,8
ITGB3 ,5ITGA2 ,2RASGRP2 and 2 TUBA4A ). These
results indicate that at least 5% of healthy donors with
moderate thrombocytopenia carry a constitutional anomalyin a gene responsible for this platelet count defect.
A. Dupuis: None. P. Guéguen: None. J. Py: None. A.
Desprès: None. C. Gachet: None. C. Férec: None.
P18.71C
Topological data analysis of SNP array data exposes thegenetic differentiation between Iberians and Canary
IslandersJ. M. Lorenzo-Salazar
1, A. Díaz-de Usera1, A. Muñoz-
Barrera1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, B. Guillen-Guio2,
A. Corrales2,3, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, D. Comas4,
R. González-Montelongo1, S. Alonso5, C. Flores1,2,3
1Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER),
Genomics Division, Granadilla de Abona, Spain,2Research
Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria,
Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,4Department of Experimental
and Health Sciences, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,
5Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and
Animal Physiology, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Leioa, Bizkaia, Spain
Introduction: Genetic structure of populations often
necessitates multidimensionality reduction, typically
assessed with principal component (PC) analysis (PCA).
However, such procedure most commonly focuses on a fewmain dimensions limiting the possibilities to excavate ﬁne-
grained strata. Here we used topological data analysis
(TDA) to embed high-dimensionality of SNP array data toexplore the degree of genetic differentiation between
Canary Islanders and the Iberian Peninsula
population (IBS).
Materials and Methods: We used data from 46 Canary
Islanders along with 740 unrelated subjects from IBS and
23 North Africans (NAF) for reference. PCA and TDA wereassessed on quality-controlled data using the PLINK v1.9
and umap v0.2.0 library for R.
Results: By leveraging the information from as few as
136K independent SNPs embedded within a 2-to-50 PC
space, we found highly distinctive patterns of differentiation
between Canary Islanders and the IBS populations despitetheir shared Spanish ancestry. Strikingly, most Canary
Islanders clustered closer to NAF, although a few indivi-
duals clustered with IBS.
Conclusions: TDA provides an optimal alternative to
reveal previously unrecognized ﬁne structure separating
IBS from Canary Islanders, compatible with genetic driftand differential admixtures. Co-clustering of Canary Islan-
ders both with NAF and IBS supports wide interindividual
variation in ancestries, re ﬂective of their recent history.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni-
versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER,
UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships bySpanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to A.D.
U. (FPU16/01435) and ACIISI co-funded by European
Social Fund to B.G.G. (TESIS2015010057).
J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. A. Díaz-de Usera: None.
A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A. Rubio-Rodríguez: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1773B. Guillen-Guio: None. A. Corrales: None. I. Marcelino-
Rodríguez: None. D. Comas: None. R. González-Mon-
telongo: None. S. Alonso: None. C. Flores: None.
P18.72D
In-silico analysis of Barrett's esophagus and esophagealadenocarcinoma reveals an association between the
genetic signal and gene expression regulation in
esophagus tissues
O. Borisov
1, C. Maj1, J. Schröder2, M. Yeung1,
M. Knapp3, P. Gharahkhani4, M. Nöthen2,
J. Schumacher2,5, A. Böhmer2, P. Krawitz1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics,
University of Bonn School of Medicine & University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Bonn School of Medicine &University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
3Institute of
Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,4Statistical Genetics,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia,5Center of Human Genetics,
University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, Germany
Introduction: Barrett ’s esophagus (BE) is a premalignant
precursor of Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) which is oneof the leading causes of cancer deaths. Both conditions are
complex traits and we aimed at dissecting their polygenic
structure in association with tissue speci ﬁc gene expression
regulation.
Materials and Methods: We estimated the SNP-
heritability on the liability scale and genetic correlation byapplying LD score regression analysis to the largest meta-
analysis results (6,167 BE cases, 4,112 EA cases, 17,159
controls). We performed Polygenic Risk Score (PRS)modeling. We analysed gene expression alterations by
means of Transcriptome Wide Association Study (TWAS)
and FUMA platform. We modeled the gene expression PRS(GE-PRS) based on the PrediXcan- and MetaXcan-imputed
gene expression pro ﬁles.
Results: SNP-heritability (h2) for BE was h2 =0.20,
h2=0.13 for EA, and h2 =0.15 for the combined cohort (BE
and EA). The genetic correlation between BE and EA was
r
g=0.85. We identi ﬁed a strong association of PRS com-
paring BE against controls (p =3.7*10-5), EA against con-
trols (p =3.5*10-7), and the combined cohort (BE and EA)
against controls (p =5*10-13), but no association comparing
BE against EA (p =0.09). Esophagus tissues were prior-
itized as the most signi ﬁcant by FUMA, and the TWAS
uncovered particular genes among these tissues (e.g.,BTN3A2 ) whose expression was signi ﬁcantly altered
(p=3*10
-7). Finally, the GE-PRS model in the esophagusmucosa tissue was signi ﬁcantly associated with the case/
control status (p =1.2*10-8).
Conclusion: Our work dissected a strong polygenic
component of Barrett ’s esophagus and Esophageal adeno-
carcinoma, we identi ﬁed potential candidate genes and
established gene expression alterations in disease-speci ﬁc
tissues.
O. Borisov: None. C. Maj: None. J. Schröder: None.
M. Yeung: None. M. Knapp: None. P. Gharahkhani:
None. M. Nöthen: None. J. Schumacher: None. A.
Böhmer: None. P. Krawitz: None.
P18.73A
Cross-phenotype transcriptome-wide association study
reveals shared susceptibility genes betweenschizophrenia and in ﬂammatory bowel disease in gut-
brain axis related tissues
C. Maj
1, O. Borisov1, A. Weiß2, S. Mucha3, S. Bej4,
F. Uellendahl-Werth3, M. Wol ﬁen4, International
Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease Genetics Consortium,
T. Karlsen5, A. Franke3, P. Hoffmann2,6, P. Krawitz1,
O. Wolkenhauer4, M. Nöthen2,7, F. Degenhardt2,
D. Ellinghaus3
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics,
University of Bonn, School of Medicine & UniversityHospital, Bonn, Germany,
2Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University
Hospital, Bonn, Germany,3Institute of Clinical Molecular
Biology, Christian Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany,4Institute of Computer Science, Department of
Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock,Rostock, Germany,
5Norwegian PSC Research Center,
Department of Transplantation Medicine, Division of
Cancer Medicine, Surgery and Transplantation, OsloUniversity Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway,
6Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University
Hospital Basel and Department of Biomedicine, Universityof Basel, Basel, Switzerland,
7Department of Genomics,
Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Introduction: Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS)
have identi ﬁed hundreds of genetic loci both for schizo-
phrenia (SCZ) and in ﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Noteworthy, both increased prevalence and genetic correla-
tion have been reported for SCZ and IBD, which suggests
potential shared molecular mechanisms between these traits.
Materials and Methods: We performed a cross-
phenotype transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS)
using the largest available summary statistics for SCZ(36.989 cases, 113.075 controls) and IBD (18.431 Crohn's
disease cases, 14.191 ulcerative colitis cases, and 33.6581774controls). We imputed the genetically regulated component
of gene expression by integrating GWAS signals with
tissue-speci ﬁc Expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) in
48 tissues. We used models trained on data from the
Genotype-Tissue Expression Project (GTEx).
Results: The combined evaluation of SCZ and IBD
TWAS results revealed a signi ﬁcant enrichment of asso-
ciated genes overlapping between SCZ and IBD in different
tissues. Interestingly, colon and brain were among the topsigniﬁcant tissues. Genes from the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) are also among the most strongly TWAS-
associated genes, which is in line with correspondinggenetic signals in SCZ and IBD.
Conclusion: Our TWAS results suggest that the genetic
correlation between SCZ and IBD can be associated withgene expression alteration in tissues involved in the reg-
ulation of the gut-brain axis and that MHC genes may play
a pivotal role. In order to further investigate this hypothesis,we intend to perform cross-phenotype TWAS including
other psychiatric and immune-related traits showing genetic
correlation.
C. Maj: None. O. Borisov: None. A. Weiß: None. S.
Mucha: None. S. Bej: None. F. Uellendahl-Werth: None.
M. Wol ﬁen:None. T. Karlsen: None. A. Franke: None.
P. Hoffmann: None. P. Krawitz: None. O. Wolkenhauer:
None. M. Nöthen: None. F. Degenhardt: None. D.
Ellinghaus: None.
P18.74B
Phenome-wide study of TTR non-coding variation in UK
Biobank participants: new knowledge regarding the
pathogenesis of hereditary and senile systemic
amyloidosis
A. De Lillo
1, F. De Angelis1, M. Di Girolamo2,
M. Luigetti3, S. Frusconi4, D. Manfellotto2, M. Fuciarelli1,
R. Polimanti5,6
1Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy,2Clinical Pathophysiology Center,
Fatebenefratelli Foundation –‘San Giovanni Calibita ’
Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, Italy,3Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS. UOC
Neurologia. Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy,4Genetic Diagnostics Unit, Laboratory Department,
Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy,5Department
of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, West
Haven, CT, United States,6VA CT Healthcare Center, West
Haven, CT, United States
Introduction: TTR coding mutations are responsible for a
hereditary form of amyloidosis (ATTR), which presents a
complex genotype-phenotype correlation including a widerange of clinical signs (i.e., peripheral and autonomic
neuropathy, cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, gastrointestinal
or ocular impairment). Additionally, a form of senile
systemic amyloidosis (SSA) is due to the misfolding of
the protein product of the same gene. Non-coding variation
inTTR gene appears to have a key role in affecting the
clinical phenotype of carriers of coding mutation and
increasing the risk of SSA in non-carriers. To understand
the role of TTR gene non-coding variation, we conducted a
phenome-wide association study in the UK Biobank.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 18,823 var-
iants located in TTR gene and its surrounding genomic
regions (GRCh37 chromosome 18: 27171000 –31171500)
in 361,194 participants from the UK Biobank with respect
to more than 4,000 traits, which include a wide range ofphysiological and pathological conditions.
Results: TTR non-coding variants were signi ﬁcantly
associated with multiple phenotypic traits after multipletesting correction (false discovery rate q-value < 0.05).
Among these signi ﬁcant results, we observed several
associations related to known signs of TTR amyloidosis:renal failure (rs150146618, p =1.33x10
-6); disorders related
to central nervous system (rs8091089, p =1.24x10-6); and
cardiac failure (rs145777295, p =2.52 x 10-6). Additionally,
a sex-strati ﬁed analysis showed signi ﬁcant differences
between females and males in the effects of TTR non-
coding variants.
Conclusions: The study provides novel insights regard-
ing the molecular mechanisms involved in ATTR and SSA,
demonstrating the effect of TTR non-coding variation on
human phenome.
A. De Lillo: None. F. De Angelis: None. M. Di Gir-
olamo: None. M. Luigetti: None. S. Frusconi: None. D.
Manfellotto: None. M. Fuciarelli: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-niﬁcant; P ﬁzer Inc.. R. Polimanti: None.
P18.75C
Combined effect of genetic predisposition, obesity, and
favorable lifestyle on risk of type 2 diabetes
H. Jakupovi ć
1, T. M. Schnurr1, G. D. Carrasquilla1,
N. Grarup1, T. I. A. Sørensen1, A. Tjønneland2,
K. Overvad3,4, O. Pedersen1, T. Hansen1,
T. O. Kilpeläinen1
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Danish
Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark,
3Department of Public Health, Section for Epidemiology,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1775Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark,4Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark
Objective: To study whether genetic risk of type 2 diabetes
(T2D) can be attenuated by adhering to a favorable lifestyle
and retaining normal body weight.
Methods: We applied Prentice-weighted Cox regression
models to a case-cohort sample of 9,556 men and women
from the Danish prospective Diet, Cancer and Healthcohort. 49.5% of the participants developed T2D during an
average 12 years of follow-up. A favorable lifestyle was
deﬁned as having three of the following healthy lifestyle
factors: no current smoking, moderate alcohol consumption,
regular physical activity, and healthy diet. An unfavorable
lifestyle was de ﬁned as no or only one healthy lifestyle
factor while the remaining participants were de ﬁned as
having an intermediate lifestyle. Genetic risk was assessed
by a genetic risk score (GRS) comprising 213 genetic locirobustly associated with T2D. The GRS was strati ﬁed into
low (lowest 25%), intermediate (middle 50%) and high risk
(top 25%) groups.
Results: Adherence to a favorable lifestyle and normal-
weight decreased T2D risk independent of genetic predis-
position (P>0.05 for GRS-lifestyle and GRS-obesity inter-action). Obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m
2) increased T2D-risk by
5.8-fold (95% CI: 5.2-6.6) compared to non-obese indivi-
duals, while the independent effects of high (vs. low)genetic risk and unfavorable (vs. favorable) lifestyle were
relatively modest (HR =1.8, 95% CI 1.6-2.0; and HR =1.2,
95% CI 1.1-1.3, respectively).
Conclusions: Individuals with poor lifestyle and obesity
are at greater risk of incident T2D regardless of their
genetic risk.
This study was supported by Danish Council for Inde-
pendent Research (DFF-6110-00183) and Novo Nordisk
Foundation (NNF18CC0034900, NNF17OC0026848 andNNF15CC0018486).
H. Jakupovi ć:None. T.M. Schnurr: None. G.D. Car-
rasquilla: None. N. Grarup: None. T.I.A. Sørensen:
None. A. Tjønneland: None. K. Overvad: None. O.
Pedersen: None. T. Hansen: None. T.O.
Kilpeläinen: None.
P18.76D
The relationship between genetically raised bilirubinand respiratory cancer: a UK Biobank study
L. J. Horsfall
1, S. Burgess2, I. Hall3, I. Nazareth1
1University College London, London, United Kingdom,
2MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United KingdomIntroduction: Genotypes causing mild hyperbilirubinaemia
(OMIM:#143500) are common in human populations
ranging from 10% (Europe and East Asia) to 25%
(equatorial Africa). Basic studies suggest moderately raised
bilirubin may be bene ﬁcial and protect respiratory systems
against oxidative stress from infection, smoke and pollution.Here we report the results of the ﬁrst large-scale Mendelian
randomisation examining the causal relationship between
serum bilirubin and respiratory cancer.
Materials and Methods: This research has been con-
ducted using unrelated participants of European ancestry
from the UK Biobank Resource. Homozygosity for theminor T allele of rs887829 in the UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase 1-1 gene is associated with serum
bilirubin levels 8-10 μmol/l (80-100%) higher than thosewithout this genotype. Using multivariable Poisson regres-
sion, we analysed the relationship between rs887829 and
the incidence of respiratory and intrathoracic cancersderived from national registers. All analyses were strati ﬁed
by smoking status with heavy smoking de ﬁned as ≥20
cigarettes per day.
Results: 323,702 participants (median follow-up 5.5
years) and 918 cancer events were included in the analyses.
Overall homozygosity for the T allele of rs887829(n=31,794) was associated with a 22% lower incidence of
respiratory cancer (95%CI:0-48%; p-value =0.047) com-
pared with other genotypes. Strati ﬁed analysis revealed this
effect was driven by heavy smokers with a 59% lower
incident rate (95%CI:38-76%; p-value =0.0018).
Conclusion: Genetically raised bilirubin could help pro-
tect people exposed to high levels of oxidants against
respiratory cancers. Serum bilirubin may therefore represent
a therapeutic target as well as a low-cost biomarker fordisease risk strati ﬁcation. Wellcome Trust funded:209207/
Z/17/Z
L.J. Horsfall: None. S. Burgess: None. I. Hall: None. I.
Nazareth: None.
P18.77A
Genetic contribution of visceral adiposity and its
relation to cardiovascular and metabolic disease
T. Karlsson, M. Rask-Andersen, G. Pan, J. Höglund,
C. Wadelius, W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden
The genetic contribution to, and the disease-related effects
of visceral adipose tissue (VAT) are largely unexplored due
to the requirements of advanced imaging technologies toaccurately measure VAT. We therefore developed non-
linear prediction models of VAT mass using 4,1981776individuals of white British ancestry from UK Biobank
(UKBB). VAT mass was then predicted in 325,153 UKBB
participants, aged 40-73 years. We performed a genome-
wide association (GWA) study for predicted VAT mass
(VAT^) and estimated the association between VAT^ and
hypertension, heart attack/angina, type 2 diabetes, andhyperlipidemia. Causal effects on disease risk were assessed
by Mendelian randomisation. The GWA study identi ﬁed
209 independent genetic associations for VAT^, represent-ing 102 novel loci. Functional analyses showed a signi ﬁcant
difference, both in expression and promoter activity
between the alleles of rs1799993, located in the HMBS
promoter. VAT^ was associated with increased risk of
disease with a more pronounced effect in females compared
to males ( p<0.0001). The largest observed effect was found
for type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, a pronounced non-linear
effect of VAT^ on disease risk was uncovered for all four
diseases ( p<0.0001). Finally, Mendelian randomisation
showed VAT^ to be a casual risk factor and a remarkably
high causal OR =7.34 (95% CI 4.48-12.0) was found for
type 2 diabetes in females. Our ﬁndings substantially bolster
the role of visceral adiposity as a bona ﬁde predictor.
The research was funded by SSMF, VR, and SciLifeLab,
as well as Kjell and Märta Beijers, Göran Gustafssons,Borgström/Hedström, Åke Wiberg, the Swedish Heart-
Lung, and the Swedish Diabetes Foundations.
T. Karlsson: None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. G. Pan:
None. J. Höglund: None. C. Wadelius: None. W.E. Ek:
None. Å. Johansson: None.
P18.78B
Exome sequencing identi ﬁes novel rare variant
association signals in the Cooperative Health Researchin South Tyrol (CHRIS) study
D. B. Emmert, J. Mitchell, E. König, M. Gögele,
C. Pattaro, P. P. Pramstaller, C. Fuchsberger
Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, ItalyIntroduction: Thus far, only few rare variant association
signals have been identi ﬁed. Given their expected larger
impact on complex traits, it is valuable to study their
association in different contexts (e.g., homogeneous
environmental conditions) and not only in large biobanks.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing
(WES) association analyses were performed for association
with 56 biochemical traits in 3840 individuals from thepopulation-based CHRIS study using the xGen Exome
Research Panel (v1.0) and processed using the Genome
Analysis Toolkit (GATK v3.7) pipeline. After QC,3422 samples remained, with a mean target coverage of
68.4X. WES variants were validated against In ﬁniumOmni2.5Exome BeadChip genotype data, with which there
was concordance of 0.998 across overlapping variants. We
performed single-variant association analysis using
EMMAX to account for family structure, and gene-based
association analysis using SKAT, grouping variants masked
as either “LoF”or“high-moderate impact ”. We used VEP/
LOFTEE for annotation. For both approaches, analyses
were repeated conditioning on all previously known
variant-trait associations collated from the EBI GWAScatalog, to ensure novelty of identi ﬁed associations.
Results: In total, 825,158 rare variants (MAF<0.5%)
were identi ﬁed across all samples. The single variant
association analysis identi
ﬁed 60 novel variant-trait asso-
ciations (P<2e-7), which clustered to 22 loci-trait associa-
tions. Gene-based association analysis yielded27 signi ﬁcant gene-trait associations (P<3.3e-6), of which 5
were completely novel, and 5 were novel gene-level signals
near known single-variant associations.
Conclusion: In the age of large Biobanks, relatively small
but well characterized population-based studies remain
important for elucidating the genetic architecture of quan-titative traits.
D.B. Emmert: None. J. Mitchell: None. E. König:
None. M. Gögele: None. C. Pattaro: None. P.P. Pram-
staller: None. C. Fuchsberger: None.
P18.79C
Cataloging genetic variation in Canary Islanders by
means of whole exome and genome sequencing
A. Díaz-de Usera
1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, A. Muñoz-
Barrera1, B. Guillen-Guio2, A. Mendoza-Alvarez2,
A. Corrales2, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, A. Pedrero-
García2, A. Cabrera de León2, R. González-Montelongo1,
J. M. Lorenzo-Salazar1, C. Flores1,2,3
1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías
Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
2Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria,
Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: The genetic uniqueness of the current Canary
Islands population (Spain) results from isolation, localadaptation, and recent admixture events mainly involving
individuals of Europe, Northwest-Africa and a minor
contribution from Sub-Saharan populations. These condi-tions and the limited characterization of the genetic pool of
the African populations justify the necessity of building a
reference dataset to be instrumental for Precision Medicinein the archipelago. Here we provide details of the design
and preliminary results of this catalog.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1777Materials and Methods: A target sample of 1000 con-
trols is being characterized by whole-exome sequencing
(WES) using Nextera-DNA Exome kit (Illumina) on
HiSeq4000 and Axiom Genome-Wide Human CEU 1 array
technologies. In addition, whole-genomes of a subset of the
donors are being obtained with two complementarysequencing technologies (Illumina and Oxford Nanopore
Technologies).
Results: Array-based-genotypes and whole-exome
sequences of 317 controls have been analysed so far. A
total of 816,829 variants have been identi ﬁed by WES, of
which 55% and 47% are not described in ExAC nor ingnomAD, respectively, while 59% of them are classi ﬁed as
missense or nonsense.
Conclusions: These results evidence the necessity of a
detailed catalog of genetic variation in the Canary Islands to
improve the identi ﬁcation of disease genes and facilitate the
identi ﬁcation of pathogenic variants.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni-
versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER,
UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships bySpanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to A.D.
U. (FPU16/01435), ACIISI (TESIS2015010057) co-funded
by European Social Fund to B.G.G., and CajaSiete-ULLfellowship to A.M.A .
A. Díaz-de Usera: None. L.A. Rubio-Rodríguez: None.
A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. A.
Mendoza-Alvarez: None. A. Corrales: None. I. Marce-
lino-Rodríguez: None. A. Pedrero-García: None. A.
Cabrera de León: None. R. González-Montelongo:
None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None.
P18.80D
A whole-genome scan of natural selection in Canary
Islanders
R. González Montelongo
1, J. M. Lorenzo-Salazar1,
A. Muñoz-Barrera1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, A. Díaz-de
Usera1, A. Mendoza-Alvarez2, B. Guillen-Guio2,
I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, A. Corrales2,3, G. Serra-Vidal4,
D. Comas4, C. Flores1,2,3
1Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER),
Genomics Division, Granadilla de Abona, Spain,2Research
Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria,Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,4Department of Experimental
and Health Sciences, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-
UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: The genetic uniqueness of the current Canary
Islands (Spain) inhabitants results from the historicaladmixture with sources from Northwest Africa (NAF),
Europe (EUR) and the sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). We used
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to identify genomic
regions under selective processes.
Materials and Methods: WGS from Canary Islanders
(n=46) were obtained and variant calling was assessed
using BWA-GATK. WGS data from NAF (n =23), and
SSA and EUR from the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP),
were used for comparisons. Selection signals were identi-ﬁed with distinct neutrality tests. Values in the extremes of
the distributions were prioritized and used for enrichment
analysis.
Results: A total of 14.4 million variants were identi ﬁed in
Canary Islanders, and about a ﬁfth was not described in
1KGP. Neutrality tests identi ﬁed a number of putative
regions of selection. Attending to PBS, the largest values
were located in the HLA, supporting different independent
signals. Autoimmune, ophthalmologic, and oncologic dis-eases were among the top-enriched terms in the prioritized
regions.
Conclusions: Our results support the existence of a
genuine gene pool in the current Canary Islanders. Studies
to evaluate the relationship between the signals of selection
and the admixture sources are needed.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni-
versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER,
UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships bySpanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports (FPU16/
01435) to A.D.U., CajaSiete-ULL to A.M.A., and ACIISI
(TESIS2015010057) co-funded by European Social Fundto B.G.G.
R. González Montelongo: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Sala-
zar: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A. Rubio-
Rodríguez: None. A. Díaz-de Usera: None. A. Mendoza-
Alvarez: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. I. Marcelino-
Rodríguez: None. A. Corrales: None. G. Serra-Vidal:
None. D. Comas: None. C. Flores: None.
P18.81A
Increasing the value of the Swedish 1000 whole-genome
data resource
A. Ameur, H. Che, I. Bunikis, L. Feuk, U. Gyllensten
Uppsala University, Uppsala, SwedenThe SweGen data resource is a collection of 1000 human
whole genomes (Illumina 30x coverage), which representsthe genetic variation in the Swedish population. Since its
ﬁrst release in 2016, the SweGen variant data has become a
widely used resource with about 200 monthly visits to thewebsite both from Sweden and abroad (swefreq.nbis.se).
During the course of the project it has become apparent that1778the SweGen data can serve many more purposes than just
providing information about SNPs and small indel variants
in the Swedish population. We have therefore initiated a
number of follow-up projects to increase the value of the
resource. Examples of ongoing activities are: i) detection of
complex structural variation, ii) analysis of genetic variationin the MHC region, iii) characterization of haplotypes of
pharmacogenetic utility, iv) detection of somatic genomic
aberrations, and v) utilization of SweGen data for improvedSNP array imputation. In addition, we have constructed de
novo high-quality reference genomes for one male and one
female SweGen individual, based on multiple long-readsequencing technologies (PacBio, Oxford Nanopore, 10X
Genomics and BioNano). These two assemblies are among
the most complete individual human genomes to date, andsurprisingly we detected over 10Mb of sequence in each
individual that is missing from the current version of the
human reference genome (GRCh38). Based on this missingsequence, we have constructed a modi ﬁed version of the
human reference, tailored for the Swedish population, that
signiﬁcantly improves the alignment and variant calling of
the SweGen Illumina data.
A. Ameur: None. H. Che: None. I. Bunikis: None. L.
Feuk: None. U. Gyllensten: None.
P18.82B
Analysing the joint effect of rare and common variantson human traits, using whole-genome sequencing data
and a gene-based approach, increases the power to
identify genetic effects
N. Rafati
1, J. Höglund1, M. Kierczak1, M. Rask-
Andersen1,W .E k1, D. Ekman2, T. Karlsson1,Å .
Johansson1
1Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden,2Stockholm
university, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: Despite the success of genome-wide associa-
tion (GWA) studies, much of the genetic contribution to
complex diseases and phenotypes remains unexplained.
Two major limitations in GWA studies are the lack ofpower to test the effect of rare alleles and the use of
genotyped or imputed SNPs.
Materials and Methods: Whole-genome sequencing
(WGS) data and measurements of over 400 disease-related
biomarkers were produced in 1,021 individuals from a
cross-sectional Swedish cohort. We scored variants usingCADD or Eigen scores. We then developed a pipe-line for
exploring the combined effects of common and rare genetic
variants on biomarker levels in a gene-wise manner.
Results: For coding variants, we identi ﬁed 158 inde-
pendent signals, of which 52 was in trans. Six of these wereassociated with the expression levels of several biomarkers.
For regulatory regions, only cis-regulatory elements were
analysed, and for as many as 191 biomarkers we identi ﬁed
at least one regulatory element that was associated with the
expression of the biomarker.
Conclusions: We have shown that analysing the com-
bined effect of rare and common variants in a gene-based
approach increases the power to detect genetic effects,
compared to a GWA study. Many of our associated signalscontain multiple rare, and even population speci ﬁc variants,
which highlights the importance of more sophisticated
methods for analysing WGS data in relation to human traits.
Funding: The research was funded by SSMF, VR and
SciLifeLab, as well as the Kjell and Märta Beijers, the
Göran Gustafssons, the Borgström/Hedström, the ÅkeWiberg, and the Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation.
N. Rafati: None. J. Höglund: None. M. Kierczak:
None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. W. Ek: None. D.
Ekman: None. T. Karlsson: None. Å. Johansson: None.
P19
Genetic counselling - Services - Education
P19.02A
Genetic testing: panacea or Pandora ’s box?
Questionnaire survey among Poles
M. A. Malarska, A. Mazerant, P. M. Pachniak,
E. M. Borkowska, M. Borowiec
Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź, Poland
Aim: Analyse of Polish people approach to genetic testing.
In addition, the doctors' knowledge on the same subject was
checked Methods: Data collection was carried out by theuse of a comprehensive questionnaire which was available
to respondents on the Internet as well as in paper format.
2210 people were examined. The average age was 29(between 18 to 80 years old). Group of doctors counting
204 people answered the same set of questions with few
addition, the average age was 30 years old (between 27 to57 years old).
Results: Many of respondents (37,7%) declared a genetic
disease among their close relatives (family, friends). Theymainly mentioned the Down Syndrome. Interestingly,
47.4% of them admitted to encounter stigma in everyday
life. 9,9% of respondents was consulted by clinical geneti-cist. What is interesting 10,5%, who haven ’t seen the
clinical geneticist, carried out a commercial genetic tests.
Most test were done in search of the genetic basis of thediseases (63,6%). 88.9% of the respondents met with the
term genetically determined cancer. 94.1% think that breastAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1779cancer is included in that group of cancers, 62.6% consider
ovarian cancer, and interestingly 43.4% also ﬁnd a genetic
basis for cervical cancer. Results for the same question in
the medical group showed that 99.5% of physicians con-
sider breast cancer, 93.3% ovarian cancer and 26.8% cer-
vical cancer as partially hereditary cancers.
Conclusions: We should focus on developing opportu-
nities to broaden the knowledge of both medical personnel
and citizens.
M.A. Malarska: None. A. Mazerant: None. P.M.
Pachniak: None. E.M. Borkowska: None. M.
Borowiec: None.
P19.03B
Genetic counselling for the Inuit indigenous populationof Nunavut, Canada: an exercise in cultural competency
M. CloutierChildren's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
The importance of providing culturally competent and
culturally appropriate genetic counselling is recognized bythe profession, as culture ’s role is crucial in molding an
individual ’s conceptualization of health and illness. There is
a dearth of literature on the provision of genetics servicesincluding genetic counselling for indigenous populations
globally. Although exploratory studies have been published
regarding the provision of genetics services for theindigenous populations of Australia, New Zealand, Philip-
pines and the United States, few have described genetics
services for the Canadian Indigenous populations (FirstNations, Inuit and Métis peoples). Ottawa, Canada serves at
the“local ”genetics service for residents of Baf ﬁn Island,
Nunavut, which has an Inuit population of approximately15,000. We describe the Ottawa Baf ﬁn Nunavut Services
(OBNS) program, as it relates to the provision of genetics
services for Inuit persons, including travel coordination,lodging, traditional diet, Inuktitut interpretation services,
and medical records coordination. We present a re ﬂective
review of cases illustrating the genetic counselling chal-lenges, including building rapport, pedigree taking, patient
isolation from their community, and cultural views of
decision-making. We share personal stories of the humblingjourney as genetic counsellors providing genetics services
for Inuit persons from Nunavut and the lessons learned in
cultural competency. Exploring these issues has never beenmore important, as Canada embarks on the Silent Genomes
Project , which aims to improve the access to genomic
technologies and research to Indigenous populations whileensuring Indigenous-led governance over biological sam-
ples and health data.M. Cloutier: None.
P19.05D
EuroGEMS.org - the ESHG ’s new educational
resources website for genetics professionals, students,
schools and patients: international uptake and furtherdevelopment
E. S. TobiasQueen Elizabeth University Hospital, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Introduction: Many highly-impressive, free, genetic/geno-
mic educational online resources exist internationally butare often dif ﬁcult to locate. The author ’s new, already-
popular ESHG-supported website, ESHG Genetic Educa-
tional Materials and Sources (at www.EuroGEMS.org )
provides a straightforward categorized guide with direct
links to numerous excellent free online educational
resources worldwide. These include professionally-createdpatient videos, sophisticated but entertaining animations
and cutting-edge genomic databases.
Methods: Following discussion with colleagues, students
and patients, >70 up-to-date, high-quality online worldwide
sources were selected and categorized with concise expla-
nations of each source's features. Included are multiple linksto new, excellent but less well-known sites, plus ESHG
pages and localized non-English-language initiatives.
Professional-level web-hosting permits unlimited simulta-neous visits.
Results: EuroGEMS.org was enthusiastically endorsed
by the ESHG Board (ESHG-Milan-2018), and linked fromthe ESHG-Education web-page. To date, EuroGEMS.org
has received 3318 views from 81 countries. The most fre-
quently visited sub-section index pages are those for:
“Genetics Professionals ”, then “Universities & Students ”,
“Patients/Families ”,“Secondary Schools ”,“Primary
Schools ”and “Ethical, Legal & Social Implications ”.
Radboud University's "Science Education Hub" is the most
frequently visited linked resource. Students report that
EuroGEMS.org is “wonderful for accessing genetics data-
bases and looking up relevant genetic conditions."
Conclusions: An up-to-date informative guide to many of
the best free worldwide educational resources has beencreated for the ESHG and accessed from 81 countries in just
8 months. The website's careful maintenance and develop-
ment continues. Further suggestions for links are welcomed.The author is grateful to Education Committee Chair, Prof
Han Brunner, for his welcome encouragement whilst
creating this website.
E.S. Tobias: None.1780P19.06A
Online education to the masses enables transformative
changes in healthcare
A. C. Davies, F. Hooley, R. Bennett, A. Brass
The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Genomics is revolutionising healthcare
enabled by techniques such as whole genome sequencing,
consequentially there is a pressing need to improve genomicliteracy and data analysis skills in the healthcare workforce.
In this study we demonstrate how development of the
world ’sﬁrst free Massive Online Open Course (MOOC) in
Clinical Bioinformatics has addressed these needs in
healthcare professionals and patients and the public
world-wide.
Methodology: The MOOC is hosted by FutureLearn,
exploring the subject from its initial roots to clinical
working practices, ethics and tools. The social constructivistapproach embeds social discourse, enabling knowledge
exchange between healthcare professionals, patients and
carers. Social learning is encouraged using "follow", “like”
and "bookmark" buttons to applaud speci ﬁc comments.
Results: Within seven course runs 17, 000 learners joined
the course, the largest numbers from the UK, Egypt, Indiaand USA. Pre-course surveys showed that of those who
stated their profession on enrolment, 31%, the largest group,
identi ﬁed as working in health and social care. The MOOC
was most popular with participants in the aged 18-35,
educated to at least degree level. Post-course evaluation
showed 78% of 145 learners liked or strongly liked theonline discussions and enjoyed interacting with other lear-
ners, 92% of 80 learners said they agreed or strongly agreed
that the course had increased their understanding of clinicalbioinformatics.
Conclusions: This course has provided knowledge and
skills in bioinformatics and improved genomic literacy at aglobal scale, facilitating discussion between clinicians and
the public regarding important areas such as data sharing.
https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/bioinformatics
A.C. Davies: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Molmart. F. Hooley:
None. R. Bennett: None. A. Brass: None.
P19.07B
Needs of the genetic counselling for familial cancer at a
university hospitalY. Goto
1,2, N. Harada2, H. Moriya2, M. Shinoda1,2,
M. Terao3,2, H. Atsumi2, K. Takahashi2, M. Okami2,
A. Kondo4,2, K. Takeshita2, S. Izumi1,2
1Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan,2Dept. of Clinical
Genetics, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan,3Dept. of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Tokai
University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan,4Dept. of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shikoku Medical Center for
Children and Adults, Kagawa, Japan
Introduction: Our genetic counselling departments were
founded in 2007. Outpatient service speci ﬁc to familial
tumor started in 2013. In Japan, precision medicine willincrease from April 2019 with the background of national
policy. We consider that it is important to review the
patients and their needs to prepare future outpatients.
Materials and Methods: We reviewed 100 cases of
familial tumor from April 2009 to May 2018. Type of
diseases, undergoing genetic test, results of the tests andtheir courses were examined retrospectively.
Results: We had 95 female patients and 5 male patients
as proband. The number of cases increased after familialtumor service has been started. Type of diseases were her-
editary breast ovary cancer (HBOC), Lynch syndrome,
hereditary thyroid cancer and so on. 76 cases were sus-pected HBOC and 58/76 cases underwent genetic test. Of
58 cases, 56 cases had already developed cancer. The
results of the test were positive for 12 cases. Positive geneswere BRCA1 for 4 cases, BRCA2 for 4 cases and RET for
4 cases.
Conclusions: The genetic counselling for HBOC is the
most required in our department. We need to expand col-
laboration system with not only breast cancer team but also
gynecological cancer team. Also cooperation with wardnurses and other medical staffs would be needed to offer
substantial support for patients.
Y. Goto: None. N. Harada: None. H. Moriya: None. M.
Shinoda: None. M. Terao: None. H. Atsumi: None. K.
Takahashi: None. M. Okami: None. A. Kondo: None. K.
Takeshita: None. S. Izumi: None.
P19.08C
Exploring the experiences and support needs of non-carrier fathers of children with fragile X syndrome
J. Luermans
1, J. Fleming1,R .O ’Shea2, M. Field3,
E. E. Palmer3,4, M. Lef ﬂer3
1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,2University of
Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia,3Genetics of
Learning Disability (GOLD) Service, Hunter Genetics,Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1781Waratah, Australia,4School of Women ’s and Children ’s
Health, University of NSW, Sydney, Austria
Clinical features of children with fragile X syndrome (FXS)
include developmental delay or intellectual disability and
behavioral, emotional and speci ﬁc learning challenges. The
diagnosis of FXS in a child often reveals the premutation
carrier status of their mother. The genetic counseling
process may therefore focus on the child and mother,without signi ﬁcant attention given to the information and
support needs of the non-carrier father. This research sought
to explore the experiences and support needs speci ﬁct o
non-carrier fathers of children diagnosed with FXS.
Eleven interviews were conducted with non-carrier
fathers recruited through the Australian-based Genetics ofLearning Disability (GOLD) Service and the Fragile X
Association of Australia. Interviews lasted on average
78 minutes (range 61 –102 minutes). Interviews were
transcribed, deidenti ﬁed, coded and analyzed by three
coders using thematic analysis with an inductive approach.
Thematic saturation was reached. Four themes emerged:
1) Making Life Easier through Understanding –Yesterday
and Today; 2) The Path to a New Normal –Today and
Tomorrow; 3) Information and Support –Paper, Scissors,
Rock; and 4) What Men Want.
Our study highlights some of the unmet support and
information needs of non-carrier fathers of children withFXS. These include the need for practical and prognostic
information, guidance in supporting their families, and
ﬂexible opportunities for accessing personal counseling and
support. Our ﬁndings will inform the provision of more
tailored support and information, not only for fathers of
children with FXS, but for other neurocognitive conditions.
J. Luermans: None. J. Fleming: None. R. O ’Shea:
None. M. Field: None. E.E. Palmer: None. M.
Lefﬂer:None.
P19.09D
Development of a short 6-item form of the GeneticCounselling Outcome Scale: The Genomics Outcome
Scale
P. Grant
1, M. Pampaka2, K. Payne2, A. Clarke1,
M. McAllister1
1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom,2University
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: The Genetic Counselling Outcome Scale
(GCOS-24) is a 24-item patient-reported outcome measure
for evaluating genetic counselling and testing interventions.The aim in this study was to create a shorter form of GCOS-
24.Methods: Cognitive interviews explored interpretability
of GCOS-24 items and items highly valued by the target
population. The Graded Response Model (GRM) was used
to examine item discrimination in an existing GCOS-24
dataset (n =395). Items with poor discriminative properties
were then excluded and items capturing a similar conceptwere not selected together. Finally, quantitative and quali-
tative ﬁndings were combined to identify superior items.
Rasch analysis was used to establish the optimalresponse scale.
Results: Ten cognitive interviews were conducted with
individuals from families affected by genetic conditions,recruited through support groups. Qualitative analysis of
interview transcripts identi ﬁed twelve GCOS-24 items
highly valued by participants. GRM item characteristiccurves and item information curves were generated. Find-
ings from both analyses were used to select ten items that
were both highly valued and performed well. Finally, itemswere iteratively removed and permutated to establish opti-
malﬁt using the Rasch model. A six-item questionnaire
with a ﬁve-point Likert Scale was created (The Genomics
Outcome Scale (GOS)). Correlation between GCOS-24 and
GOS is good (r =.838, 99% con ﬁdence), indicating that
GOS maintains the ability of GCOS-24 to captureempowerment, whilst providing a less burdensome scale for
respondents.
Conclusions: GOS will be less burdensome than GCOS-
24 for patients and could be used where genetic testing is
done outside the context of clinical genetics.
Unfunded study.P. Grant: None. M. Pampaka: None. K. Payne: None.
A. Clarke: None. M. McAllister: None.
P19.10A
The challenges of genetic counselling in consanguineous
communities in North Israel
O. Aboleil Zoubi
1,2, S. Allon Shaliv1,2
1The Genetic Institute Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel,
2Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel
The Genetics Institute of Emek Medical Center serves a
population living in northern Israel, with signi ﬁcant
representation of Israeli minorities, including Muslim andChristian Arabs. These populations are devoted to old
traditions including consanguineous marriages, (presently
24.4%), leading to an increased risk of rare autosomalrecessive disorders. Most of this population lives in small
towns and villages that were founded by small number of
individuals. Therefore, the diagnosis of founder mutationsallows effective genetic counselling and occasionally
genetic screening.1782However, there are genetic mechanisms that make the
counselling more challenging such as co- inheritance of
more than one recessive condition in the same sib- ship.
Each of these couples has 25% risk for an offspring affected
by one condition and additional 25% risk for the other
condition. Seven couples had 2 autosomal recessive con-ditions, diagnosed in different babies. For example, Con-
genital thrombocytopenia/Muscular Dystrophy, Wolman/
Meckel syndromes.
Counseling these couples often done following the birth
of affected children, and is complex particularly after the
second event. It is associated with marked emotionalstruggle of the parents, reduced self-con ﬁdence and a sense
of control-loss, occasionally leading to mistrust of the
counselling process. Family planning becomes more chal-lenging, with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis become
advantageous, a treatment associated with medical, techni-
cal and personal dif ﬁculties. Genetic counselling performed
by experienced and aware professionals, might improve the
outcome.
The new era of genomic technologies has dramatically
improved our diagnostic abilities, and hopefully will allow
us to detect those couples before the birth of their affected
children.
O. Aboleil Zoubi: None. S. Allon Shaliv: None.
P19.11B
Genetic counseling from the perspective of modern
ethical concepts: practical implications
J. L. Castaneda
Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical
Genetics, Warsaw, Poland
Introduction: Genetic counseling can be considered as the
external image of Clinical Genetics. The way in which it is
delivered is the basis for patients ’and the health care
system ’s evaluation of the ef ﬁciency of the ﬁeld as a
medical specialty. It is thus of utmost importance that
genetic counseling professionals obtain an adequate pre-
paration for its practice, in accordance with the complexcharacter of genetic diseases.
Stern (Measuring Medical Professionalism, 2006)
includes ethical and legal understanding as a foundation formedical professionalism. The ethics of genetic counseling is
often reduced to the implementation of the requisite of
nondirectiveness and of the elements of principialism:respect for autonomy, bene ﬁcence, non-male ﬁcence and
justice.
Aim and Methodology: This study aims to apply other
bioethical concepts to the practice of genetic counseling.
Principles derived from various modern philosophical andethical modes of thought such as personalism, virtue ethics,
narrative ethics and care ethics which have been applied to
other medical ﬁelds or action, are herewith analyzed in the
context of genetic counseling, speci ﬁcally in prenatal
diagnostics. Practical implications for counseling are
deduced from this analysis.
Conclusion: An understanding of a wider range of
bioethical concepts allows for a greater awareness of ethical
requisites for proper genetic counseling. Given that thiscommunication process frequently involves value-laden
decisions on the part of patients and families, such an
understanding can build better counselor-counseled rela-tionships adequately facilitating well-informed, shared
decision-making processes.
J.L. Castaneda: None.
P19.12C
Genetic Counsellors working with young people:overview of current needs and glimpse forward
M. M. Radu, A. S. Baban, R. MoldovanDepartment of Psychology, Babe ş-Bolyai University, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania
Introduction: Genetic counselling has been consistently
shown to increase understanding of genetic disorders andthe implications of genetic testing, manage emotional
distress and stigma, promote empowerment and patient
autonomy in choosing screening or treatment options. Theoverwhelming evidence is primarily based on adult data.
Genetic counselling of young people is less reported on and
brings with it additional challenges. To this date we knowlittle about genetic counsellors ’needs, knowledge and
conﬁdence when working with children and adolescents.
Method: An online survey assessing genetic counsellors ’
knowledge and skills used in the counselling process, self-
efﬁcacy in working with children and adolescents and
access to training speci ﬁcally for working with age group,
was sent to European and national professional organiza-
tions representing 20 countries.
Results: At the time of the abstract submission data is
still being gathered. A preliminary analysis shows that
genetic counsellors ’self-ef ﬁcacy in conducting genetic
counselling sessions with young people is rather modest;there is overwhelming consensus on the need for more
theoretical and practical training. Speci ﬁc knowledge about
child development and communication strategies wereamong the most frequent needs mentioned by genetic
counsellors.
Conclusions: Having a clearer insight into genetic
counsellors ’needs when working with this age group can
be particularly informative for training programmes.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1783Focusing on developing speci ﬁc skills and knowledge,
drawing on the knowledge of pediatrics, developmental
psychology and counseling, and empowering genetic
counsellors to acknowledge their skills when working with
children and adolescents are key aspects in training and
supervision.
M.M. Radu: None. A.S. Baban: None. R.
Moldovan: None.
P19.13D
Insight into the impact of genetic counselling on English
and Urdu speaking Pakistani families affected with anautosomal recessive disorder living in the UK North
West
V. A. Leach
1,2, N. Khan2
1Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom,2Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, St Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Cousin marriages are common in the UK
South Asian population and consanguineous couples are at
increased risk of having a child with an autosomal recessive
disorder. This study explored views around consanguinityand the utilisation of genetic information following genetic
counselling of both English and Urdu speaking South Asian
women who had children with an autosomal recessivecondition.
Methods: Participants were ascertained through purpo-
sive sampling. Face-to-face semi-structured interviews wereconducted with English and Urdu speaking genetic coun-
sellors. Transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: Twelve participants took part in interviews; 6
English speaking and 6 Urdu speaking. Most (92%) were in
consanguineous marriages. Similar themes included; effect
of genetic counselling on reproductive decision making andthe perception of a cultural shift in the practice of cousin
marriage. Differences in themes included; genetics being an
abstract concept among Urdu speaking participants and agreater willingness to share genetic information among
English speaking participants.
Conclusion: Theﬁndings of this study provide a valuable
insight into an insuf ﬁciently researched minority group and
has implications for how services are delivered and devel-
oped for these families. This study con ﬁrms that families do
engage and utilise genetic services. However, it highlights
the essential need for greater awareness towards the cultural
sensitivities and attitudes towards genetics for servicedevelopment among this ethnic population.
V.A. Leach: None. N. Khan: None.P19.14A
Utilisation of genetic counselling services in Germany
before and after the enactment of the German
Gendiagnostikgesetz (GenDG) –Results of the GenBIn
study
Nippert
1, J. T. Epplen2, R. Glaubitz3, T. Grimm4,
R. P. Nippert5, J. Schmidtke6, K. Zerres7, H. Tönnies8
1Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany,2Ruhr
Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany,3amedes group,
Hannover, Germany,4Biozentrum Universität Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany,5Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität,
Münster, Germany,6Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Hannover, Germany,7Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische
Hochschule, Aachen, Germany,8Robert Koch –Institut,
Berlin, Germany
Introduction: The GenDG stipulates the requirements of
good practice in regard to safety, patient rights to know,
patient rights to decide and requirements for geneticcounselling. A guideline on the requirements for contents
and quali ﬁcation in genetic counselling within the scope of
each medical specialty came into force in 2011.
Methods: Development of a database (GenBIn) that
provides both, baseline data on utilisation of genetic
counselling services prior to the GenDG (status quo ante)and data on utilisation after the enactment.
Results: 26 genetic counselling centres volunteered to
collect data on in person counselling cases in 2011, 34centres provided data for counselling cases seen in 2016/
2017. In total the GenBIn database contains data on 5256
cases. Compared to 2011 the relative share of referrals byobstetricians&gynecologists has decreased (83%/63%),
whilst referrals by other specialists (15%/27%) and self-
referrals (2%/10%) have increased in private practice.Referrals for prenatal counselling have decreased, coun-
selling for familial cancer and other familial disorders has
increased. Workload and mean waiting time per case haveincreased.
Conclusions: The data document a rising demand for
genetic counselling services and a shift in indications forreferral. Arguably, the observed changes are due to a mul-
tiplicity of causes and are not attributable solely to the
GenDG. Advances in genetic testing technology, growingawareness among healthcare providers and among patients
(increased self-referrals) are likely to contribute together to
higher patient volumes, to increased workload and tocapacity constraints for genetic counselling services. Fun-
ded by German Federal Ministry of Health ZMVi1-2515-
FSB-71784M.Nippert: None. J.T. Epplen: None. R. Glaubitz:
None. T. Grimm: None. R.P. Nippert: None. J.
Schmidtke: None. K. Zerres: None. H.
Tönnies: None.
P19.15B
Development of a genetics education program:
equipping medical professionals for the genomics era
B. Cham1,T .T i n g1, Y. M. Bylstra2, A. Lai1,S .M .D .
Dominguez2, S. Jamuar1
1KK Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore,2SingHealth Duke-NUS Institute of Precision
Medicine (PRISM), Singapore, Singapore
Advances in molecular diagnostic technologies and greater
integration of genetic testing into the diagnostic process
have required the modern healthcare provider to become
literate in genomics. Many physicians report lack ofknowledge and con ﬁdence as barriers to offering appro-
priate genetic counselling. In response to this, ahalf-day
interactive workshop was developed to provide existinghealthcare professionals with current knowledge in ﬁeld of
genetics.
The educational program was tailored to equip providers
with an awareness of the bene ﬁts, limitations and risks of
available genetic testing. Course components included basic
genetic concepts, current testing methodologies, interpreta-tion of results and local legal frameworks regulating genetic
testing. Through case studies, providers also gained an
understanding of medical, social, ethical and legal issuessurrounding genetic testing.
Since 2018, the workshop has been run twice, with 2
more runs planned in 2019. Participants include more than90 healthcare providers from various healthcare professions.
A pre- and post-course evaluation was conducted to assess
knowledge improvement and self-reported con ﬁdence in
ordering and interpreting genetic test results. There was an
improvement of a pre-course score of 6 to post-course score
of 9 out of 12 questions. However, participants generallydid not report changes in their level of con ﬁdence in
ordering or interpreting genetic test results. The genetics
education program is effective in improving the level ofgenetic knowledge amongst healthcare providers. It will be
useful in future to explore the factors that increase provider
conﬁdence in ordering and interpreting test results so as to
empower healthcare providers in this genomics era.
B. Cham: None. T. Ting: None. Y.M. Bylstra: None. A.
Lai: None. S.M.D. Dominguez: None. S. Jamuar: None.P19.16C
Is follow-up our future? A focus on changing roles in
genetic counselling
S. M. A. Goodman
1, M. Bradford2
1University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom,
2Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
United Kingdom
Genomic technology and the expansion of mainstreaming
mean that increasingly complex test results are beingdelivered in a wide range of medical settings. Genetic
counsellor (GC) involvement will be critical to successfully
navigate this situation, ensuring that patients understand andbeneﬁt fully from their tests. GC expertise will be important
in supporting families, especially in the face of uncertain or
evolving results.
Cross-sectional survey data (Family Web study n =286)
supports the importance of a trusted expert who can balance
these different roles. Data indicate that, in a population ofpatients at high risk of bowel cancer, the diagnosis had a
profound effect on patients and their families: participants
wanted more support, ideally from a care co-ordinator; plusinformation on a range of topics and a positive message to
give their relatives. Key issues identi ﬁed included: gene-
speciﬁc risks, accessing adequate cancer surveillance, and
advice on how to reduce cancer risk through lifestyle.
Pressures to meet clinical targets, combined with
increasingly robust GC training, have resulted in a greaterprevalence of GC-led clinics for diagnostic and predictive
testing. It seems likely that this will be matched by an
increased emphasis on follow-up. GCs possess the neces-sary range of skills to provide ongoing liaison services,
assisting with the two-way communication that is necessary
for managing uncertain results over time. Successfulgenomic services depend on patients successfully assim-
ilating information; GCs may be uniquely placed to support
this across a range of settings.
Partially funded by charity: Bowel Cancer West.
S.M.A. Goodman: None. M. Bradford: None.
P19.17D
Teaching Clinicians Practical Genomic Medicine –Our
7 Year Evaluated Experience
R. Michaelson-Cohen
1,2, L. Salzer- Sheelo3, L. Basel-
Salmon3,4, I. Maya3
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Hebrew University of, Jerusalem, Israel,
3Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, PetachAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1785Tikva, Israel,4Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Introduction: With introduction of various genomic
technologies into the clinic, physicians must be pro ﬁcient
in genomics. Training of physicians in genetics is offered inprograms across Europe and USA, but there is need for
standardized, effective program-models. We sought to
evaluate effectiveness of our genomic-education-model.
Methods: Our program served physicians from various
levels of training and disciplines. We used 11 different
program-formats (8-44hrs, 10-35participants), most fre-quently our “extended-format ”- week-long course combin-
ing lectures, educational-movies, interactive tests, and
practical exercises. Lecturers were dedicated team of 15geneticists. Pretest exams assessed baseline knowledge;
posttest exams after program evaluated improvement. Pre-
and posttest scores between different groups were comparedusing t-tests (SAS-institute version9.4).
Results: Over 7 years, 774 clinicians attended 35 pro-
grams (924 hours total) over 7 years, 334 participantscompleted “extended-format ”. Knowledge improved greatly
for all participants (mean improvement 15.05 points,
P<0.001). Residents started with better knowledge thanspecialists (pretest score 66.3±17.3 vs. 58.7±16.6, respec-
tively, p =0.002). Both groups improved knowledge sig-
niﬁcantly, by similar magnitude, with specialists “catching-
up”(post-test 79.1±17.2 vs. 75.7±15.9, NS). The trend was
same when comparing fellows and subspecialists (pre-test
70±18 vs. 59.4±16.4, p =0.007, post-test 78.6±16.4 vs. 73.2
±17.7, NS). Specialists who completed training within last
10years had signi ﬁcantly higher scores than those practicing
>10years (before and after program). Despite differences inscores, degree of improvement was equivalent for physi-
cians from various disciplines.
Discussion: Our program is effective in improving
genomic knowledge of clinicians, regardless of practice
years and disciplines. It could serve as a model for
improving genetic skills of medical-professionals.
R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. L. Salzer- Sheelo: None.
L. Basel-Salmon: None. I. Maya: None.
P19.18A
Greatly expanded new 2019 versions of free educational
Clinical Genomics apps for smartphones & tablets:international uptake and further development
A. P. Tobias
1, E. S. Tobias2
1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
2University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United KingdomIntroduction: Android & iPhone (iOS) educational smart-
phone apps that explain (and test knowledge of) commonly
used genomics and bioinformatics terms and acronyms,
were developed by the authors & recently greatly expanded.
Methods: Further development has included iOS12-
compatibility and doubling the number of terms and con-cepts explained. The new total of 42 includes: databases
(e.g. gnomAD, ExAC & COSMIC), genome projects,
constraint metrics (e.g. pLI & Z scores), polygenic riskscores, third-generation sequencing & biological concepts
e.g. topologically associating domains & NMD. These
Clinical Genomics apps are being made available via theApple and Android app stores (search: “Clinical Geno-
mics ”). They provide immediate clear explanations (often
difﬁcult to ﬁnd elsewhere) of genomics-related terminology
(such as “MNPs ”,“BED ”,“PED ”,“FASTQ ”,“BAM ”,
“CRAM ”,“GVCF ”,“BED ﬁles”,“GATK ”and“BWA ”).
Results: Highly positive feedback has been received from
physicians, genetic counsellors, laboratory scientists and
students. The apps are used by professionals, who increas-
ingly receive complex genetic laboratory reports requiringinterpretation for patient bene ﬁt. The apps have been
approved by the ESHG, the Scottish Genetics Education
Network (ScotGEN) and by DSDnet. They have beendownloaded thousands of times, across approximately 60
countries and were shortlisted for a national higher educa-
tion innovation award.
Conclusions: Although creating these multi-platform
apps was complex and time-consuming, they have thank-
fully been found very useful by many individuals. Theauthors would welcome feedback and suggestions for
additional terms/concepts to include. Author APT, a medi-
cal student, is grateful to have been a recipient of a YoungEnterprise Scotland Innovation Award 2018.
A.P. Tobias: None. E.S. Tobias: None.
P19.19B
The In ﬂuence of Natural Sciences on the Development of
Human Genetics as a Medical Field in the FederalRepublic of Germany
H. I. Petermann
1, T. Liehr2
1Institute for Ethics, History and Theory of Medicine,
Muenster, Germany,2University Clinic Jena, Institute of
Humane Genetics, Jena, Germany
Introduction: In 1953, biologist JD Watson and physicist
FHC Crick published the molecular structure of DNA.
Together with physicist MHF Wilkins they were awarded
the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology in 1962. Naturalscientists added more fundamental principles to human
genetics in the following decades.1786Materials and Methods: Basis are the results of the
DFG-Project of H. Petermann. Based on those data, we are
conducting interviews with human geneticists, natural sci-
entists and physicians. The focus is on the role of scientists
of various ﬁelds (medicine, natural sciences, anthropology)
in establishing human genetics at universities in the FRG.
Results: 1. In the 1950s physicians and philosophical
anthropologists dominated the institutes that did mainly
paternity tests. Those were paid by the courts that instructedthem. 2. In 1960 the Scienti ﬁc Council of FRG ( Wis-
senschaftsrat ) forced the establishment of Human Genetics
Institutes as a ﬁeld of medicine. 3. Since the beginning of
the 1970s National Health Insurances paid for genetic
counseling by physicians, according to the German Scale of
Fees for Doctors (GOÄ). 4. Therefore, two departments
were established at Human Genetics Institutes: for diag-
nostics by natural scientists and for genetic counseling by
physicians. 5. Lectures were given by physicians and nat-ural scientists.
Conclusions: The role of physicians and natural scientists
at Human Genetics Institutes is determined by two facts:historical reasons and reimbursement of expenses. There-
fore, head of Human Genetics Institute at medical faculties
is always a specialized physician. For changes, there mustbe a revolution of the system.
H.I. Petermann: None. T. Liehr: None.
P19.20C
TheﬁrstCDH1 founder mutation in Portugal: Risk
assessment and clinical management
L. Garrido*
1, R. Leal*2, A. Aguiar2, S. Seixas2, L. Ferro1,
L. Vilarinho1, I. Gullo1,2,3, V. Devezas1,3, R. Oliveira1,3,
S. Fernandes3,2, S. Costa1,3, A. Magalhães1,
M. Baptista1,3, F. Carneiro1,2,3, S. Castedo1,2,3,
C. Oliveira2,3
1Centro Hospitalar Universitário S ãoJ oão (CHUSJ),
Porto, Portugal,2Ipatimup/i3S, Institute of Molecular
Pathology and Immunology at the University of Porto
(Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal & Instituto de Investigaç ãoe
Inovaç ão em Saúde (i3S), University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal,3Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto
(FMUP), Porto, Portugal
Introduction: Germline CDH1 mutations cause hereditary
diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), characterized by early-onset
multigenerational diffuse-gastric-cancer (DGC) and lobular-breast-cancer (LBC). Risk-reduction-gastrectomy (RRG)
and –mastectomy (RRM) may be life-saving if performed
in asymptomatic carriers. In Northern Portugal, weidenti ﬁed 7 HDGC-unrelated families sharing the
c.1901C>T variant, raising the hypothesis of a founder-effect. We calculated mutational-age, characterized tumour
spectrum and analysed management output in the extended
pedigree (n =114 individuals).
Materials and Methods: RNA-based analysis was per-
formed to prove variant deleteriousness. CDH1 c.1901C>T
variant carriers and non-carriers were used to estimate thefounder-effect age by decay of haplotype sharing methods.
Carriers ’clinical data were collected as they were followed
in high-risk consultations.
Results: Germline RNA from c.1901C>T carriers
demonstrated production of a single truncated transcript. All
carriers shared the same ancestral haplotype in a 6.8 Mb/5.1cM region. The time to the most recent common ancestor
was estimated to 489.64 [CI: 445-10,900] years. Following
death of 5 DGC probands (3F:2M), aged 18-35, we iden-tiﬁed 48(24F:24M) additional carriers. In female-carriers, 9
underwent RRG, 7 both RRG and RRM, and 8 endoscopic/
MRI surveillance. In male-carriers, 10 underwent RRG and14 endoscopic surveillance. The application of a strict sur-
veillance/prophylaxis protocol, following positive genetic-
testing, allowed DGC (n =4) and LBC (n =2) early-
detection and sub-clinical disease detection in RRG and/or
RRM surgical specimens (DGC =19, LBC =4).
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed the ﬁrst Portuguese CDH1 -
related founder-effect with ~500 years. Reaching out to 48
carriers from 7 families allowed to adopt appropriate risk-
reducing surgeries and/or surveillance, so far without fur-ther cancer-related deaths.
*Equal contribution
L. Garrido*: None. R. Leal*: None. A. Aguiar: None.
S. Seixas: None. L. Ferro: None. L. Vilarinho: None. I.
Gullo: None. V. Devezas: None. R. Oliveira: None. S.
Fernandes: None. S. Costa: None. A. Magalhães: None.
M. Baptista: None. F. Carneiro: None. S. Castedo: None.
C. Oliveira: None.
P19.21D
Attitudes of Genetic Counsellors towards counselling
young adults through predictive testing for
Huntington ’s Disease (HD)
U. Savania1, S. Lesley2
1University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom,
2Clinical genetics, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde,
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Majority of individuals who seek a predictive test for
Huntington ’s disease (HD), have been primarily found to be
young adults (YA) (18-30 years old). With no current direct
medical bene ﬁt to testing, as well as the uncertainty in the
severity/age at which symptoms may appear, the emotional,ethical and other psychological consequences associated
with the test have been found to be increased. TheAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1787importance of genetic counselling and support for at-risk
individuals remains crucial to enable a better understanding
on the impact predictive testing can have on one ’s life.
However, YA have previously reported lack of emotional
support and a communication barrier during these consulta-
tions. As there is limited research conducted on the explicitexperiences of genetic counsellors with predictive testing
for HD, it is dif ﬁcult to establish why this gap in support
and communication exists. The aim of this study was togain a better understanding of experiences of GCs whilst
counselling at-risk young adults for predictive testing for
HD, as well as explore the HD service provision inScotland. Nine genetic counsellors from three regional
centres in Scotland (Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee) were
interviewed using a semi-structured interview guide.Thematic analysis identi ﬁed three key themes: challenges
faced with young adults and Huntington ’s disease, aspects
of the pre-symptomatic predictive testing protocol and therelationships with other health care professionals. Being
made aware about these experiences can highlight gaps in
training and support for genetic counsellors as well as otherhealthcare professionals.
U. Savania: None. S. Lesley: None.
P19.22A
How to inform relatives at risk? Attitudes of 1.379
patients, relatives and members of the generalpopulation
L. M. Van den Heuvel
1, D. Stemkens2, W. Van Zelst-
Stams3, F. Willeboordse4, I. Christiaans1,5, C. Oosterwijk2
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2VSOP Dutch
Genetic Alliance, Soest, Netherlands,3Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Knowledge
Institute of Medical Specialists, Utrecht, Netherlands,
5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands
Introduction: The uptake of predictive DNA testing in
families with a hereditary disease is less than 50%. Current
practice often relies on the proband to inform relatives aboutthe possibility of predictive DNA testing, but not all
relatives are informed adequately. To enable informed
decision-making concerning predictive DNA testing, theapproach used to inform relatives needs to be optimized.
This study investigated preferences of patients, relatives,
and the general population on how to inform relatives at riskof autosomal dominant diseases.
Methods: Online surveys were sent to people with an
autosomal dominant neuro, onco or cardiogenetic diseaseand to their family members via patient organisations(n=379) and to members of the general population via a
commercial panel (n =1000).
Results: Attitudes of the patient and population samples
generally corresponded. A majority of participants believed
that initially only ﬁrst-degree relatives should be informed,
following the principles of cascade screening. Most parti-cipants also thought that patients and healthcare profes-
sionals (HCPs) should be involved in informing relatives,
and a large proportion believed that HCPs should contactrelatives directly when patients are unwilling to inform, for
untreatable and treatable conditions. Participants from the
patient sample were of the opinion that HCPs shouldactively offer support.
Discussion: Ourﬁndings show that both patients and
HCPs should be involved in informing relatives at risk ofautosomal dominant diseases and suggest that relatives ’
‘right to know ’was considered a dominant issue by the
majority of participants. Further research is needed on howto more actively inform at-risk relatives.
L.M. Van den Heuvel: None. D. Stemkens: None. W.
Van Zelst-Stams: None. F. Willeboordse: None. I.
Christiaans: None. C. Oosterwijk: None.
P19.23B
Experiences with transition of gene panel DNA-
diagnostics from clinical geneticists to treating
physicians in breast cancer patients
M. L. Haadsma
1, B. A. H. Caanen2,K .J .A .F .V a n
Kaam2, A. R. Mensenkamp1, R. J. Blok2, E. M. Leter2,
M. Van Geel2, W. A. G. Van Zelst-Stams1,M .J .L .
Ligtenberg1, N. Hoogerbrugge1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, Netherlands
Introduction: In many European countries requesting
DNA-diagnostics for hereditary breast cancer has tradition-ally been the ﬁeld of clinical geneticists. Since test results
can now be available within 2-3 weeks, these are
increasingly considered for determining treatment optionsin breast cancer patients. Treating physicians therefore
increasingly refer eligible, recently diagnosed breast cancer
patients for rapid DNA-testing to the clinical geneticist. Tofacilitate timely test results, we aimed to shift counseling
and requests for rapid DNA-diagnostics for these patients
from clinical geneticists to treating physicians and evaluatethis transition towards so-called ‘mainstreaming ’.
Methods: The project was initiated by the departments of
Clinical Genetics from Maastricht University MedicalCenter and Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. Regional hospitals were included one-by-1788one from July 2018 onwards. Treating physicians were
asked for their needs and barriers to participate. DNA-
diagnostics consisted of gene panel analysis for BRCA1,
BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2 andATM .
Results: In the start-up phase, treating physicians
requested hands-on information, for which the websitewww.DNA ﬁrst.nl was developed. Barriers included time
investment during consultation and perceived incompetence
of providing breast screening advice for family members.Therefore, clinical geneticists joined multidisciplinary
meetings. Up to February 2019, nine hospitals were inclu-
ded, 65 requests for DNA-diagnostics made and threepathogenic mutations found (4.6%) for which patients were
referred to a clinical geneticist. Structured evaluation of
quality of care and experiences of doctors and patients willfollow shortly.
Conclusion: Transition of rapid gene panel diagnostics
from clinical geneticists to physicians treating breast cancerpatients appears to be feasible.
M.L. Haadsma: None. B.A.H. Caanen: None. K.J.A.F.
Van Kaam: None. A.R. Mensenkamp: None. R.J. Blok:
None. E.M. Leter: None. M. Van Geel: None. W.A.G.
Van Zelst-Stams: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. N.
Hoogerbrugge: None.
P19.24C
Parental perceptions to recurrent chromosomalmicroarray ﬁndings and their implications
S. Devaiah
1, S. Douzgou2, M. Bottomley3
1Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford, United
Kingdom,2Manchester Centre For Genomic Medicine,
Manchester, United Kingdom,3Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Following the American College of Medical
Genetics (ACMG) guidelines in 2010, chromosome micro-
array analysis (CMA) has become the baseline genetic testperformed in individuals with neurological and cognitive
impairment which may often occur in association with
multiple congenital anomalies. However, there is scarceinformation regarding the families ’comprehension of
microarray results indicative of recurrent chromosomal
micro-deletion/ duplication ﬁndings. This is especially true
in cases where microarray testing identi ﬁes parents to be
carriers of similar chromosomal alterations as their child
and where parents may/may not have some clinicalmanifestations of their own.
Method: This is a qualitative exploratory study, where
semi structured interviews were conducted with fourmothers of children identi ﬁed to have recurrent chromoso-
mal micro-deletion/duplication syndromes. The interviewswere transcribed verbatim and analysed using Interpretative
Phenomenological Analysis (IPA).
Results: Three superordinate themes emerged from the
study: validation of a diagnosis, response to unexpected test
results & acceptance patterns and thirdly, impact of results.
Conclusion: This study identi ﬁed that all the parents
interviewed valued the genetic diagnosis provided by
microarray testing. Acceptance patterns of results differed
based on personal family differences. However there stillexisted some uncertainty regarding their child ’s future.
Interventions to help parents adapt must also include
imparting information about what is known and what is yetto be known about these rare and variable conditions. Par-
ents may bene ﬁt from follow up care in order to keep
abreast of latest developments.
S. Devaiah: None. S. Douzgou: None. M.
Bottomley: None.
P19.25D
Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (Morquio syndrome)
A rare case report
M. Mahdavi Amiri
1, A. Khoshaeen2
1Thalassemia Research Center,, Sari, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,2Welfare Counseling Center, Sari, Iran,
Islamic Republic of
Motivation: One of the rare inherited diseases is the
mucopolysaccharidoses disorders (MPS) associated withaccumulation of glycosaminoglycan in several organs,
leading to abnormalities in musculoskeletal, respiratory,
cardiac, neurological, ophthalmological, otolaryngological,and gastrointestinal. Nowadays, an increasing number of
patients with MPS are reaching adulthood and are involved
in family planning due to improvements in diagnosis, multi-disciplinary care, and therapies such as enzyme replacement
therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Knowl-
edge on skeletal deformity in MPS remains relativelyuncommon and includes a few case reports. To assess more,
we present a case report on musculoskeletal deformity in
one subject with MPS.
Case: This case revealed that subject with MPS has
generalized osteoporosis, Degenerative Joint Disease (DJD)
of both hips, general skeletal deformity alongside normalmental status. He is 26 years old and the parents were
relatives (1st cousin). He had one healthy younger sibling.
On physical examination, disproportionate short stature,skeletal dysplasia, osteoporosis, prognathism, negative
ulnar variance, angle blunting and ulnar styloid were
detected. Intelligence is normal and there is no direct centralnervous system (CNS) involvement. In the present research
work, C.181C>T (p.Arg61Trp) variant of GALNS gene wasAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1789found through whole exome sequencing and the mutation
was con ﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing method, which is
associated with MPS4A phenotype.
Conclusions: Pathogenic variant in the GALNS gene
associated with hereditary Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA,
(MPS4A, Morquio syndrome A) which encodes N-acetylgalactosamin-sulfate sulfatase, may be useful as a
biomarker to early diagnosis and treatment.
M. Mahdavi Amiri: None. A. Khoshaeen: None.
P19.26A
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) associatedmoderate breast cancer risk: Women ’s attitudes
towards the introduction of additional breast screening
A. Esteve Garcia
West of Scotland Regional Clinical Genetics Service -
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1)
is a rare inherited condition characterised by a lifetime risk
of developing numerous tumours at different sites of the
body. The main clinical manifestations include tumours ofthe parathyroid glands, pancreas and anterior pituitary
gland. Recent research suggested that female patients with
MEN1 might also be at an increased risk of early onsetbreast cancer. Therefore, there is a potential need to
introduce early breast screening into the surveillance
programme of this group of patients. The purpose of thisstudy was to explore attitudes towards the introduction of
additional breast screening among women with MEN1 who
were mainly unaware of this risk and already undergoingintensive screening investigations.
Methods: Seven women with molecular diagnoses of
MEN1 were recruited through Clinical Genetics at theQueen Elizabeth University Hospital (Glasgow). Semi-
structured qualitative interviews were conducted. Interviews
were transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematicanalysis.
Results: Three main themes underpinning the attitudes
about additional breast screening emerged: positivity, con-cern and information needs. All participants were positive
about the introduction of additional breast screening.
However, a fear of cancer, risk misperceptions and lack ofinformation were identi ﬁed as major concerns affecting
their willingness to be screened.
Conclusions: The positive attitude of women with
MEN1 supports the feasibility of introducing additional
breast screening into the surveillance program of this group
of patients. Emphasis should be placed on the risk com-munication process in order to facilitate informed decisions
alongside maintaining the wellbeing of these patients.A. Esteve Garcia: None.
P19.27B
Next Generation Sequencing in health care and clinical
research: attuning all steps
T. Rigter
1, J. A. M. Beliën2, G. M. W. R. de Wert3,
C. Ploem4, E. M. Bunnik5, A. L. Bredenoord6,
M. C. Cornel1
1Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Clinical
Genetics, section Community Genetics, Amsterdam,Netherlands,
2Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Pathology, Cancer Center Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Maastricht University,
Department of Health, Ethics and Society, Maastricht,
Netherlands,4Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center,
Department of Public Health, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
5Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam,
Department of Medical Ethics and Philosophy of Medicine,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,6University Medical Center
Utrecht, Julius Center, Department of Medical Humanities,
Utrecht, Netherlands
Responsible implementation of NGS in health care involves
different disciplines which need to communicate and
cooperate. For instance, while clinicians ask informedconsent for NGS, lab-technicians performing DNA sequen-
cing and analysis do not always know what exactly was
consented to. Contrariwise, those who are developingconsent forms and/or performing consent conversations
with the patient, require information from all other parties
involved in later steps of the NGS process.
To elucidate the key steps in the communication between
the different parties involved in NGS in health care and
clinical research, an expert meeting was organized by theNational Consortium of Ethical, Legal and Social Implica-
tions of Personalised Medicine (ELSI-PM) in the
Netherlands.
Ideally, it should be clear to all parties what exactly is
consented to. Transparency is required about e.g. how long
the samples and the data can/should be stored, what(unsolicited) results should be communicated to the physi-
cian and/or patient, possibility of data-sharing between
physicians and/or researchers, the types of research that canbe conducted, and conditions for data de-identi ﬁcation.
Furthermore, the content of the informed consent forms
and conversations should be aligned with the requirementsfor effective and responsible execution of each of the next
steps in the NGS process.
This requires not only clear de ﬁnitions of roles and
responsibilities of the different parties involved, but also1790agreement on, and facilitation of, the sharing of information
across disciplines, including the content of the consent.
Funding: ELSI-PM is funded by ZonMw (Netherlands
Organisation for Health Research & Development; grantno.
846003102)
T. Rigter: None. J.A.M. Beliën: None. G.M.W.R. de
Wert: None. C. Ploem: None. E.M. Bunnik: None. A.L.
Bredenoord: None. M.C. Cornel: None.
P19.28C
Developing clinical bioinformatics online learning using
agile and reusable principles
A. Devereau, A. Davies, M. Cornell, F. Hooley,
P. Trimbel, H. Hulme, I. Eleftheriou, A. Brass
The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom
Introduction: We present an online learning course in
clinical bioinformatics developed using an agile approachand reusability of components. The University of Manche-
ster delivers face-to-face post-graduate taught courses to
trainee Clinical Bioinformaticians in the UK NationalHealth Service. A recent MOOC (Massive Open Online
Course) introducing this subject area, and market research
has demonstrated the wider demand for skills and knowl-edge development in this ﬁeld.
Materials and Methods: We used agile processes for
course development including user storyboarding, priori-tised development sprints and iterative development. We
took a reusable approach to development of teaching
materials to make them useable in other contexts.
Results: Using Laurillard ’s conversational framework the
course was divided into sections and discussion activities
designed. Each section was further divided into learningobjects which were developed iteratively by subject matter
experts using a range of teaching approaches. Team meeting
were used to prioritise each development sprint. Learningobjects were designed to be non-context speci ﬁc and thus
reusable: weekly topics were formed by contextualising a
series of learning objects using text, videos and interactiveactivities using the Articulate Rise 360 platform. User
Acceptance Testing provided feedback on the completed
course.
Conclusions: This approach has made course develop-
ment more ﬂexible, easier to manage and innovative. Initial
overheads for development of online material are high, butenable easier maintenance of the course. Development of a
library of reusable learning objects (RLOs) will allow faster
and easier development of further courses. Details of thecourse can be found here: http://bit.ly/clinicalbioA. Devereau: None. A. Davies: None. M. Cornell:
None. F. Hooley: None. P. Trimbel: None. H. Hulme:
None. I. Eleftheriou: None. A. Brass: None.
P19.29D
Pre-genetic counseling telephone interviews (PTI) androuting: an ef ﬁcient procedure for an accessible,
appropriate, accelerated and affordable genomic
medicine
M. Branchaud
1, N. Parodi1, G. Collet1, C. Gasnier2,
Z. Neviere2, J. Thery1, I. Tennevet1, E. Lacaze3,
P. Berthet2, T. Frebourg1
1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital,
Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,2Department of Genetics, Comprehensive
Cancer Centre François Baclesse, Normandy Centre forGenomic and Personalized Medicine, Caen, France,
3Department of Genetics, Le Havre Hospital, Normandy
Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Le Havre,France
We previously described a new procedure, based on pre-
genetic counseling telephone interviews (PTI) followed by
routing of patients, in order to address the challenges of the
exponential demand for genetic counseling, especially forpatients suspected to present with hereditary breast or ovary
cancers (HBOC). We provide here an update of the
procedure extended to a total of 4272 patients suspectedof HBOC, hereditary colorectal or renal cancers. After the
PTI scheduled within 14 days and performed by genetic
counselors, a pre-genetic counseling ﬁle (including tumour
data and status of treatment and number of affected and
unaffected ﬁrst- and second-degree relatives), is established.
The PTI is then submitted within 7 days to the routingperformed by a cancer geneticist with 3 possible conclu-
sions: (i) priority face-to-face genetic counseling (FTFGC),
with a cancer geneticist, if the indication is con ﬁrmed and
genetic analyses have potential immediate therapeutic
impacts, (ii) non priority FTFGC with genetic counselors
if the indication is con ﬁrmed, but genetic analyses have no
immediate therapeutic impacts and (iii) non indication for
FTFGC. For 1525 patients (35.7%), FTFGC was considered
not justi ﬁed and approximately 10% of the patients
beneﬁted from priority FTFGC. The human resources
required for the genetic counseling, using this procedure,
was estimated per 1000 index cases at 0.12 FTE secretaries,0.62 FTE genetic counselors and 0.08 FTE medical
geneticists, con ﬁrming our previous estimate. This simple
strategy, based on PTI and routing, allows an accessible,appropriate, accelerated and affordable genomic medicine,
especially in the ﬁeld of cancer genetics.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1791M. Branchaud: None. N. Parodi: None. G. Collet:
None. C. Gasnier: None. Z. Neviere: None. J. Thery:
None. I. Tennevet: None. E. Lacaze: None. P. Berthet:
None. T. Frebourg: None.
P19.30A
Capacity building and empowerment program in
European Joint Program on Rare Diseases: time to
address unmet needs in rare disease research educationand training
B. Tumiene
1,2, V. Bros-Facer3, C. Carta4, R. Favresse5,
E. Bonnaud5, H. Graeßner6, K. Chrzanowska7,
S. Maiella8, G. Matthijs9, C. M. Wang10,
A. Papadopoulou11, D. Julkowska8
1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Vilnius University
Hospital Santaros klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania,
3EURORDIS-Rare Diseases Europe, Paris, France,
4Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy,5French
Foundation for Rare Diseases, Paris, France,6Eberhard
Karls Universität Tübingen, Centre for Rare Diseases,
Tübingen, Germany,7Instytut Pomnik - Centrum Zdrowia
Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland,8Institut National de la Santé et
de la Recherche Médicale, Paris, France,9Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,10Fondazione
Telethon, Milan, Italy,11Joint Research Centre, Directorate
F - Health, Consumer and Reference Materials, Ispra, Italy
Rare diseases (RD) are conditions with prevalence of <5/
10,000 inhabitants, ~80% of RD have genetic etiology.
Despite signi ﬁcant developments in recent years, major
challenges remain including delayed RD diagnosis, insuf ﬁ-
cient treatments and dif ﬁcult access to appropriate care. In
view of current massive generation of new data, introduc-tion of omics into care practices and ongoing RD care
structuration in European Reference Networks (ERN), there
is crucial need to develop RD research capabilities, tospread know-how and standards in RD research among
stakeholders. Recently launched European Joint Program on
Rare Diseases (EJPRD) encompasses comprehensive andcohesive capacity building and empowerment program
addressing developing needs of RD research community in
terms of content, geographical coverage, targeted audiences.Existing resources will be pooled and novel will be created
to tackle areas as data management, orphan drug develop-
ment, HTA/regulatory processes, scienti ﬁc innovation/
translational research, best practice guidelines and ERN
cross-cutting themes/needs. The face-to-face capacity
building activities will train ~1,500 participants over 5years, while ﬁrst-in-class online training program has the
potential to reach unlimited number of trainees in the longterm. The program will target various groups of stake-
holders - researchers, practitioners, patients/their represen-
tatives. Speci ﬁc attention will be given to patient-
centredeness in research and the needs of ERN and EU13
countries. Increased accessibility of trainings will be
secured through course rotation, fellowships and openaccess to some online resources. This project has received
funding from the European Union ‘s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No825575, EJPRD, 2019-2023.
B. Tumiene: None. V. Bros-Facer: None. C. Carta:
None. R. Favresse: None. E. Bonnaud: None. H. Gra-
eßner: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. S. Maiella: None.
G. Matthijs: None. C.M. Wang: None. A. Papadopou-
lou: None. D. Julkowska: None.
P19.31B
Reproductive genetic counseling and management ofhemoglobinopathies carriers couples
C. Skrypnyk
1,2, H. Albuarki1,2, J. S. Pedro2, A. Hellani3
1Arabian Gulf University, College of Medicine and Medical
Sciences,, Manama, Bahrain,2University Medical Center,
King Abdullah Medical City, Manama, Bahrain,3Viafet
Genomic Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Introduction: The premarital hemoglobinopathies screen-
ing associated with genetic counseling and genetic testing
offer people at risk the opportunity of making informeddecisions on marriage and reproduction.
Material and Methods: Preconceptional counseling was
offered for couples at risk for haemoglobinopathy offspring,referred to Genetic Clinic at University Medical Center
Bahrain, from 2016 till 2019. 21 couples were counseled,
genetic testing con ﬁrmed the carrier status and those who
opt out for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGT-M) were
referred to In Vitro Fertilization Clinic (IVF). PGT-M of the
particular mutations identi ﬁed in the couples were per-
formed and pregnancies were initiated with the healthy and
non-carrier selected embryos.
Results: 38% couples were carriers of sickle cell, 33.33%
carriers of sickle cell and beta thalassemia, 28.57% carriers
of beta thalassemia, 4.76% carrier of sickle cell and
hemoglobin D and 4.76% carrier of beta and alpha tha-lassemia. 66.66% of the couples were non consanguineous,
76.19% were married and 40% of them had already one
affected child. 57.14% (12/21) couples underwent the IVF+PGT-M, 58.33% (7/12) for Sickle Cell Disease and
41.66% (5/12) for Sickle Cell/beta thalassemia disease.
Pregnancy was achieved in 50% (6/12) couples, 2/6 mis-carried, 3/6 have an ongoing pregnancy in 1/6 gave birth to
a healthy child.1792Conclusions: There is a high hemoglobinopathies carrier
status in non-consanguineous couples. Genetic counseling
allows the carrier couples to understand their risk and helps
them in taking their best reproductive decision. PGT-M was
the main option and had a good pregnancy rate.
C. Skrypnyk: None. H. Albuarki: None. J.S. Pedro:
None. A. Hellani: None.
P19.32C
BrecanRisk: Strati ﬁcation of high-risk women to suffer
from breast cancer
R. Miñambres1, J. Triviño1, M. Sánchez1, D. Serra1,
A. Lluch2, A. Julve2, A. Cano2, A. Garcia2, S. Hoyas3,
A. Martínez2, E. Rubio-Solsona1, B. Cortina1, A. Ceba1,
L. Bernad1, C. Moya1, S. Santillán1, J. Montoya1,
L. Montes1, R. Rosa1, D. Salas4, J. Ibáñez4, M. Escrig2,
G. Pita5, A. Llaneza6, P. Marrón6, J. Benitez7
1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain,2Hospital Clínico
Universitario de VAlencia, Valencia, Spain,3Instituto
Matemática Aplicada UPV, Valencia, Spain,4Salud
Pública-FISABIO, Valencia, Spain,5Cegen, Madrid, Spain,
6Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain,
7CNIO, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: During last years, the main genetic (SNPs)
and phenotypic risk factors in breast cancer have been
described. In this context, we have developed Brecan Risk
algorithm, in order to integrate these factors and assess therisk throughout women ’s life.
Material and Methods: In the ﬁrst phase, the genotypic
stratiﬁcation was validated in a cohort of 930 healthy
women and 1202 patients, analyzing 120 SNPs related to
breast cancer susceptibility from peripheral blood DNA. In
the second phase, the algorithm was validated in a cohort of790 women by integrating genotypic and phenotypic data
(family history, previous biopsy, breast density, age of
menopause, age at ﬁrst pregnancy). In two independent
retrospective cohorts followed up for 2-15 years, Bre-
canRisk was calculated and correlated with breast cancer
development.
Results: The genotypic analysis separated case-control
populations and strati ﬁed them according to the risk based
on the genotype-phenotype combination. 67% of thewomen were classi ﬁed as low-medium risk (0-1.67) while
the remaining 33% were classi ﬁed as moderate (1.67-2.49)
or high risk (>2.49). In the ﬁrst retrospective cohort (170), 9
women developed cancer, being 80% of them strati ﬁed as
moderate-high risk. This result was supported in the second
cohort recruited through the screening program (157).
Conclusions: The BrecanRisk algorithm ef ﬁciently stra-
tiﬁes women according to their risk to suffer from breastcancer depending on the individual genotype and pheno-
type. Based on our retrospective studies, the correlation
between a high-risk result and subsequent cancer is 80%.
R. Miñambres: None. J. Triviño: None. M. Sánchez:
None. D. Serra: None. A. Lluch: None. A. Julve: None.
A. Cano: None. A. Garcia: None. S. Hoyas: None. A.
Martínez: None. E. Rubio-Solsona: None. B. Cortina:
None. A. Ceba: None. L. Bernad: None. C. Moya: None.
S. Santillán: None. J. Montoya: None. L. Montes: None.
R. Rosa: None. D. Salas: None. J. Ibáñez: None. M.
Escrig: None. G. Pita:
None. A. Llaneza: None. P.
Marrón: None. J. Benitez: None.
P19.33D
Working in Cambridge, UK and Brisbane, Australia: Acomparison between 2 Clinical Genetics services in the
United Kingdom and Australia
S. G. Mehta
Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Clinical Genetics services have evolved rapidly in a
relatively short period of time. They have had to adapt to
technological change, increasing demand, increasing aware-
ness by other clinicians and the public of the genetic burdenof disease. There have been different models adopted
depending on the healthcare system, funding models,
resources available, training, personnel and geography.
These services are increasingly requiring new and inno-
vative ways of working to meet demand and overcome the
signiﬁcant shortage of trained health professionals in Clin-
ical Genetics. Comparing and contrasting delivery of these
services between countries is a way of bene ﬁtting from
innovations which have worked elsewhere.
I am a trained Clinical Geneticist from Cambridge, UK,
and worked in a similar role in Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia for a year. I will describe the pathway to berecognised as a Clinical Geneticist in Australia and the
similarities and differences in the services.
There were signi ﬁcant similarities with the clinical work
in both centres however triage, organisation of the patient
pathway, use of IT software and role of Genetic counsellors
was different. There were variable numbers of staff permillion population.
As an example, due to the large geographical area cov-
ered by the statewide service in Queensland, telehealthutilisation enabled access in remote areas and also to enable
subspecialist care to be delivered. Due to the increasing
demand and lack of resources, the Cambridge departmenthad transferred some roles to administrative staff to allowAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1793the Genetic counsellors and Doctors time to focus on their
specialist skillset.
S.G. Mehta: None.
P19.34A
Perspectives in genetic counseling for spinal muscularatrophy in the new therapeutic era
C. Serra-Juhé, A. Abulí Vidal, M. Codina Solà, E. Rovira
Moreno, E. F. Tizzano Ferrari
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, SpainIntroduction: Genetic diagnosis and counseling in Spinal
muscular atrophy (SMA) present several challenges includ-ing the existence of carriers that are undistinguishable of
non-carriers and the report of patients with very mild
manifestations and even asymptomatic that are discoveredwhen a full symptomatic case appears in the family.
Younger asymptomatic siblings of symptomatic SMA
patients are usually never tested until adolescence or adultlife. However, following regulatory approval of the ﬁrst
tailored treatment for SMA, the prospects for care of these
patients have changed as early testing would changeproactive measures and opportunities for these patients.
Methods: Different aspects of genetic counseling that
could potentially be in ﬂuenced by new advanced therapies
are explored. Among them are considered: 1) Risk of
recurrence and diagnosis of carriers in the family 2)
Reproductive options 3) Phenotypically concordant anddiscordant brothers 4) Prevention levels 5) Predictive
genetic markers of disease evolution 6) Early intervention:
criteria for neonatal screening and presymptomatic treat-ment. Two clinical cases are deeply analyzed.
Results: In all the aspects analyzed there were potential
substantial changes regarding attitudes and decision-making. Of particular relevance is the fact that at present
the SMA would ful ﬁll the total of the 10 criteria of Wilson
and Jungner to be considered a candidate disease for neo-natal screening.
Conclusions: The approval of effective advanced thera-
pies is changing the way in which the communication andgenetic counseling is assumed in SMA. It is essential that
professionals be aware of these advances as they change the
perspective of this disease.
C. Serra-Juhé: None. A. Abulí Vidal: None. M. Codina
Solà: None. E. Rovira Moreno: None. E.F. Tizzano
Ferrari: None.
P19.35B
The discussion of uncertainty concerning multigenepanel testing during cancer genetic counseling. An
observational studyN. M. Medendorp
1, M. A. Hillen1,P .E .A .v a n
Maarschalkerweerd1, C. M. Aalfs2, M. G. Ausems2,
S. Verhoef3, L. E. van der Kolk4, L. P. V. Berger5,
M. R. Wevers6, A. Wagner7, B. A. H. Caanen8,
A. M. Stiggelbout3, E. M. A. Smets1
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,3Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,
4Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
5University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands,6Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,7Erasmus MC University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,8Maastricht UMC +,
Maastricht, Netherlands
Introduction: Pre-test counseling about multigene panel
testing involves an increased level of uncertainty. Ideally,counselees are fully informed about uncertainties to make
an informed decision about whether or not to perform such
a test. It is presently unknown whether and how uncertaintyis discussed during initial cancer genetic counseling. We
therefore investigated in which counselors discuss uncer-
tainty concerning multigene panel tests, address counselees ’
uncertainties, and whether their manner is associated with
counselors ’characteristics.
Materials and Methods: Videotapes were made of
counselors discussing a multigene panel test with a simu-
lated patient (SP). SPs represented a counselee who had had
multiple cancer types. Before and after their consultation,counselors completed a survey. Counselors ’uncertainty
expressions, initiative- and framing of expressions, and
counselors ’verbal responses to SP ’s scripted uncertainty
expressions were coded.
Results: Counselors (N =29) expressed uncertainties
mainly regarding scienti ﬁc topics (94%) and on their own
initiative (95%). Most expressions were framed directly
(77%; e.g. We don ’t know ), and non-valenced (59%; i.e.
without a positive or negative value). After SPs expresseduncertainties, counselors mainly responded by explicitly
referring to the uncertainty (69%) without providing space
for further disclosure (66%). More experience with geneticcounseling led to a decrease in space for further disclosure
of SPs ’uncertainties ( p<.02).
Conclusions: Mainly communicating scienti ﬁc uncer-
tainties, and using mostly space-reducing responses, raises
the question whether enough attention is paid to counselees ’
personal uncertainties allowing them to disclose their con-cerns during initial genetic counseling.
Funding: The Dutch Cancer Society (KWF Kankerbes-
trijding) Grant number: UvA 2015-7607
N.M. Medendorp: None. M.A. Hillen: None. P.E.A.
van Maarschalkerweerd: None. C.M. Aalfs: None. M.G.1794Ausems: None. S. Verhoef: None. L.E. van der Kolk:
None. L.P.V. Berger: None. M.R. Wevers: None. A.
Wagner: None. B.A.H. Caanen: None. A.M. Stiggelbout:
None. E.M.A. Smets: None.
P19.36C
Whole exome sequencing in Romania - beginnings and
challenges
A. Tutulan-Cunita1, F. Nedelea1,2, M. Gica1,3,
N. Usurelu4, D. Blanita4, E. Rentea1, A. Pavel1,
M. Becleanu1, D. Stambouli1
1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania,
2Filantropia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania,3Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Hospital, Bucharest, Romania,4Institute
of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of
Introduction: Genomic technologies are an integral part of
the genetic investigation toolkit in many areas of medicine.
While genomic data accumulates at a very fast pace, itsavailability and the speci ﬁcs of the local genetic landscape
are among main challenges encountered by the biomedical
or clinical geneticist. We present our preliminary data onthe implementation of whole exome sequencing (WES)
technology as a clinical investigation tool in our Romanian
patients.
Materials and Methods: Twenty two patients with
neurological, metabolic, cardiac, and skin disorders were
referred to our laboratory for WES or panel sequencingbetween June 2017 - January 2019. Ion GeneStudio S5
System (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) and Ion Reporter plat-
form were used.
Results: Eleven pathogenic or likely pathogenic muta-
tions associated with part of/complete clinical phenotypes
were found in ACADS, ACADVL, ALOX12B, AP4B1,
APOE, GJB6, IQSEC2, PHKB, TBCK genes. 3 VOUS in
ACADVL, GK, KCNMA genes possibly causative for the
clinical presentations of patients were also described. Thus,mutations explaining the patients ’phenotypes were found
in 7 cases, indicating an overall detection rate of 30.43%; in
2 more cases only part of the phenotype was clari ﬁed.
Conclusions: Genetic diagnosis is becoming increasingly
accessible throughout the Western world. However, small,
local clinics beyond this geographical space encounterspeciﬁc challenges when embarking in WES, such as the
genetic particularities of the local populations, the need to
establish an open dialogue within multidisciplinary medicalteams, competition with larger Western companies and,
quite often, the lack of patient ﬁnancial assistance from
local health insurance systems.
A. Tutulan-Cunita: None. F. Nedelea: None. M. Gica:
None. N. Usurelu: None. D. Blanita: None. E. Rentea:None. A. Pavel: None. M. Becleanu: None. D.
Stambouli: None.
P19.37D
Memory game in the learning about X-linked diseases
N. T. Simões, M. B. Reis, S. Vasconcelos, E. Leite,
A. C. M. Marlinverni, G. M. G. Carvalheira
Universidade Federal de S ão Paulo, S ão Paulo, Brazil
Introduction: The inheritance patterns of X-linked dis-
orders had been easily identi ﬁed due to unequally
distribution of the chromosome X between women and
men. Like the other monogenic diseases, X-linked disordersare categorized into dominant and recessive. In order to
teach about this inheritance pattern of diseases, it has been
created a memory game, which the main purpose was toinform, in a playful way, their characteristics.
Materials and Methods: This memory game contains 24
cards, split in 12 pairs. Each pair has a card with informa-tive text and another with an illustrative ﬁgure about the
corresponding text. The game needs two players that will
use memory and logic capacities. As the game progresses,the player must use memory to store information contained
in the card and his position in the game, winning the player
that achieves a larger number of correct pairs.
Results: We used eight players, divided into four pairs.
They had a few knowledge about the subject and, during the
game, were correlating the texts with the ﬁgures. In the end,
the players were able to correctly relate the information
contained in the cards with the respective ﬁgures.
Conclusion: The memory game proved to be ef ﬁcient in
acquiring knowledge about the theme, brought in a playful
and easy-to-learn way. By relating the information con-
tained in the texts with the images, the players presented agreater understanding about the features of X-linked
diseases.
N.T. Simões: None. M.B. Reis: None. S. Vasconcelos:
None. E. Leite: None. A.C.M. Marlinverni: None. G.M.
G. Carvalheira: None.
P20
Psychological and social issues in genetics
P20.01A
Cognitive and psychosocial pro ﬁle in Silver-Russell
syndrome: a ﬁrst study in adults
M. Burgevin
1, A. Lacroix1, A. Toutain2, D. Martin-
Coignard3, M. Vincent4, C. Crosnier-Schoedel5,
V. Coutinho6, I. Netchine5, S. Odent7Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 17951Univ Rennes, LP3C (Laboratoire de Psychologie:
Cognition, Comportement, Communication) - EA 1285,
Rennes, France,2CHRU de Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau,
Service de Génétique Médicale, Université François
Rabelais, Faculté de Médecine, INSERM UMR U930,
Tours, France,3CH du Mans, Service de Génétique, Le
Mans, France,4CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique
Médicale, Nantes, France,5Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris
Est (AP-HP), Hôpital des Enfants Armand Trousseau,Service d ’explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes,
Centre de Recherche Saint Antoine, INSERM UMR S938,
Paris, France,
6Hôpital des Enfants Armand Trousseau,
AP-HP, GUEP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Paris, France ;
Centre de Recherche en Épidémiologie et Santé des
Populations, INSERM U1018, Villejuif, France,7Hôpital
Sud, CHU de Rennes, Service de génétique clinique, Centre
de référence Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, Univ Rennes,
CNRS UMR 6290, Rennes, France
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a rare disorder character-
ized by severe intrauterine and postnatal growth retardationwith relative macrocephaly at birth, typical dysmorphic
features, and feeding dif ﬁculties (Wakeling et al., 2017). In
50-60% of cases, SRS is caused by an epimutation of theregion 11p15. Currently, no studies have been published on
the assessment of cognitive, psychological and behavioral
particularities of adults with SRS.
Methods: An evaluation of cognitive and psychosocial
proﬁle was performed in 11 patients (7 men), aged 18 to 39
years (M =24.36 years). All patients had an epimutation of
the region 11p15 IGF2/H19 region. Ten patients had a
bachelor ’s degree and 7 completed a higher education. 70%
were treated with growth hormone and 90% have bene ﬁted
from speech therapy and/or psychological care.
Results: Mean overall IQ score was 95.82 (17.65 SD).
Verbal comprehension index was on average higher thanother indexes (mean 109.55; 18.17 SD). We have found a
trend link between birth weight and Processing Speed Index
and between birth head circumference and PerceptualReasoning Index. The abilities to concentrate were con-
sidered very low (score below 84) in 4 patients. Self-esteem
was also very low (score below 33) in 4 patients. Inter-nalizing problems score was higher in SRS group than in
the normative control group (p =0.032).
Conclusion: Overall adults with SRS had normal intel-
lectual ef ﬁciency. In our group, some speci ﬁc cognitive and
psychosocial pro ﬁles were observed. These results improve
knowledge about SRS and point to the importance of earlyintervention and multidisciplinary care from childhood to
adulthood.
M. Burgevin: None. A. Lacroix: None. A. Toutain:
None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. M. Vincent: None. C.Crosnier-Schoedel: None. V. Coutinho: None. I. Netch-
ine:None. S. Odent: None.
P20.02B
Genetic risk information ( APOE ) as a lifestyle change
motivator in Finland - Description of the participantpopulation
M. Tringham
1, H. Leskinen2, H. Karjalainen1, T. Iso-
Touru2, H. Hietaranta-Luoma3, S. Rokka2, P. Marnila2,
J. Pihlava2, T. Hurme2, A. Pietilä4, H. Puolijoki3,
K. Åkerman3, L. Tanner5, M. Sandell1, K. Vähäkangas4,
A. Hopia1, R. Tahvonen2
1Functional Foods Forum, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland,2Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke),
Jokioinen, Finland,3The Hospital District of South
Ostrobothnia, Seinäjoki, Finland,4University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland,5Department of Clinical
Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: The Western lifestyle greatly contributes to
the risk of cardiovascular diseases and Alzheimer ’s disease.
Lifestyle change can improve health prospects dramatically,but executing the change requires ﬁrm motivation. Our 18-
month lifestyle intervention, “Effects of ApoE4 genotype
information and intervention intensity on the ful ﬁlment of
lifestyle changes and sensory preferences (ApoE4mot) ”,
assessed the effect of genetic risk information ( APOE ɛ4
carrier status) on the motivation for lifestyle change.
Materials and Methods: We recruited 211 healthy adult
volunteers from Ostrobothnia (Finland), genotyped them for
APOE ɛ4carrier status (carrier vs. non-carrier) and com-
municated the results to the intervention group. The parti-
cipants ﬁlled in questionnaires on lifestyle choices, food
preferences and psychological state. Their lifestyle statuswas documented by physiological measurements and
plasma values (cholesterol, blood glucose, fatty acid
composition etc.).
Results: 35.6% of the individuals had at least one ɛ4
allele. LDL and total cholesterol levels were lower in those
with APOE ε2than those with APOE ε3and ε4(p<0.05).
However, in those with ε2, the proportions of 18:2n-6 and
total polyunsaturated fatty acids, for example, were lower
than in those with ε4, and 16:0 and total saturated fatty
acids higher (p<0.05).
Conclusions: The plasma fatty acid differences may
result from genetic differences in the fatty acid metabolismbetween the APOE genotypes, or, excepting the cholesterol
values, the slightly better lifestyles of the APOE ɛ4carriers,
suggesting better health-awareness. The study populationwas a representative sample of the Finnish population,1796forming a reliable basis for a genetic risk information
intervention.
M. Tringham: None. H. Leskinen: None. H. Karja-
lainen: None. T. Iso-Touru: None. H. Hietaranta-
Luoma: None. S. Rokka: None. P. Marnila: None. J.
Pihlava: None. T. Hurme: None. A. Pietilä: None. H.
Puolijoki: None. K. Åkerman: None. L. Tanner: None.
M. Sandell: None. K. Vähäkangas: None. A. Hopia:
None. R. Tahvonen: None.
P20.03C
Communication of Clinical Uncertainties: A SystematicLiterature Review
B. B. Biesecker
1, B. Boyea2, N. Kulkarni2, H. L. Peay2,
R. S. Paquin3, A. C. Wheeler2, M. A. Lewis4
1RTI, International, Bethesda, MD, United States,2RTI,
International, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States,
3RTI, International, Minneapolis, MN, United States,4RTI,
International, Seattle, WA, United States
Uncertainties pervade medicine, and genomics is no
exception. How patients perceive uncertainty is in ﬂuenced
by how providers convey it. Communication theories about
managing uncertain health information include provider
messaging. To assess the state of the science, we conducteda systematic literature review on communication of
uncertain health risk information across specialties. Our
aims were to assess the breadth and quality of the evidence,identify research gaps and posit evidence-based hypotheses.
The search identi ﬁed 1020 abstracts from PubMed, Web of
Science, PsycINFO, Communication Source and CochraneReviews published between 1/1/1990 and 6/1/2018. Forty-
one met inclusion criteria: 16 quantitative and 25 qualitative
studies. A total of 3656 providers and 4530 patients wererepresented. Among the quantitative studies, one was of
high quality--an intervention study to enhance effective
communication of uncertainty. Nine were moderate qualityobservational studies. Seven were self-report of lower
quality. Among 25 qualitative studies, 12 were analyses
of recorded clinical sessions of high quality, ten were self-report interviews, three were focus groups and one was an
ethnographic study. Communication and management of
clinical uncertainties were observed or reported betweenproviders and patients in primary care, advanced cancer
care, genetics, obstetrics, oncology, cardiology, and emer-
gency medicine. Research gaps exist in interventionresearch. Evidence revealed providers ’avoidance of com-
municating clinical uncertainties, recognition of challenges
in communicating uncertainties, decisions to provideinformation over uncertainties, and relational factors that
led to expressions of uncertainty; all generating hypothesesto be tested. High-quality research is needed to inform best
practices in clinical medicine, particularly in genomics.
B.B. Biesecker: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; RTI International Non-pro ﬁt. B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;NIH Grant Consultant-Baylor Univ. and Kaiser-
Permanente. B. Boyea: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; RTI International Non-pro ﬁt.N. Kulkarni:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI Interna-
tional Non-pro ﬁt.H.L. Peay: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; RTI International Non-pro ﬁt.R.S. Paquin:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI Interna-
tional Non-pro ﬁt.A.C. Wheeler: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; RTI International, Non-pro ﬁt.M.A.
Lewis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI
International Non-pro ﬁt.
P20.04D
The concept of ‘emotional distress ’as a measure of
outcome when assessing the impact of genetic testresults; a systematic review
S. Eddy, L. M. JacksonUniversity of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom
Purpose: In psychological assessment a wide range of
terms are used to describe an individual ’s behaviour,
personality and state of wellbeing. Across the genomicsresearch literature there are myriad studies using a plethora
of psychological terms, not always consistently. As well as
the terminology utilised, the tools employed to measurethese states also vary. This review examined the usage and
measurement of ‘emotional distress ’in the context of
genetic testing.
Methods: This systematic review followed the Centre for
Reviews and Dissemination (CRD) framework and MED-
LINE, EMBASE and PsycINFO databases were searched.The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) framework was used to report
results followed by a quality scoring analysis. Search termsincluded “emotional distress
”,“psychological distress ”and
“gene* ”. Qualitative thematic analysis was conducted and
tools used within the included studies were quantitativelytabulated.
Results: The review included 13 papers, incorporating 16
tools. Thematic analysis generated six major themes;demographics, in ﬂuence of patients ’condition, in ﬂuence of
time on patient emotion, support structures and mechanisms
and familial implications, emotions surrounding genetictesting and methods of emotional measurement.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1797Conclusion: Terms used when measuring psychological
states differed and it is clear that the term ‘emotional dis-
tress ’is being used inconsistently. There is also variation in
the application of tools. It is suggested that incorrect
assumptions or misunderstanding regarding term usage and
psychological health measurement, may result in disparitiesin patient care. This is of concern when assignment of a
particular term is being used to stratify patient follow-up.
S. Eddy: None. L.M. Jackson: None.
P20.05A
Patient's experiences of genomic testing for FamilialHypercholesterolaemia: What it might reveal about the
adoption of healthy lifestyle behaviours
L. Silva, L. Condon, J. Kai, S. Weng, K. Vedhara,
N. Qureshi
Division of Primary Care, Nottingham, United Kingdom
Introduction: Recent scienti ﬁc advances have led to
genomic testing being mainstreamed into clinical practice.
Consequently, there has been increasing interest in the
change in health-related behaviour after patients receive agenomic test result. Leventhal ’s Self-regulation model is
one of the frameworks used in this area. According to this
theory, the genomic test result (external stimulus) wouldchange the patient ’s mental representation about health
threats. Recent evidence suggests that simply acquiring new
information about one ’s risk to develop a certain condition
might not be enough for patients to change their lifestyle
(Hollands et al., 2016). Therefore, we will also be interested
to ascertain if taking part in the study might in ﬂuence the
intention to change particular behaviours (Prochaska &
DiClemente, 1982).
Our aim is to explore patients ’experiences of genomic
testing for Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) and
understand what factors may explain their readiness to
adopt (or not) a healthier lifestyle.
Materials and Methods: We will report a mixed-
methods approach that evaluates patients receiving differ-
ent types of FH genomic test results. Quantitative data willbe generated through a questionnaire that includes measures
of anxiety, beliefs and perceived control over heart disease
and stages of change for smoking cessation and exercise.Qualitative data will be collected through semi-structured
interviews and the framework model will be used in the
analysis.
Conclusion: Following the example of FH, we will
explore how genomic testing in primary care might be used
as a potential intervention to empower patients to adopthealthier lifestyle behaviours.L. Silva: None. L. Condon: None. J. Kai: None. S.
Weng: None. K. Vedhara: None. N. Qureshi: None.
P20.06B
Psychological and ethical considerations of population
genomic testing: qualitative interviews with the public
A. K. Smit
1,2,3, A. J. Newson2, G. L. Fenton1, G. Reyes-
Marcelino1, L. Keogh4, A. E. Cust1,3
1Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Research, Sydney
School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health,The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,
2Sydney
Health Ethics, Sydney School of Public Health, Faculty of
Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney,Australia,
3Melanoma Institute Australia (MIA), The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,4Melbourne School
of Population and Global Health, The University ofMelbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: As genomic technologies rapidly improve,
the incorporation of genomic testing into public health
prevention strategies and screening programs is being
investigated. To assess whether genomic testing should beimplemented on a population-scale, and to ensure effective
research translation, evidence is required on the psycholo-
gical and ethical implications of this approach. Theperspectives of main stakeholders, such as the public, are
key to understanding these implications.
Methods: Semi-structured interviews were undertaken
with 30 participants (24-69 years, 50% female) recruited
from a pilot trial in which they received personalised mel-
anoma genomic risk information. We explored participants ’
psychological responses to receiving this information and
their views on broader ethical considerations of offering
genomic risk information to the population. Data wereanalysed thematically.
Results: Many participants described positive responses
to receiving genomic risk information, including feelingreassured. Some reported short-term negative emotional
reactions that dissipated over time. Their responses were
linked to: expectations for their risk result, disease riskperception, existing preventive behaviours and their risk
results. Participants raised ethical considerations of
population-scale genomic testing including: consequencesfor individual responsibility for disease prevention, possible
adverse responses due to perceptions of genetic exception-
alism, implications for parental responsibilities and poten-tial discrimination. Participants felt that trust, choice and
equity should be taken into account in the provision of
population-scale genomic testing.
Conclusions: Personalised melanoma genomic risk
information alongside education and lifestyle counselling is1798favourably received by the public with minimal negative
responses. Ethical considerations relevant to policy discus-
sion and program design include trust, choice and equity.
A.K. Smit: None. A.J. Newson: None. G.L. Fenton:
None. G. Reyes-Marcelino: None. L. Keogh: None. A.E.
Cust: None.
P20.08D
Transgenerational management of information aboutHuntington disease within the family: from past silence
to normalization in the present
C. R. Oliveira
1, Á. Mendes2, J. Sequeiros3, L. Sousa4
1Universidade de Aveiro, CINTESIS; and UnIGENe, IBMC
–Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S –Instituto de
Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Aveiro,
Portugal,2UnIGENe and CGPP –Centre for Predictive
and Preventive Genetics, IBMC –Institute for Molecular
and Cell Biology, i3S –Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão
em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal,3UnIGENe and
CGPP –Centre for Predictive and Preventive Genetics,
IBMC –Instit. for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S –Instit.
de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde, Univ. Porto,
Portugal; and ICBAS –Instit. de Ciências Biomédicas Abel
Salazar, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal,4Universidade de
Aveiro, CINTESIS, Aveiro, Portugal
Huntington disease (HD) has a signi ﬁcant impact on family
process. Management of the information on HD in familieshas been scarcely reported, from a transgenerational
perspective. This study aims to get a deeper understanding
of the management of information about the disease, withinPortuguese HD families, and its implications for family and
social relationships.
This is an exploratory qualitative study, using a semi-
structured interview with persons from HD families. Ten
participants were recruited: two carriers, eight non-carriers.
Interviews were transcribed and submitted to themeanalysis.
Information from genetic diagnosis and the potential for
presymptomatic testing represent a turning point for HDfamily members, with a high impact for management of the
information about the disease within the family. After a
diagnosis of HD, families tend to identify possibly affectedrelatives (in previous and present generations) and question
who may develop it in the future. Through this process,
families i) travel into their past, to re/build the history of thedisease in the family; and ii) build a new consciousness
about HD and its hereditary character. Family members use
different approaches to deal with HD in the family and inthe community: either closure (denial, silence, secrecy) or
openness (open disclosure). Outcomes from theseapproaches range from isolation, challenging stigma, and
normalizing the disease experience.
These results may be relevant for genetic counselling
practice, bringing further insight into transgenerational
processes of management of the information about HD in
families.
Grants and fellowships: FEDER (POCI-01-0145-
FEDER-007746; CINTESIS (UID/IC/4255/2013) and FCT
Doctoral Fellowship (SFRH/BD/131925/2017).
C.R. Oliveira: None. Á. Mendes: None. J. Sequeiros:
None. L. Sousa: None.
P20.09A
Noninvasive prenatal test: preferences and awareness
among healthcare professionals in Russia
E. Zaiaeva
1, E. Baranova1, L. Zhuchenko1, L. Ivanova2,
V. Izhevskaya3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Federal State Budgetary
Educational Institution of Further Professional EducationRussian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional
Education of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Sector of Social
Health Problems, Federal Center of Theoretical and
Applied Sociology of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Educational Department,
Federal State Budgetary Institution Research Centre for
Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal tests, NIPT, are rapidly
changing the algorithm of ﬁrst trimester screening, FTS, for
chromosomal abnormalities, CA. NIPT allows to improvethe detection of CA of a fetus and reduce the number of
unwarranted invasive procedures. Healthcare professionals,
HPs, in Europe are ready to use NIPT as a ﬁrst or second
line test due to its safety, high sensitivity and early results.
However, there were found country-speci ﬁc differences in
choosing methods for FTS, depending on ethnic, socio-demographic and religious characteristics of respondents, as
well as the local health policy related to the need for partial
or full payment of prenatal tests and the availability ofabortion. Accordingly, each country requires its own
guidelines, developed with taking into account the social
context.
Methods: Our group conducted the sociological survey
among 37 HPs. The questionnaire included questions about
preferences for FTS, demographic attributes and a discretechoice experiment.
Results: For Russian HPs, most signi ﬁcant attributes of
prenatal tests are their cost, the justi ﬁcation of invasive
procedures and the possibility of obtaining the mostAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1799complete information. Don ’t affect the choice the sensitivity
and the time of receiving results.
Conclusion: The obtained results are not fully matched
with the data from the world literature, therefore it is
necessary to pay attention to the level of awareness of HPs
about the possibilities of NIPT, assessment of existingsocial and ethical problems in the country, as well as the
prospects for introducing NIPT into the algorithm of FTS.
Grant RFBR №18-013-01175.
E. Zaiaeva: None. E. Baranova: None. L. Zhuchenko:
None. L. Ivanova: None. V. Izhevskaya: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Russian foundation for basic research.
P20.10B
A review of the pro ﬁle of mood states (POMS) with the
client of prenatal test
A. Kondo
1, D. Nakaoku1, M. Yamasaki1, M. Morine1,
K. Hinokio1, Y. Goto2, K. Takahashi2, K. Maeda1
1Shikoku Medical Center for Children and Adults, Zentsuji,
Japan,2Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara,
Japan
Introduction: The availability of prenatal screening and
diagnostic testing has changed the experience of pregnancy.
Prenatal screening tests may have positive or negative
effects for women. In this study, we are looking at thepsychological effects of prenatal screening tests for
the fetus.
Materials and Methods: A sample of 162 women who
had genetic counselling sessions regarding prenatal tests
completed the Pro ﬁle of Mood States (POMS) short form
before the prenatal test and after they received the result.The Pro ﬁle of Mood States (POMS) is a psychological
rating scale used to assess transient, distinct mood states
such as Tension or Anxiety, Anger or Hostility, Vigor orActivity, Fatigue or Inertia, Depression or Dejection, Con-
fusion or Bewilderment.
Results: Most cases showed slightly higher score in
Tension or Anxiety, Confusion or Bewilderment category
before the prenatal tests. The score was decreased after they
received the test result but some showed repressive andpunitive attitudes at the session. Six women showed
medically disturbed mood in spite of negative result
for NIPT.
Conclusions: Testing the fetus make some impact on
pregnant women and the partner even with negative result.
The study showed prenatal tests make them slight moodchange within expected range in many cases. It was very
helpful to ﬁnd some medically disturbed women throughthis study since they didn ’t show any speci ﬁc symptoms.
We take care of the women with positive result, but it might
be important to screen all the pregnant women to offer
psychological support depend on objective evaluations.
A. Kondo: None. D. Nakaoku: None. M. Yamasaki:
None. M. Morine: None. K. Hinokio: None. Y. Goto:
None. K. Takahashi: None. K. Maeda: None.
P20.11C
Transmission of genetic information to relatives in
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
J. Mazzella
1, S. Adham1, M. Frank1, X. Jeunemaitre1,
K. Lahlou-laforet2
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen
Georges Pompidou, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Vasculaires Rares, Paris, France,2Assistance Publique-
Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou,
Unité de Psychologie et Psychiatrie de Liaison et
d’Urgence, Paris, France
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare
inherited disorder leading to arterial, digestive and uterinecomplications due to pathogenic COL3A1 variants. Identi-
ﬁcation of variants allows family screening, provided that
relatives have been previously informed accordingly to a2013 French decree. We wanted to assess the effective
transmission of genetic information to relatives and the
impact of the diagnosis disclosure, and show a possible linkbetween vEDS experiencing and ability to communicate the
genetic information. vEDS adult probands answered a
questionnaire during a clinical visit. Transmission ofinformation to relatives was considered effective if the
proband gave information to some or all relatives and easily
realized if it was done less than a month, withoutdifﬁculties, to all relatives. Personal and family aspects of
probands regarding their vEDS experience were also
assessed. Effective transmission of information to relativeswas remarkably high (98%). Siblings were the most
frequently informed (82%). This process seemed simple to
perform (58%) but worrying (44%). Women (89%) seemedto inform their relatives more quickly than men (59%).
There was no difference in the information of relatives
before and after 2013, meaning that regular multidisciplin-ary support of patients fosters transmission of information.
Regarding vEDS experience, patients felt anxiety (78%) at
diagnosis disclosure and considered this diagnosis as thepossibility to start a medical follow-up (82%) ; Most of
probands with children (56%) felt guilty about vEDS
transmission to offspring. The ability to easily communicateinformation seemed to be mainly related to the relief felt
during vEDS diagnosis disclosure.1800J. Mazzella: None. S. Adham: None. M. Frank: None.
X. Jeunemaitre: None. K. Lahlou-laforet: None.
P21
Lay beliefs and public understanding of genetics -Access to genetic services
P21.01D
The genome as the most intimate common: taking
citizen perspectives into account in policy and research
W. Van Hoof, C. Mayeur
Sciensano, Brussels, BelgiumIntroduction: Genomic research and medicine can only
advance as long as there is a willingness to share genomicdata. However, given that genomics is both a fringe and
highly complex subject, there is a big risk of misinforma-
tion, misunderstanding and general distrust in society.
Methods: Different initiatives have been launched to
organize the societal debate on ethical, legal and societal
issues (ELSI) in genomics. We will focus on in-depthqualitative data from a Belgian citizen forum (32 citizens,
3 weekends) and a French public consultation (22 citizens,
4 weekends) in 2018.
Results: On the one hand, genomic research can bene ﬁt
everyone and scienti ﬁc progress is a common good. On the
other hand, the individual - and potentially the individual ’s
family - is at risk when certain mutations are discovered or
data is misused. In the public ’s understanding, genes are
linked to identity, irreversible traits, the ‘nature ’of an
individual. Both risks and bene ﬁts regarding genomics
touch an intimate part of individuals ’private lives. This
tension is not alleviated through societal debate, but dis-cussions between citizens can inform researchers and policy
makers about different perspectives in society and potential
reactions to certain information, requests, policies andprojects. In turn, well organized debates enhance public
awareness and understanding of ELSI in genomics. We
describe different approaches to societal debates and theiroutcomes.
Conclusion: Without societal support, the ambitions of
genomic research are unattainable. In an area whereeveryone can feel intimately involved, it is important to
actively listen to all perspectives.
W. Van Hoof: None. C. Mayeur: None.P21.02A
Polarised views on the regulation of genetic data and use
of genetic information in criminal justice
R. Chapman
1, V. Smereczynska1, V. Nanau1,
D. Matsepuro2, F. Selita2, Y. Kovas1,2
1Goldsmiths, University of London, London, United
Kingdom,2Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian
Federation
The use of genetic data is permeating all areas of society.
The talk/poster will present 2 studies dedicated to under-
standing more about public views on legal applications of
genetic data. In the ﬁrst study, data were collected on how
genetic information should be used in criminal trials.
Results from the International Genetic Literacy and
Attitudes Survey (iGLAS, N =3981) showed marked
variation in views. For example, 62% of participants felt
that genetic information should inform sentencing, whereas
29% felt that it should not be considered. 6% felt a highgenetic risk for aggression should reduce the defendant ’s
sentence; and 3% felt it should increase it. In the second
study, participants considered whether family membershave a right to information about a close relative ’s genetic
condition (based on ABC vs the NHS). Data were collected
several times as additional information was provided toparticipants. The results revealed highly polarised views.
Some participants resolutely supported familial rights to
access information about their relative ’s diagnosis and that
the NHS should be legally obliged to provide this. Other
participants steadfastly supported the patient's right to
conﬁdentiality and non-disclosure, even though this might
have health implications for their relatives. Participants who
either had a genetic condition themselves or in their family
favoured disclosure. Sex differences also emerged. Theseand other results suggest polarisation of opinions on these
important matters and call for increased efforts to involve
the public in debates about genetic data usage.
With support from the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research grant No. 18-29-14071.
R. Chapman: None. V. Smereczynska: None. V.
Nanau: None. D. Matsepuro: None. F. Selita: None. Y.
Kovas: None.
P21.03B
Opinion about prenatal and gene mutation testing
among Polish populationAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1801M. A. Malarska, P. M. Pachniak, A. Mazerant,
E. M. Borkowska, M. Borowiec
Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź, Poland
Aim: The aim of the study was to collect information about
knowledge and approach among Polish population to the
topic of genetic prenatal tests. We also analyzed the
doctor ’s approaches to the same issues.
Methods: Data collection was carried out by the use of a
comprehensive questionnaire on the Internet and in paper
format. 2210 people were examined. 204 doctors answeredthe same set of questions with few addition.
Results: 60,6% of respondents are enthusiastic about
prenatal test such as amniocentesis. Over 26% patients and30,9% doctors consider this test too risky. Free fetal DNA is
considered to be very important test by 86,1% of doctors
and 75,1% of patients (the respondents were informed aboutthe need of additional payment). Also we asked what is the
attitude of respondents to perform genetic testing for
BRCA1 / BRCA2 / BRAX without a family history ofcancer. 25.9% of respondents do not have any knowledge
about such tests and 90.3% of doctors replied that such a
study would have a positive impact. Unfortunately doctorsdo not know how to properly collect samples (82,5%) and
what documents to ﬁll in to correctly carry out the proce-
dure (43,3%).
Conclusions: The opinion on genetic testing among
Poles is very positive. There is a great need to increase the
availability of prenatal and other genetics tests in Poland. Itseems very necessary to expand the knowledge of both
patients and physicians on subject of genetic research.
M.A. Malarska: None. P.M. Pachniak: None. A.
Mazerant: None. E.M. Borkowska: None. M.
Borowiec: None.
P21.04C
The human germline gene editing dialogue in the
Netherlands
D. Houtman, S. Riedijk, B. Vijlbrief, R. Hofstra
Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Safe and effective clinical application of
human germline gene editing (GLGE) is becoming more
feasible, as gene editing techniques are being improved.This provides a real prospect of curative treatment for
serious (mono)genetic diseases. However, human GLGE
may also be used to prevent disease, as in He Jiankui ’s
experiment, and to enhance humanity. There is general
consensus that human GLGE should be democraticallygoverned, meaning that all stakeholders should be involved
in determining the purposes and boundaries of the
technology. Therefore, a public dialogue will be organized
in the Netherlands to provide information, encourage active
participation, and to assemble various stakeholders ’opi-
nions. We aim to investigate the impact of this humanGLGE dialogue on public opinions.
Method: This study was piloted among 28 students who
ﬁlled in a survey on attitudes towards human GLGE before
and after a ten weeks minor course.
Results: Student de ﬁnitions of germline editing were
signiﬁcantly more correct after the minor period compared
to before (p<0.01). Attitudes towards GLGE shifted equally
towards both directions between pre and post measurement.
Proponents perceived GLGE to be more promising (p<.01)and hopeful (p<.05) and judged the odds of the best-case
scenario to occur as greater (p<.01) compared to opponents.
Conclusions: Increased knowledge does not imply a
more positive attitude towards human GLGE. Our data
indicates that especially factors related to trust and affect
may in ﬂuence attitudes towards GLGE. Together these
ﬁndings support the presumption that organizing a public
dialogue will enable public deliberation without in ﬂuencing
public opinion.
D. Houtman: None. S. Riedijk: None. B. Vijlbrief:
None. R. Hofstra: None.
P21.07B
Most issues covered but not in their full complexity: a
newspaper content analysis of ethical issues in predictivegenetic testing
B. M. Zimmermann, B. S. Elger, D. M. ShawInstitute of Biomedical Ethics, Basel, Switzerland
Predictive genetic testing is becoming more available to the
general population through direct-to-consumer genetic
testing. Its application raises many ethical issues ofconsiderable complexity. Broadsheet newspapers are one
of the public ’s main source of information on such scienti ﬁc
topics. We analysed all articles about predictive genetictesting published in The Guardian and the Daily Telegraph
between 2011 and 2016. Principles of Biomedical Ethics by
Beauchamp and Childress and a review of scienti ﬁc
literature served as a starting point for the deductive
analysis. The analysis was qualitative with semi-
quantitative aspects. We found that issues related to theprinciples of bene ﬁcence and autonomy were covered more
than aspects regarding the principles of justice and
nonmale ﬁcence. More speci ﬁcally, the medical bene ﬁts of
predictive genetic testing were preferred in newspaper
coverage over its potential harms. Many ethical issues were1802not portrayed in their full complexity, and there was a lack
of coverage regarding the autonomy-related issues Right not
to know and Incidental ﬁndings . With direct-to-consumer
genetic testing on the rise, the ethical issues regarding
predictive genetic testing are highly signi ﬁcant for society.
Medical professionals, journalists and other stakeholdersneed to improve the representation of such issues in
communication to the public, especially through broadsheet
newspapers as the public ’s main trusted source of informa-
tion. This study also provides a new methodological
approach on how to empirically assess ethical issues in
media coverage.
B.M. Zimmermann: None. B.S. Elger: None. D.M.
Shaw: None.
P21.08C
Risk perceptions for Type 2 diabetes and coronary heart
disease after receiving risk information - participants ofP5 FinHealth study
A. Haukkala
1, M. Vornanen1, O. Halmesvaara1,
M. Marttila2, H. Kääriäinen2, M. Perola2
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2National
Institute of Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
Providing risk information to people is expected to change
their perceptions of risk and motivate them to change their
behaviour. The aim of this presentation is to examine how
actual risk estimates correlate with perceived risk and howgenetic knowledge is related to these estimates.
Participants of FinHealth 2017 study received a pro ﬁle
based on clinical and self-reported measures. The pro ﬁle
included risk for developing type 2 diabetes (T2D) and risk
for developing coronary heart disease (CHD) in the next 10
years. After receiving the health pro ﬁle, 3384 participants
consented to P5 study to receive genetic and metabolomic
risk information. Those who consented to study answered
questions related to genetic knowledge and perceived riskfor CHD and T2D.
At the baseline, 19% of men in age group 50-59 had
increased risk (>10%) for CHD and 71% in oldest agegroup 60-69, respectively among women 2% and 17%. In
the youngest age group (30-39) only 4% and at least
moderate risk for T2D, while 33% were in that groupamong 60-69 years old males, respectively among women
11% and 40% had at least moderate risk. Only 10% of all
P5 respondents reported their risk to be high for CHD,while 33% reported their risk to be at least moderate for
T2D. Genetic knowledge was weakly related to perceived
T2D risk (r =-.05,p=.023) and CHD risk (r =-.06,p=.017).Respondents ’perceived risks were strongly related to
actual risk estimates. P5 study participants will receive new
risk estimates based on polygenic and metabolomic
analyses.
A. Haukkala: None. M. Vornanen: None. O. Halmes-
vaara: None. M. Marttila: None. H. Kääriäinen: None.
M. Perola: None.
P21.09D
Surveying the general public on genome editing: 10 tips
on how to do it to make it count
V. Romano, H. C. Howard
Uppsala University, Uppsala, SwedenSurveying the general public on a game-changing technol-
ogy such as CRISPR-Cas9 is essential for at least two mainreasons. First, surveying the general public aims at under-
standing people ’s attitudes and orientations about genome
editing which are relevant as they should inform, in someways, further public engagement, scienti ﬁc research and
policy. Second, it simultaneously educates the general
public about the surveyed matter and drives people ’s
attention on the subject in a chosen way. Surveying on any
subject, no matter how “merely descriptive ”the explicit
goal of the survey is, always comes as a selection of whathas to be considered relevant, why and how. In order for
such surveys to not be (too) biased and to increase the
knowledge about genome editing, they therefore need tofollow a structured design and rigorous methodology.We
analyzed the only 8 surveys on genome editing - published
worldwide in the last four years and fully dedicated to thissubject - and here present the comparative analysis of their
main strengths and weaknesses. We noticed that the
research design often tends to be identi ﬁed as the statistical
sample selection process and that ’s why we fear this might
weaken the heuristic range of the research itself. We suggest
how to structure the research design in order to diminish therisk to get expected results Research grants open call 2017
(Medicine and Health) Swedish Research CouncilType of
grant: Research Project GrantProject title: Ethical, legal andsocial issues of gene editing Project start: 2018-01-01
Project end: 2021-12-31
V. Romano: None. H.C. Howard: None.
P22
Ethical issues in geneticsAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1803P22.01A
Do international recommendations meet citizens' values
and needs regarding genomic information?
C. Mayeur
Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium
Introduction: We compare some of the main results of a
Belgian citizen forum (2018) on the use of genomic
information, with related recommendations of international
professional societies, such as the European Society ofHuman Genetics.
Materials and Methods: At the request of the Minister
of Public Health, we organized a panel of 32 citizens,selected to ensure maximal diversity. During three week-
ends, they debated and re ﬂected on the ethical, legal and
societal issues surrounding the use of genomic information,supported by experts of different backgrounds.
Results: Among the many needs and opinions expressed
by citizens, we focus on one key message. Citizens supportgenomic data sharing for the common good, which they
deﬁne as scienti ﬁc research that improves knowledge (on
both prevention and diagnostics) to build a fair societywhere everyone has an equal opportunity to live healthy.
However, their support hinges on three conditions:
1) No genetic discrimination: a person should not be a
prisoner of his/her genetic makeup
2) Privacy protection: the genome is an unique and
intimate part of the individual that warrants protection
3) Individual control: transparency, traceability and
decision-making
As genomics grows more and more important, it will
impact the lives of many citizens. However, recommenda-tions of international professional societies are based on
expert opinion.
We investigate whether the principles underlying these
recommendations are in line with fundamental values in
society.
Conclusion: Professional recommendations should be
informed by fundamental values and needs of citizens.
C. Mayeur: None.
P22.02B
Challenges of prenatal genetic counselling in two cases
of CNV of variable expressivity and incompletepenetrace
R. Stoeva
1, E. Henry2, M. T. Cheve2, C. Le Caignec3,
D. Martin Coignard11Medical Genetics Service, Hospital Le Mans, Le Mans,
France,2Service of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hospital
Le Mans, Le Mans, France,3Department of Medical
Genetics, University Hospital Nantes, Nantes, France
The dif ﬁculty of genetic counselling in case of f œtus carrier
of microdeletion or microduplication syndrome showing
variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance consists in
bringing appropriate prognosis about the postnatal devel-opment. The prognosis is more uncertain when the CNV is
inherited from a healthy parent. Here we present two cases
of prenatal diagnosis of 1q21.1 deletion with oppositepregnancy issues. The ﬁrst case is a second pregnancy of
healthy parents. During the second trimester US examina-
tion the AVSD was detected. The amniocentesis wasperformed and array-CGH showed 2,6 Mb deletion
including GJA5 and GJA8 , inherited by the father. The
parents were worried from the uncertain prognosis and thefamily history of relatives with developmental delay, autism
and heart defects. They choose to terminate the pregnancy
and applied for preimplantation diagnosis for next preg-nancy. The second case is a ﬁfth pregnancy of healthy
parents showing some learning dif ﬁculties. Two of 3
children had learning dif ﬁculties/epilepsy. The second
trimester US examination showed VSD and an amniocent-
esis was performed. The array-CGH showed 1,6 Mb
deletion in 1q21.1 including GJA5 and GJA8 , inherited
from the mother. The parents were not worried and the
pregnancy was maintained. A number of ethical questions
rise in an everyday clinical practice mainly announcing orno the CNV with uncertain pathogenicity and the place of
pregnancy termination and preimplantation diagnosis.
R. Stoeva: None. E. Henry: None. M.T. Cheve: None.
C. Le Caignec: None. D. Martin Coignard: None.
P22.03C
A survey of public attitudes toward genetic services in
Georgia
E. Kvaratskhelia
1, M. Kvintradze1, D. Chokoshvili2,
K. Dzagoevi1, S. Surmava1, E. Abzianidze1
1Tbilisi State Medical University, Dept. of Molecular and
Medical Genetics, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Centre for Biomedical Ethicsand Law, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Objective: The aim of the present study is to assess
knowledge and attitudes of Georgian population toward the
genetic testing.
Methods: A total of 491 individuals completed surveys.
The data were gathered using a convenience sampling.
Eligible participants must have been at least 18 years of age,1804Georgian-speaking. Respondents were recruited from the
annual scienti ﬁc festival 2018 held in Tbilisi, Tbilisi book
festival 2018 and scienti ﬁc conferences. Participants were
surveyed using a Likert-scale written questionnaire con-
ducted by medical students from Tbilisi State Medical
University.
Results: Positive attitude were found toward predictive
genetic testing. A majority of participants (77.4%) would
like to know whether they at risk of developing diseases.Moreover, about 65% of participant would like to test their
newborn child to learn which diseases they may develop in
adulthood. Most respondents (71.2%) are agreed that cou-ples planning a pregnancy should have a possibility to have
a carrier test. Only 20% of respondents agreed that carrier
screening for speci ﬁc diseases will lead to an inferior image
of people with these disorders.
Conclusions: Interest in genetic tests is high and attitudes
are largely positive in Georgian population. Such investi-gation is critical to ﬁnd out ways to start the discussion
between the public, policy makers, and healthcare profes-
sionals on these issues.
E. Kvaratskhelia: None. M. Kvintradze: None. D.
Chokoshvili: None. K. Dzagoevi: None. S. Surmava:
None. E. Abzianidze: None.
P22.04D
Between burdensome and knowledge - predictive genetictesting in two children from a mother diagnosed with
Huntington disease
L. Curteanu
1,2, C. Rusu3, C. Afuduloai3
1Saint Mary Emergency Hospital, Iasi, Romania,2Regional
Center of Medical Genetics - Iasi, Iasi, Romania,3Saint
Mary Emergency Hospital - Regional Center of Medical
Genetics, Iasi, Romania
Huntington disease (HD) is a late onset, progressive,
neurodegenerative autosomal dominant disorder. Given thisinheritance pattern, there has been a signi ﬁcant and rather
sensible controversy whether predictive genetic testing for
minors - in a condition for which there is no disease-modifying treatment - is ﬁt. The numerous ethical issues on
both sides of the debate refer not only to the psychological,
emotional and social impact of the decision making, butalso raise the question regarding the cognitive capacities of
the children in their different developmental stages and their
right to autonomy. The controversy of testing in minorswhere there is no medical bene ﬁt in the immediate future
needs to be challenged once again, given the current
perspective of the latest trials that cast a vision upon thepossibility of tangible treatments. Given the acknowl-
edgment of this new perspective, the discussion addressesthe case of a 39 y.o patient, severely affected, diagnosed
with Huntington disease, mother of two boys, aged 12 and
17 that show clinical signs. The purpose of this paper is to
explore the positive rami ﬁcations and possible negative
impacts from the predictive genetic testing for the children,
given the real possibility of a treatment.
L. Curteanu: None. C. Rusu: None. C.
Afuduloai: None.
P22.05A
Ethical solicitude in medical genetics as perceived from
a genetic counselor's perspective in the tribal-basedcommunity of Saudi Arabia
A. A. Qari
1, A. Kashmeeri2, M. Al-Sayed1
1King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2king Saud bin Abdulaziz university, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Introduction: The genetics domain is witnessing great
advances in diagnosing and predicting genetic diseases. Ina clinical setting, autosomal recessive genetic disorders are
frequently observed as a result of the high rate of
consanguinity. The advances in genomic technologies inrecent years have facilitated new tools for gene discovery in
humans. Such approaches have already proven to be
beneﬁcial for the identi ﬁcation of the genetic causes of
several Mendelian disorders. There is a debate over the
ethical dilemmas behind providing families with the genetic
test results and incidental ﬁndings identi ﬁed by the whole
exome sequencing. Thus, this vast source of information
can have a multitude of ethical and social implications both
for patients and healthcare providers. In this study we aim tostudy how families of affected children respond when they
receive incidental ﬁndings. Also we aim to identify how
healthcare professionals working within genetic counselingﬁelds descriptively abide by their role and the information-
sharing procedures.
Methods: This study was qualitative conducted at King
Faisal Specialist Hospital in Riyadh. It included a total of
fourteen parents, and a total of fourteen healthcare providers
working with children diagnosed with genetic diseases.
Results and conclusion: In this study six strong themes
emerged. This study explored the experiences of parents of
children affected with genetic diseases at the time ofreceiving the incidental ﬁndings. It also explored the
experiences of the healthcare providers attending these
families.
References: Abbort, Madue E. "The Evolution of Mod-
ern Medicine." Canadian Medical Association Journal 12.3
(1922): 182
A.A. Qari: None. A. Kashmeeri: None. M. Al-
Sayed: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1805P22.06B
Ethical aspects in genetic research
S. De1, H. Karjalainen2, M. Tringham2, A. Hopia2,
R. Tahvonen3, A. Pietilä4, K. Vähäkangas1
1School of Pharmacy/ Toxicology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland,
2Functional Foods Forum, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Turku, Turku, Finland,3Bio-Based Business and
Industry, Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke),
Jokioinen, Finland,4Department of Nursing Science,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland
Introduction: “Effects of ApoE4 genotype information and
intervention intensity on the ful ﬁlment of lifestyle changes
and sensory preferences ”(ApoE4mot) is a nutrigenetic
intervention study. Within its ethics work package, a
generally usable questionnaire is being developed to study
ethical aspects in genetic studies. Informed consent processis a signi ﬁcant step in the recruitment of participants and is
the focus of this questionnaire.
Methods and Materials: Participants were recruited
through advertisements from South Ostrobothnia, Finland.
A closed-ended ethics questionnaire was developed based
on literature and discussions among the research group. Onepart of the questionnaire assessed genetic knowledge and
the other parts probed opinions related to recruitment pro-
cess including informed consent. Answering options were“agree ”,“disagree ”and “don’t know ”. The questionnaire
wasﬁlled online. The answers are being analyzed through
descriptive statistical methods.
Results: The majority of the participants (250/281)
answered the ethics questionnaire. As to informed consent,
91% (228/250) thought that enough information was given,96% was happy with the way information was given and
99.6% felt that enough time was given to consider partici-
pation. Most (98%), felt that they understand what signingthe consent means. Although 38% thought that consent
should be asked each time their information is used in any
study, 54% thought asking once was enough.
Conclusion: Participants regarded the informed consent
process as satisfactory. The ethics questionnaire was found
to be a useful tool and is now being further developed andvalidated.
Funding: Academy of Finland, University of Eastern
Finland
S. De: None. H. Karjalainen: None. M. Tringham:
None. A. Hopia: None. R. Tahvonen: None. A. Pietilä:
None. K. Vähäkangas: None.P22.07C
Demarcating the ethical and legal boundaries of
Mitochondrial Replacement Therapy: A literature
review analysis
F. Noohi, A. Caul ﬁeld, Y. Joly
McGill, Montreal, QC, Canada
Mitochondrial Replacement Therapy (MRT) is a new type
ofin vitro fertilization that aims to prevent the transmission
of mitochondrial diseases (matrilineal transmission) byreplacing mutated mitochondrial DNA in unfertilized
oocytes or zygotes with normal mitochondria from a
healthy donor. Since as a result of MRT, permanentchanges are made to the germline that would be transmitted
through generations, this controversially so-called “three
parent IVF ”can be considered as a means of genetic
modiﬁcation. Besides the UK, which became the ﬁrst
country to approve MRT in 2015, only a few countries have
addressed MRT through public policy. In order to explorehow the interdependence of ethics, policy, and public views
can address questions that arise from new reproductive
technologies and analyze the in
ﬂuence of sociocultural
factors upon stakeholders ’motives for using MRT, we
conducted a systematic literature review analysis of relevant
academic sources according to Oxford ’s Bodleian Libraries
review guidelines. Next, we reviewed and assessed
pertinent legislation, policies, and ethical guidelines, in
both the research and clinical contexts, in Canada, the US,the UK, and Mexico whose approaches in governing this
controversial technique range from strict bans with serious
consequences to an absence of policy. The major themesidenti ﬁed in our review included, safety and ef ﬁcacy,
concerns over germline modi ﬁcation, issues of identity,
concerns over three genetic contributors, and distributivejustice. Next, the interdisciplinary knowledge produced in
theﬁrst phase will be used to analyze perceptions and
expectations and concerns of Canadian stakeholders withregard to MRT.
F. Noohi: None. A. Caul ﬁeld:None. Y. Joly: None.
P22.08D
Earlier, more and better information in families with a
genetic disease
J. Hennessy
1, M. Amador2,3, M. Monin4, G. Coraelli4,
A. Heinzmann4, S. Heide3, E. Schaerer3, M. Spentchian3,
A. Herson3,5, S. Sayah1,5, E. Petit4, D. Heron3, S. Tezenas
du Montcel6, M. Gargiulo7,8,3, A. Durr4,3
1ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Inserm U 1127, CNRS
UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UMR_S 1127, Paris,1806Paris, France,2Paris ALS Center, Departement of
Neurology, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris,
France, Paris, France,3Department of Genetics, APHP,
Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris,
France,4ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Inserm U 1127,
CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UMR_S 1127,Paris, Paris, France,
5Institute of Myology, Pitié
Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris,
France,6Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre
Louis de Santé Publique, Medical Information Unit, Pitié-
Salpêtrière Charles-Foix University Hospital, Assistance
Publique –Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 75013, Paris,
France, Paris, France,7Institut of Myologie, Pitié
Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris,
France,8Laboratoire de Psychologie Clinique et
Psychopathologie, EA 4056, Université Paris Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut de Psychologie, Paris,
France., Paris, France
Introduction: Genetic counselling relies on information
circulation within families. One issue of information aboutgenetic risk is reproductive decision making. The aim was
to compare attitudes in different neurogenetic diseases such
as Huntington disease, spinocerebellar ataxias, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Myotonic
dystrophy and assess evolution for Huntington disease
since 2000.
Materials and Methods: A questionnaire was distributed
since June 2018.
Results: We analysed 370 completed questionnaires (200
HD, 81 SCAs, 56 DM1, 28 ALS, 5 CJD). Affected indi-
viduals were 34.9%, spouses 27.6%, at-risks persons 21%
and premanifest carriers 10.1%, or non-carriers 6.5%. Meanage at response was 56.5± 15.5 (18-85), signi ﬁcantly older
in ataxias (p<0.001). Only 12.5% knew about the French
law, stipulating obligatory information, but 66.6% said theydid inform offspring.
37% wished having children, their family disease inter-
fered: 85% declared their disease justi ﬁed prenatal or pre-
implantation diagnosis, 67% to interrupt a future pregnancy.
Disease gravity estimated by the participant was positively
correlated to turn to preimplantation diagnosis (p<0.01).
Between 2000 and 2019 participants had been informed
about their risk earlier (33.8±13.2 years versus 28.8±14.9
p<0.05); they were informed more often by parents, 13.8%versus 51.2%; less by clinicians, 36.6% versus 18.2%; by
other family members 20.7% versus 14.0% and not directly,
23.4% versus 16.5% (p<0.001) and testing before the age of18 was considered positively in 13.8% versus 30.1%
(p<0.005).
Conclusion: Prospective comparison showed that infor-
mation is given earlier, more frequently and wished to be
even earlier for the offspring.Grant references: Agence de la Biomédecine
J. Hennessy: None. M. Amador: None. M. Monin:
None. G. Coraelli: None. A. Heinzmann: None. S. Heide:
None. E. Schaerer: None. M. Spentchian: None. A.
Herson: None. S. Sayah: None. E. Petit: None. D. Heron:
None. S. Tezenas du Montcel: None. M. Gargiulo: None.
A. Durr: None.
P22.11C
searching for secondary ﬁndings, considering
actionability and preserving the right not to know
M. Vincent
1, M. Nizon1,S .J u l i a2, S. Bézieau1, B. Cogné1,
L. Pasquier3, B. Isidor1
1CHU Nantes, nantes, France,2CHU Toulouse, Toulouse,
France,3CHU Rennes, Rennes, France
As use of high-throughput sequencing is rapidly growing in
the clinical setting, vital questions need to be raised over the
most appropriate course of action regarding the activesearch for disease-causing variants extraneous to the clinical
question. Although the American College of Genetics and
Genomics recommends a list of these secondary ﬁndings be
identi ﬁed in all patients, other professional bodies are not in
agreement, a view which we share for several reasons. First,
as we discuss, the use of actionability as the criterion fordetermining whether or not to report secondary ﬁndings is
problematic, particularly as it is currently lacking a clear,
precise and widely agreed upon de ﬁnition. Second, the
question remains as to how bene ﬁcial the knowledge of
these variants is to individuals ’health, particularly given the
uncertainty associated with the pathogenicity of some of thevariants. We suggest it is critical that reasonable choices
concerning the release of data resulting from high-
throughput sequencing are made and that it is appropriateto wait for a consensus among scientists on the pathogeni-
city and clinical utility of disclosing secondary ﬁndings
before integrating this into sequencing practices in theclinical setting.
M. Vincent: None. M. Nizon: None. S. Julia: None. S.
Bézieau: None. B. Cogné: None. L. Pasquier: None. B.
Isidor: None.
P22.12D
Genetic discrimination concerns in travel insurance - the
pre-existing medical condition rule
K. K. Barlow-Stewart
1, B. V. Murillo1, M. Otlowski2,
A. Doble1
1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,2University of
Tasmania, Hobart, AustraliaAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1807Internationally steps have been taken to prevent or limit
genetic discrimination in life insurance, yet travel insurance
remains unregulated and has received little attention to date.
An on-line survey explored the experiences of consumers
applying for a range of risk-rated insurance products whohad had predictive genetic testing 2010-2016 and asympto-
matic at the time of application. Recruitment was conducted
through Australian support groups and research organisa-tions. 67/79 respondents at risk for one or more of 76
conditions were valid for analysis. Of the 31/67 who
applied for travel insurance after genetic testing, seven[hereditary breast/ovarian cancer - HBOC (4), cardiovas-
cular (2), neuromuscular (1)] reported being charged higher
premiums (1) or refusal (5) with the reasons cited as havinga pre-existing condition. Another respondent at risk for
HBOC reported high anxiety that she had answered “no”to
the pre-existing question and may have dif ﬁculties claiming
if she developed breast cancer. An audit of application
forms for travel insurance available in Australia found none
included any reference to positive genetic test results as acriterion that meets the de ﬁnition of a ‘Pre-Existing Medical
Condition ’. While limitations of the survey methodology
prevent con ﬁrmation of their asymptomatic status, there is
the potential that these consumers inferred themselves that
they had the condition as a result of their test. This
emphasizes the need for clear guidelines for providers oftravel insurance, education of consumers as to the meaning
of their test result and of the importance of the language
used by professionals when returning the result.
K.K. Barlow-Stewart: None. B.V. Murillo: None. M.
Otlowski: None. A. Doble: None.
P23
Legal implications of advances in genetics
P23.01A
The GDPR and the research exemption: considerationson the necessary safeguards for research biobanks
S. Ciara
1,2, S. Slokenberga3,4, D. Mascalzoni2,4
1Middlesex University, London, United Kingdom,2EURAC,
Bolzano, Italy,3Lund University, Lund, Sweden,4Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into
force in May 2018. The aspiration of providing for a high
level of protection to individuals ’personal data, risked
placing considerable constraints on scienti ﬁc research, that
was contrary to various research traditions across the EU.
Therefore, along with the set of carefully outlined datasubjects ’rights, the GDPR also provides for a two-level
framework to enable derogations from these rights when
scienti ﬁc research is concerned. First, by directly invoking
provisions of the GDPR on a condition that safeguards that
must include ‘technical and organisational measures ’are in
place. Second and in addition to that, through the MemberState law. Although these derogations are allowed in the
name of scienti ﬁc research, they can simultaneously be seen
as challenging in light of the ethical requirements and long-existed protection standards in biobanking that have been
set forth in various research-related soft legal tools,
international treaties and other legal instruments. In thispaper we review such soft legal tools, international treaties
and other legal instruments that regulate the use of health
research data. We report on the results of this review, andanalyse the rights contained within the GDPR and Article
89 of the GDPR vis-à-vis these instruments. These
instruments were also reviewed to provide guidance onpossible safeguards that should be followed when imple-
menting any derogations. To conclude, we will offer some
commentary on limits of the derogations under the GDPRand appropriate safeguards to ensure compliance with
standard ethical requirements.
S. Ciara: None. S. Slokenberga: None. D.
Mascalzoni: None.
P23.02B
Achieving a moratorium on the use of genetic test results
in Australian life insurance: a case study
J. M. Tiller
1, M. Otlowski2, P. Lacaze1
1Public Health Genomics, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia,2University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia
Introduction: Historically, Australian life insurance com-
panies have been permitted to use genetic test results of any
kind in life insurance underwriting, and legally discriminate
on that basis. Despite international trends towards banningor restricting this practice, the Australian insurance industry
has, until recently, opposed any restriction of access to
applicants ’genetic results. This has resulted in the deterred
uptake of clinical genetic testing and reduced participation
in medical research, and has compromised progress in
genomic medicine for Australia (Tiller et al, Front. PublicHealth, 2018).
Methods: In 2016, the Australian Genetic Non-
Discrimination Working Group formed to address issuesof genetic discrimination in Australia, especially in life
insurance. Over the past 2 years, we undertook research,
lobbied government, and gave evidence at public hearingsfor a national Parliamentary Inquiry. We also appeared in
the media and surveyed hundreds of Australians with1808genetic mutations about their experiences of insurance
discrimination.
Results: The survey data we collected indicated a wide-
spread issue, based on consumer-reported breaches of cur-
rent policy by insurance companies. In early 2018, the
Parliamentary Inquiry recommended an urgent ban on usinggenetic results in life-insurance underwriting. In late 2018,
the peak insurance industry body (Financial Services
Council) proposed a moratorium to commence in mid-2019.
Conclusion: Achieving a moratorium on the use of
genetic test results in Australian life insurance underwriting
was a concerted effort requiring the cooperation of numer-ous groups and individuals and signi ﬁcant time and
resource commitments. This case study is highly relevant
for all jurisdictions considering these issues.
J.M. Tiller: None. M. Otlowski: None. P.
Lacaze: None.
P23.03C
Improvement of the Russian intellectual property law in
order to protect the results of genomic research
A. A. Inyushkin, V. D. Ruzanova, E. S. Kryukova,
I. S. Povarov
Samara National Research University, Samara, Russian
Federation
Introduction: The Civil Code of the Russian Federation
contains an exhaustive list of intellectual property that isgranted legal protection, but it lacks "the results of genomic
research". At the same time, the results of genomic studies
require legal protection. For the purpose of legal protectionof the genomic research results, it is necessary to apply the
mechanisms used in the ﬁeld of intellectual property that
meet international standards.
Materials and Methods: The aim of the study was to
improve a legal basis for protection of the results of geno-
mic research. A method for analyzing the doctrine, judicialpractice, comparative legal methods, as well as the method
of legal modeling were used. The speci ﬁc mechanisms were
proposed to protect the results of genomic research.
Results: To protect the results of genomic research in the
Russian legal system, the legal regime of copyright, patent
law, as well as trade secrets can be applied. In addition, wehave de ﬁned the limits of applying the legal regime of
intellectual property to protect the results of genomic
research in the Russian legal system.
Conclusion: The recommendations were made to provide
the protection of genomic research results. In particular, the
interpretation of Russian legislation on intellectual propertyobjects is carried out in the aspect of protection of the
genomic research results. In addition, comments areprovided on the decisions of the courts of the Russian
Federation on disputes related to genomic research.
The study was funded by RFBR according to the research
project№18-29-14073
A.A. Inyushkin: None. V.D. Ruzanova: None. E.S.
Kryukova: None. I.S. Povarov: None.
P23.04D
Analysis of the procedure for agreement of subjects ofthe genomic information in the Russian Federation to
obtain their biological material for research
V. D. Ruzanova, I. S. Povarov, E. S. Kryukova,
A. A. Inyushkin
Samara National Research University, Samara, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Legislation in the ﬁeld of obtaining the
genomic information in the Russian Federation consists of a
large number of regulations and does not have a precisesystem. This leads to inconsistency of legal norms and
creates a problem of the agreement for obtaining the
biological material for its analyzing, classi ﬁcation, account-
ing and subsequent use.
Materials and Methods: The genomic information traf-
ﬁcking, as well as judicial practice including the practice of
the European Court of Human Rights were analyzed in the
study. A method for analyzing the doctrine, judicial prac-
tice, comparative legal methods as well as the method of
legal modeling were used.
Results: The study suggests the systematization of cases
of compulsory and optional coordination of the form, pro-cedure, and conditions in which agreement must be
achieved for obtaining biological material for the purpose of
subsequent identi ﬁcation of genomic information. A sys-
tematic approach to the analysis of the legal system in the
Russian Federation has being developed.
Conclusion: The results correlate with legislation and
judicial practice in the Russian Federation and in foreign
legal systems. The similarities and differences in approa-
ches to obtaining consent to the processing of biologicalmaterial are revealed. Optimal approaches to the application
of the normative base in the ﬁeld of genomic information
collection are developed. The study was funded by RFBRaccording to the research project №18-29-14073
V.D. Ruzanova: None. I.S. Povarov: None. E.S.
Kryukova: None. A.A. Inyushkin: None.
P23.05A
Patent Protection of the Inventions Created by theTherapeutic CloningAbstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1809L. Rudzite1,2
1University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia,2Riga Stradins
University, Riga, Latvia
Introduction: One of the latest and most controversial
issues of biotechnology is therapeutic cloning as it
comprises morally and ethically ambiguous question
regarding embryo stem cell research. As inventors andscientists tend to protect their intellectual property and
resources applying for a patent, opposing debate occurs as
to the feasibility to grant patent protection. Notwithstandingthe controversy, scientists and inventors have possibility to
avail patent protection also for inventions of therapeutic
cloning.
Materials: books, journals, reports as well as law and
case-law in different languages.
Methods: 1) comparative method; 2) historical method;
3) analytical method; 4) inductive and deductive methods;
5) logical method; 6) grammatical, systemic and tele-
ological methods.
Results: controversy exists as to what interests of an
embryo prevail - rights to be born, rights to be born healthy
and rights to health or rights to human dignity. The conceptof‘being healthy ’leaves a margin of interpretation - whe-
ther ‘healthy ’includes generally stated standard in the state
or it may comprise the standard which an individual mayattain if it exceeds the generally stated level. The debate
increases even more in countries which have stated the
status of an embryo at a constitutional level. Inventionsregarding the therapeutic cloning may be patented in the
USA as such, including all types of patents even embryo
stem cells. Whereas, amongst the European States may beclaimed via micro-biological invention approach, including
all types of patents but not involving methods which leads
to destruction of human embryo even comprising super-numerary embryos.
L. Rudzite: None.
P24
Other relevant ELPAG issues in genetics
P24.02C
Modelling the economic impact of next generationsequencing on childhood cancer management —a
microsimulation approach
O. Tan, D. Scho ﬁeld, R. ShresthaGenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic
Medicine, Macquarie Park, Australia
Introduction: Economic cost of cancer care could be
improved via the implementation of precision medicine.
The aims of this study is to i) determine the costs andhospital utilisation by childhood cancer patient through
current practice; and ii) develop a microsimulation model to
evaluate the cost and bene ﬁt from applying next generation
sequencing (NGS) in the management of childhood cancer.
The model will be ﬂexible to allow for updating input
parameters in future.
Materials and Methods: We used linked datasets of
children under 18 year of age, living in New South Wales
(NSW), Australia, who have had cancer as base population.Their records were extracted from the NSW Central Cancer
Registry and were linked to mortality database and the
hospital datasets. Individual patient ’s hospital services
usage was determined from the hospital datasets. The
simulation will mainly focus on actionable variants identi-
ﬁed, and change in management due to the NGS result. The
simulation will be benchmarked against the current evi-
dence, and sensitivity analysis will be performed.
Results: Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, neuroblastoma,
and Hodgkin's lymphoma, accounted for 30% of the
reported cases. The annual cost of hospitalisation was $
114,000. Early diagnosis and treatment before the cancerspread are critical drivers to lower costs and hospital utili-
sation. In our simulation model, 40% of the patients would
be diagnosed with actionable variants.
Conclusions: We have successfully determined the
baseline cost of caring for childhood cancer. Our micro-
simulation model will allow us to simulate the impact ofNGS on costs and patients ’care.
O. Tan: None. D. Scho ﬁeld:None. R. Shrestha: None.
P24.03D
Predictors of colonoscopy uptake: psychosocial and
healthcare factors
A. Ciuca1, S. Pintea1, A. Baban1, R. Moldovan1,2
1Department of Psychology, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania,2Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHSFoundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
frequent form of cancer worldwide, and approximately one
third of cases have a positive family history of CRC or
associated cancers. Colonoscopy is one of the most1810effective methods of screening for CRC. Uptake of
colonoscopy is suboptimal, and many countries lack a
national screening programme. Our study aims at identify-
ing and ranking the factors contributing to a positive
decision to participate in colonoscopy screening in a sample
population at risk, in order to inform psychosocialinterventions, such as genetic counselling.
Method: The study included 98 individuals aged over 50
years, recruited from senior centres in Romania. Measuresincluded socio-demographic variables, frequency of colo-
noscopy, previous recommendations for screening and
preventive measures, health literacy and family history ofcancer. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis
was used to establish the discriminative value for each
variable between positive and negative decision for colo-noscopy screening. Area Under Curve (AUC) coef ﬁcients
and effect size parameters were calculated.
Results: 23.5% participants reported previous colono-
scopy screening. ROC curve analysis shows that colono-
scopy uptake is best discriminated by perceived bene ﬁts of
screening (AUC =0.711, d =0.787, p =0.001), previous
recommendations for screening (AUC =0.689, d =0.697,
p=0.007) and previous recommendations for preventive
measures (AUC =0.675, d =0.642, p =0.011).
Conclusions: Results show that recommendations from
healthcare professionals towards colonoscopy adherence
and preventive measures and highlighting the bene ﬁts of
screening were associated with improved colonoscopy
uptake. These results can further inform genetic counselling
sessions by bringing empirical evidence to emphasizescreening recommendations in individuals at risk for CRC.
A. Ciuca: None. S. Pintea: None. A. Baban: None. R.
Moldovan: None.
P24.04A
“It is written in our genes! What people would like to
know? ”Economic approaches to reveal preferences for
genetic testing. Methods and results based on two
projects (SEQUAPRE and PRESAGE) in HealthEconomics
A. Pélissier
1,2, C. Thauvin Robinet3,2, L. Olivier3,2,
C. Peyron1,2
1LEDi, université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon,
France,2FHU Translad, université de Bourgogne/CHU
Dijon, Dijon, France,3CHU Dijon, Dijon, France
Introduction: With the rapid spread of genome sequencing
in medicine, it's important to know its acceptability for
patients and potential users. Which elements of a genetictest are important to them: do they want to know all results,
whatever they are? Under what conditions? HealthEconomics, thought discrete choice experiments (DCEs),
allows to reveal and analyze individual and societal
preferences for genetic testing. Here, we will present two
studies we conducted in France. They illustrate how Health
Economics can investigate the value of genetic information
and apprehend the diffusion of genomic technologies.
Materials and Methods: SEQUAPRE investigated
individual preferences . 513 parents of children with rare
diseases who would bene ﬁt from NGS were surveyed.
PRESAGE investigated societal preferences . 2501
respondents representative of the French population were
surveyed. In each study, DCE was aimed to investigatepreferences as regard to different characteristics that can
describe a genetic test such as nature and cost of the results.
Econometric analysis investigated the presence of pre-ference heterogeneity.
Results: They stressed how genetic information is valued
from individual and societal perspectives and the hetero-geneities among respondents: the value of uncertain and
secondary results, the role of the clinician in the decision
making-process, the willingness to pay for the test.
Conclusions: In the context of “Plan Médecine France
Génomique 2025 ”, our results show the importance to
understand individual and societal preferences to favour thediffusion of the technology.
Funding: Studies were funded by Regional Council of
Bourgogne Franche-Comté and FEDER. PRESAGE wasalso funded by Fondation Maladies Rares.
A. Pélissier: None. C. Thauvin Robinet: None. L.
Olivier: None. C. Peyron: None.
P24.05B
Incidental ﬁndings in clinical exome sequencing
H. G. Yntema
1, V. van der Schoot2, L. Haer-Wigman1,
A. J. M. Oerlemans3, M. van Koolwijk1, F. Tammer1,
Y. Arens2, H. G. Brunner1,2, L. E. L. M. Vissers1,
I. Feenstra1
1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Dept Clinical Genetics,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht,Netherlands,
3Scienti ﬁc Centre for Quality of Healthcare,
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
In our Genome Diagnostics laboratory, whole exome
sequencing has been performed for more than 15,000 indexcases in the last 5 years. After analysis of genes associated
with the patient ’s condition (tier 1), analysis of the entire
protein coding sequence can be performed. Especially tier 2has an intrinsic risk to uncover incidental ﬁndings (IFs),
referring to the unintended identi ﬁcation of (likely)Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1811pathogenic variants unrelated to the initial clinical question,
but of possible medical relevance to patients and their
families. In total 15 IFs (0.1%) were detected in tier 1,
mainly in the gene panel including all OMIM genes. As
expected, the risk of IFs in the second tier is higher: 85 IFs
were detected in 5,358 analyses (1.6%). For some diseases,this 1.6% chance of an IF is even higher than the chance of
a positive diagnosis. Only 58 of these 85 IFs were located in
the 59 medically actionable genes reported by the AmericanCollege of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG),
indicating that in our diagnostic setting there is 1.0% chance
ofﬁnding a pathogenic variant in one of the ACMG genes.
This number differs 2.5-fold from the incidence of
secondary ﬁndings (deliberate analysis of available data)
in these genes in our population (incidence 2.6%, Haer-Wigman et al. EJHG (2019)). Strikingly, one third of the
IFs reported by us are located in genes that are not on the
ACMG gene list. These results ask for a revision ofinternational guidelines on the reporting of IFs in
clinical care.
H.G. Yntema: None. V. van der Schoot: None. L.
Haer-Wigman: None. A.J.M. Oerlemans: None. M. van
Koolwijk: None. F. Tammer: None. Y. Arens: None. H.
G. Brunner: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. I.
Feenstra: None.
P24.06C
Long-term economic impacts of exome sequencing for
suspected monogenic disorders
L. Rynehart
1, D. Scho ﬁeld1, R. Shrestha1, Z. Stark2,3,4,
S. White2,3,4
1Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia,2Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia,
3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia,4Melbourne Genomics Health
Alliance, Melbourne, Australia
Background: Exome and genome sequencing (ES/GS) has
high diagnostic and clinical utility in rare genetic disease
diagnosis. However, the current health economic evidencebase to support widespread adoption and reimbursement is
very limited.
Aim: To undertake the ﬁrst cost-effectiveness analysis of
ES for suspected monogenic disorders in comparison with
usual diagnostic care, incorporating forecasting of both
patient and family outcomes over a 20-year horizon.
Methods: A cohort of 80 infants who underwent ES and
usual diagnostic care in parallel were used to model incre-
mental cost and health outcomes (using quality adjusted lifeyears, QALYs) attributable to ES. Three models were
developed: (1) outcomes in patients only, (2) outcomes inpatients and ﬁrst-degree relatives as a result of cascade
testing, (3) outcomes in patients and ﬁrst-degree relatives
including parental reproductive outcomes.
Results: When the directly observed cost and health
outcomes of the cohort participants were forecast over 20
years, the use of ES resulted in a total gain of 7.63 QALYsfor the cohort and an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER) of AUD$24,887.80 per additional QALY gained.
When cascade testing in ﬁrst-degree relatives was added to
the model, cost-effectiveness was substantially increased,
generating a total gain of 16.15 QALYs and an ICER of
AUD$12,331.17. When parental reproductive outcomeswere added to the model, this produced the most cost-
effective outcome, with a total QALY gain of 40.55 and an
ICER of AUD$11,899.69.
Discussion and Conclusions: ES in suspected mono-
genic disorders becomes more cost effective as the bene ﬁts
of cascade testing and reproductive outcomes are realised.
L. Rynehart: None. D. Scho ﬁeld: None. R. Shrestha:
None. Z. Stark: None. S. White: None.
P24.07D
The role of personality and price on interest in direct-to-
consumer genetic testing in a UK sample
H. Davies
1, R. Wootton1, O. Davis2, C. Haworth1,2
1University of Bristol School of Psychological Science,
Bristol, United Kingdom,2University of Bristol Medical
School, Bristol, United Kingdom
Introduction: The accuracy and accessibility of direct-to-
consumer genetic tests (DTCGT) has increased rapidly inthe last few years. Consequently, it is important to research
who is using these tests and why. This study explored the
underlying psychosocial factors that impact on interest inDTCGT, including the in ﬂuences of personality and price
(£149 versus free-of-charge) on the decision-making
process.
Methods: Participants ( N=168, average age =18-25
years), recruited via social media and email, completed an
online survey including the 44-item Big-Five PersonalityInventory. This measured: Neuroticism; Extraversion;
Conscientiousness; Openness; Agreeableness. Additional
questions measured levels of interest in DTCGT and howthese vary as a function of price.
Results: Increased conscientiousness was associated with
decreased interest in free-of-charge DTCGT, perhaps aresult of the perception that genetic tests pose a greater
threat to mental health than a bene ﬁt to physical health. In
participants over 25 years, interest in £149 DTCGT wasassociated with increased openness. Extraversion was
associated with decreased interest in free DTCGT in 18-251812year olds. Neuroticism and agreeableness did not predict
interest. 86% of participants asserted a GP recommendation
would heighten their interest.
Conclusion: Personality and price both affected interest
in DTCGT. Interest peaked when tests were free-of-charge
and with a GP recommendation. This suggests the UK ’s use
of genomic medicine will attract signi ﬁcant interest, butpatients with different personality traits may require per-
sonalised support during the consent process. We are cur-
rently exploring the UK public ’s awareness and acceptance
of genomic medicine to further inform NHS consent
procedures.
H. Davies: None. R. Wootton: None. O. Davis: None.
C. Haworth: None.Abstracts from the 52ndEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG). . . 1813