European Journal of Human Genetics (2019) 27:870 –1041
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0408-3
MEETING ABSTRACTS
Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics
Conference: Electronic Posters
© European Society of Human Genetics 2019
June 16 –19, 2018, Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan Italy
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was
reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scienti ﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract selections.
Disclosure Information: In order to help readers form their own judgments of potential bias in published abstracts, authors
are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests.
Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered
"Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Signi ﬁcant".
E-P01 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics
E-P01.01
Parent of origin in familial 22q11.2 deletions impacts fullscale intelligence quotient scores
D. E. McGinn1,2, M. Unolt3,4, T. B. Crowley1, B. S. Emanuel1,5,
E. H. Zackai1,5, E. Moss1, B. Morrow6, B. Nowakowska7,J .
Vermeesch8, A. Swillen8, D. M. McDonald-McGinn1,5
1The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
United States,2Davidson College, Davidson, NC, United
States,3La Sapienza, Rome, Italy,4Ospedale Bambino Gesu,
Rome, Italy,5Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,6Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States,
7Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,8KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium
Background: Familial 22q11.2 deletions are thought to
have a negative impact on mean Full Scale IQ scores(MFSIQ) in affected offspring, however, parent of origin
(PO) effect has not been examined.
Methods: We compared MFSIQ on children of affected
parents from Philadelphia (N =26) and Leuven (N =26),
assessed using the age appropriate Wechsler Intelligence
Scale, in those with familial v. de novo deletions and
maternally v. paternally inherited familial deletions. Wethen compared this data to de novo cases where research
based PO studies were completed (N =57) in NY.
Results: MFSIQ (66.4) for familial deletions was
statistically lower (p =.01) than for de novo deletions
(N=399, MFSIQ =76.2). MFSIQ for children with mater-
nally inherited deletions (63.7) was statistically lower
(p=.03) than for paternally inherited deletions (72.0). As
compared with the NY cohort where the MFSIQ for
maternal deletions (N =37, MFSIQ =73.41) was no different
(p=0.67) than paternal deletions (N =20, MFSIQ =75.2).
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings con ﬁrm the association of
lower FSIQ scores in familial versus de novo 22q11.2
deletions. We also observed the novel association of lowerMFSIQ scores in maternally v. paternally inherited familial
deletions in contrast to de novo deletions where no
difference was observed based on PO. Thus, a maternallyinherited familial deletion is a signi ﬁcant risk factor for
poorer cognitive outcome. Confounding factors could
include maternal comorbidities, mitochondrial effects,epigenetics, assortative mating, socioeconomics, grand-
parental engagement, etc. to explain this ﬁnding. Regard-
less, this data serves as an important adjunct to traditionalgenetic counseling for women with 22q11.2DS in the
prenatal and preconception setting.
D.E. McGinn: None. M. Unolt: None. T.B. Crowley:
None. B.S. Emanuel: None. E.H. Zackai: None. E. Moss:
None. B. Morrow: None. B. Nowakowska: None. J.
Vermeesch: None. A. Swillen: None. D.M. McDonald-1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:McGinn: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau,
symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Natera.
E-P01.02
Reevaluation of ADAM12 as ef ﬁcient marker for X
chromosome trisomy prenatal biochemical screening forimproving care of associated clinically important disorders
of postnatal development
M. Macek sr.1, D. Springer2, H. Klu čková1, R. Vlk3, I. pálová1,
D. Chudoba1, D. Novotná1, L. Dvo řáková1, M. Simandlová1,M .
Turnovec1, H. Cuckle4
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical
Faculty of Charles University and University Hospital Motol,Prague, Czech Republic,
2Intitute of Medical Biochemistry and
Laboratory Diagnostics of the General University Hospital and
of the First Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague,Czech Republic,
3Department of Obstetrics and Gyneacology,
2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University and University
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,4Columbia
University, New York, NY, United States
Introduction: ADAM12 assures bioavailibility of IGF-1/IGF-
2 for growth, differentiation and neurogenesis and is expressed
in the trophoblast. Trisomy X (TX) is the most common
chromosomal abnormality (est. 1:1000 females) with a variablea phenotype, commonly associated with renal/urogenital
abnormalities, developmental del ay, depression, autism, schi-
zophrenia and cerebral cortex hypo-/hyperplasia. In this regard,we have retrospectively validated this biomarker in prenatal
aneuploidy screening in a representative Czech cohort.
Material and Methods: ADAM12-S serum levels were
measured in 1534 frozen maternal sera by Del ﬁa ADAM12
research kit (Perkin Elmer) using time-resolved ﬂuoroim-
munoassay (within 9th-18th weeks of gestation) atpercentile level distribution <5, 6-10, 11-25, 25-49, 50,
51-75 and 76-100. We assessed screening ef ﬁcacy of
autosomal (70) and heterochromosomal (30) aneuploidies.
Results and discussion: Levels of ADAM12 in all
percentile categories were increasing by 15 ng/ml/day
(p<0.000001). Detection rates in category <25th percentilefor T21 was 46.67% (45 cases), for T18 57.14% (7), T13
100% (7), triploidy 100% (10), TX 87% (8), monosomy X
12.5% (8) and monosomy X mosaic 16.66% (6).
Conclusions: Although ADAM12 does not satisfactorily
detect T21, it is sensitive for the detection of T13, triploidy and
TX. Decreased ADAM12 levels could be due to defective Xchromosome inactivation, as ind ependently suggested by XIST
overexpression associated with psychiatric disorders and TX.
Signiﬁcantly decreased ADAM12 levels are a ssociated with
placental dysfunction and impaired CNS differentiation. Only
ADAM12 enables prenatal scree ning of developmental andpsychiatric disorders related to TX, and fosters their early
prevention and eventually also therapy.
Support
00064203 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022.
M. Macek sr.: None. D. Springer: None. H. Klu čková:
None. R. Vlk: None. I. pálová: None. D. Chudoba: None.
D. Novotná: None. L. Dvo řáková: None. M. Simandlová:
None. M. Turnovec: None. H. Cuckle: None.
E-P01.03
Cytogenetic abnormalities in amniocytes and ﬁbroblasts of
abortion material diagnosed in the Laboratory of MedicalGenetics - Varna for a 10 year period
M. Tsvetkova1,2, M. Stoyanova1, M. Levkova1, T. Ruseva1,V .
Miteva1, L. Angelova1
1Medical University Varna, Varna, Bulgaria,2University
Hospital St. Marina, Varna, Bulgaria
Introduction: Amniocentesis is the most widely used
method of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis for its high sen-
sitivity though the risk from the manipulation. Data show
that 50% of all clinically recognized pregnancies are due toaneuploidy and 5% - structural chromosomal
abnormalities (SCA).
Materials and Methods: Cytogenetic study was per-
formed in 721 samples of amniotic ﬂuid and 19 from
ﬁbroblasts. Karyotype was analyzed on GTG-banded
metaphases on cultures of amniocytes and ﬁbroblasts,
according to the standard protocol.
Results: Overall abnormality rate in amniocytes was
4,32%, mainly with high maternal biochemical risk. Thesewere trisomy 21 (2,2%), trisomy 18 (0,6%), -chromosome
numerical and SCA 3 (0,4%); 1 (0,14%) with unbalanced
karyotype; 1 (0,14%) - a carrier of two different transloca-tions. SCA were identi ﬁed in 5 (0,7%) cases indicated for
familial rearrangements: 2 balanced translocations, 2
inversions and 1 derivative chromosome, due to three waytranslocation in the father. Ultrasound data on aneuploidy
enabled the detection of 1 fetus (0,14%) with combined
numerical and structural karyotype of paternal origin.
The pathology In the ﬁbroblasts was 36,8%: trisomy 18,
mosaic translocation 21, one trisomy 11, 13 and 16 and
mosaic trisomy 2.
Conclusion: Nowadays amniocentesis is still a feasible
tool for detecting structural chromosomal aberrations in
1,4%, which NIPT would fail to diagnose. Analyzing theresults of amniocentesis helps us to determine prenatal
detection rate of chromosomal aberrations and proper
genetic counseling of pregnant women. The pathologyfound in this study of ﬁbroblasts con ﬁrms that most of the
early abortions are due to aneuploidy.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 871M. Tsvetkova: None. M. Stoyanova: None. M.
Levkova: None. T. Ruseva: None. V. Miteva: None. L.
Angelova: None.
E-P01.04
Molecular dissection of fetal anomalies by using arrayCGH analysis - the opportunities and challenges
I. Dimova1, V. Peicheva2, P. Chaveeva3, V. Stratieva3,M .
Yankova4, K. Kamenarova2, D. Markov5, A. Shterev3,V .
Djonov6, R. Kaneva2
1Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Molecular
Medicine Center, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3SAGBAL "Dr Shterev", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4MBAL Serdika,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,5Medical Center Markoff, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
6Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Background: The systematic review of the literature for the
use of array CGH in prenatal diagnostics provides with
evidence for the signi ﬁcantly higher sensitivity of this
method in the elucidation of high risk pregnancies, espe-
cially for structural fetal anomalies. In this study, we eval-
uated the diagnostic rate of array CGH analysis in cases ofdisturbed fetal development and high reproductive risk in
the family.
Materials and Methods: We applied G4449 SurePrint
G3 Hmn CGH 4x44K Oligo microarray (Agilent Technol-
ogies) with an average resolution of 150 Kbp, in 30 fetal
samples with the mentioned indications.
Results: In 14 samples (47%) we detected pathogenic
structural genomic aberrations: deletions of 7q21.3,
10q26.3, 22q11.21, 1p36.22, 4p16.3, 17p13.3, 6q27,1q21.1, 15q11.2; duplications of 18p, 22q11.1, 22q11.21
or chromothripsis. All deletions/duplications were asso-
ciated with known disease syndromes. In 8 of the cases(27%) variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VOUS) were
detected: deletion of 17q21.31 and duplications of
18p11.23, 22q12.3, 6p25.1, 11p15.5, 16p13.3, 1q12,9q34.3.
Conclusion: The array CGH diagnostics in prenatal
settings is quite challenging and requires much morefocused result, based on the data on known pathogenic
aberrations and syndromes; our results showed deletions as
the most prevalent pathogenic aberrations. It is extremelyimportant to collect data for VOUS and match them to
speciﬁc fetal markers, in order to make the feasible use of
Fetal-Genomic database.
Acknowledgment: SNSF grant No IZ73Z0_152454.
I. Dimova: None. V. Peicheva: None. P. Chaveeva:
None. V. Stratieva: None. M. Yankova: None. K.
Kamenarova: None. D. Markov: None. A. Shterev:
None. V. Djonov: None. R. Kaneva: None.E-P01.06
Genetic variation in CHRNA7 andCHRFAM7A is
associated with nicotine dependence and response to
varenicline treatment
C. Cameli1, M. Viggiano1, E. Bacchelli1, M. De Paola2,G .
Giucastro3, M. M. Cainazzo2, L. A. Pini2, M. Zoli4, E. Maestrini1
1Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Department of Internal Medicine,
AOU –Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy,3ASL Parma
-Dipartimento Salute Mentale/Dipendenze Patologiche,Parma, Italy,
4Department of Biomedical, Metabolical and
Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy
Introduction: The role of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
(nAChR) in nicotine dependence (ND) is well established;CHRNA7 , encoding the α7 subunit, has a still uncertain role
in ND, although it is implicated in a wide range of neu-
ropsychiatric conditions. CHRFAM7A , a hybrid gene con-
taining a partial duplication of CHRNA7 , has been shown to
modulate α7 nAChR function. The aim of this study was to
investigate the role of CHRNA7 andCHRFAM7A genetic
variants in ND and to test the hypothesis that α7 nAChR
variation may modulate the ef ﬁcacy of varenicline treatment
in smoking cessation.
Methods: We assessed CHRNA7 andCHRFAM7A copy
number, CHRFAM7A exon 6 Δ2bp polymorphism, and
sequence variants in the CHRNA7 proximal promoter in an
Italian sample of 408 treatment-seeking smokers. We
conducted case-control and quantitative association ana-
lyses using two smoking measures (cigarettes per day, CPD,and Fagerstro ̈m Test for Nicotine Dependence, FTND).
Next, driven by the hypothesis that varenicline may exert
some of its therapeutic effects through activation of α7
nAChRs, we restricted the analysis to a subgroup of
142 smokers who received varenicline treatment.
Results: The CHRNA7 promoter variant
rs28531779 showed association with both smoking quanti-
tative measures (FNTD p =0.027, CPD p =0.012). More-
over, in the varenicline-treated subgroup we observedassociation of CHRFAM7A copy number with six months
smoking abstinence (p =0.035).
Conclusions: Our study points to a possible role of
genetic variation in CHRNA7 andCHRFAM7A in tobacco
addiction mechanisms and response to varenicline
treatment.
Funding: Supported by Italian Ministry of Health
(RF2009-1549619) and by University of Bologna
(RFO2011-2014).
C. Cameli: None. M. Viggiano: None. E. Bacchelli:
None. M. De Paola: None. G. Giucastro: None. M.M.872 J. del PicchiaCainazzo: None. L.A. Pini: None. M. Zoli: None. E.
Maestrini: None.
E-P01.07
The cytogenetic study in male infertility
S. V. Racovita1, M. Sprincean2, E. Halabudenco3, A. Misina3,T .
Samoilenco3, R. Gutuleac1, E. Chesov1, N. Revenco2, V. Mosin1,
V. Mosin1
1State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N.
Testemitanu ”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of,2State
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Testemitanu ”,
Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of,
3Instutute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic
of
Male infertility is one of the most simple examples of
complex disorder with a de ﬁned genetic background.
Genetic factors show about 30% of cases of male infertility
associated with oligosospermia and azoospermia.
The Purpose: was to study the pecularities of cytogenetic
polymorphism in male infertility in order to con ﬁrm the
importance of cytogenetic diagnosis prior to assistedreproductive techniques (ART).
Material and Methods: A group of 55 infertile men were
investigated during genetic counseling in the Center forReproductive Health and Medical Genetics between 2015
and 2017, having the following selection criteria: more than
one year infertility in the couple and / or sperm analysis:azoospermia and severe oligospermia. Karyotyping was
performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes according to
standard methods G.
Results: Chromosome abnormality has been detected in 8
men with infertile problems.The most common chromo-
some disorder diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome washomogeneous form or trisomy 47, XXY (4 cases), followed
by mosaic form (47 XXY/46, XY: 1 case), and variants of
structural abnormalities of autosomal chromosomes (47,XXY, inv (5): 1 case). One patient was diagnosed with 46,X
del (Y)(q1123-qter) and another patient with 46XY,t(8;7)
(8qter::7q336-qter).
Conclusions: In the context of the introduction of
assisted reproduction techniques, the male partner's cyto-
genetic evaluation is necessary for diagnosis of maleinfertility, treatment and provides genetic counseling,
including all information on the individual type of
chromosome anomaly/polymorphism, its clinical relevance,possible inheritance, prenatal diagnostics.
S.V. Racovita: None. M. Sprincean: None. E. Halabu-
denco: None. A. Misina: None. T. Samoilenco: None. R.
Gutuleac: None. E. Chesov: None. N. Revenco: None. V.
Mosin: None. V. Mosin: None.E-P01.08
Fetus with partial trisomy 4 and t(2;16) due to maternal
complex rearrangement involving three chromosomes: a
case report
B. Albuz1, G. O. Çetin1, M. Öztürk1, V. Caner1, C. N. Semerci
Gündüz2,G .B a ğcı1
1Medical School of Pamukkale University, Department of
medical genetics, Denizli, Turkey,2Medical School of Y ıldırım
Beyaz ıt University, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara,
Turkey
Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements
(CCRs) are structural chromosome anomalies involving twoor more chromosomes and more than two breakpoints.
These can be balanced rearrangements (BR) which are not
causing a chromosomal loss/gain or unbalanced rearrange-ments (UR) that result in loss/gain of genes at the break-
points. These gene changes can cause fetal anomalies. It is
important that URs can be de novo or occurring because of
BRs of parents. Here we report a fetus with partial trisomy 4
and t(2;16) due to maternal complex rearrangement.
Clinical Report: A couple, a 22-year-old female and a 32-
year-old male, both in good health, was referred for genetic
counselling following an abnormal fetal sonogram. This was
the couple ’s second pregnancy following one ﬁrst trimester
miscarriage. They were non consanguineous parents. In the
family history, mother ’s parents had an ex-preterm infant. An
ultrasound study performed at 26 weeks ’gestation revealed
craniosynostosis and anencephaly. At this time, the patient
was counselled about the high risk of a fetal chromosome
abnormality. Karyotype and multiprobe FISH analyse of thecord blood sample was performed and 47,XY, +der(4)del(4)
(q13.2?).ish t(2;16)(q33;q22)(wcp16 +;wcp2+),add(4) (?;
q13.2?)(wcp4 +) was detected. Parental karyotyping revealed
a chromosomally normal father and the mother was carrying
46,XX,t(2;16) (q33;q22),ins(2;4)(q31?;q21qter?).ish t(2;16)
(q33;q22)(wcp16 +;wcp2+),ins(2;4)(q31?;q21?)(wcp4 +).
The pregnancy was terminated.
Conclusion: Although CCRs are rare, they are often
associated with multiple congenital abnormalities, recurrentspontaneous abortions and infertility. Therefore, genetic
counselling for CCR carriers is very important and can be
offered before and after pregnancy. References:McGowan-Jordan J, Simons A, Schmid M. ISCN 2016.
B. Albuz: None. G.O. Çetin: None. M. Öztürk: None.
V. Caner: None. C.N. Semerci Gündüz: None. G.
Bağcı:None.
E-P01.10
Detecting a triploid embryo while doing PGD for a cystic
ﬁbrosis carrier womanAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 873S. Sabeghi, Y. Keshvar, K. Fatemi, Z. Shari ﬁ, A. Bandehi
Sarhadi, T. Shirzad, H. Bagherian, S. Zeinali, M. H. S. Aref
zeinalis lab, tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is
an option for couples with a risk of transmitting a genetic
disease, to prevent birth of children affected with mono-
genic disorders. Other usages of PGD are sex selection andHLA typing. Chromosomal aneuploidies are also detectable
in molecular PGD.
Materials and Methods: A family with a 14 year ’s old
child affected with cystic ﬁbrosis referred to our laboratory.
Blood samples collected and DNA was extracted. Mutation
detection carried out using Sanger sequencing. Linkageanalysis performed to trace defective alleles using multiplex
short tandem repeats (STRs). Aneuploidy STR markers
were checked for the family to illustrate each person ’s
proﬁle. Fertilization carried out at in vitro fertilization (IVF)
clinic. After 3 days one blastomere removed from each
embryo. Causative mutation and informative STR markerswere investigated for each blastomere using multiplex
nested PCR. Linkage analysis performed and intended
embryos were selected and implanted to mother ’s uterus.
Results: CFTR: delF508 was detected in patient. From 7
analyzed blastomeres 5 were unaffected. Haplotype map-
ping illustrated that one of the unaffected blastomeres hadan extra set of chromosomes inherited from her mother
which was detectable in chromosomes 7, 13, 18, 21 and X.
Conclusions: PGD is a powerful diagnostic tool for
carrier couples who desire a healthy child and wish to avoid
medical abortion. It can also be used to detect chromosome
numerical abnormalities before pregnancy. Results obtainedfrom linkage analysis and haplotype mapping in parallel
with direct mutation detection make this method more
accurate and reliable.
S. Sabeghi: None. Y. Keshvar: None. K. Fatemi: None.
Z. Shari ﬁ:None. A. Bandehi Sarhadi: None. T. Shirzad:
None. H. Bagherian: None. S. Zeinali: None. M.H.S.
Aref: None.
E-P01.11
Different results from examination of CVS and amniotic
ﬂuid
A. Pecková1, J. Lat ůvková1,V .Čejnová1, V. Harma1,P .
Kajanová2, R. Chladová2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech
Republic,2Genvia s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic
We present a pregnancy with different results of CVS and
amniotic ﬂuid examination. A 27-year-old woman wasreferred for genetic counseling because of positive ﬁrst-
trimester screening. Her previous pregnancy ended because
of GEU. Prenatal diagnosis was recommended and mother
underwent CVS at 13 weeks of gestation. QF PCR from
CVS for aneuploidy of chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 was
suspicious for trisomy 18, but centromeric FISH revealedchromosome 18 disomy. Ultrasound screening of the fetus
didn´t show any abnormalities. Cytogenetic analysis
showed karyotype 46,XY,i(18)(q10)[8]/46,XY[2]. Thisresult was con ﬁrmed with FISH and QF PCR examination.
It was recommended to verify the result from amniotic ﬂuid.
Amniocentesis was performed in the 17
thweek of preg-
nancy. The karyotype in cultured amniotic ﬂuid cells
appeared normal, whereas Array CGH examination identi-
ﬁed a 5,4-Mb terminal deletion of chr.18p. Parental kar-
yotypes were normal. The mother was informed about the
result: de Grouchy syndrome. The mother was informed
about the possibility of pregnancy termination. She decidedto continue with the pregnancy. The boy was delivered
prematurely in 34 weeks of gestation with birth weight
1940g. Dysmorphic features at birth were mild. The boy atsix months of age had weight 7010g, round face, thin hair,
broad base to nose, palpebral ﬁssure upslanted, large ears,
short neck, inguinal hernia. MRI of the brain was normal.Cytogenetic analysis from peripheral blood lymphocytes
showed pathological karyotype 46,XY,del(18)(p11.31),
Array CGH con ﬁrmed the result. Up to now the develop-
ment of the boy continues to be favourable, but only time
will tell.
A. Pecková: None. J. Lat ůvková: None. V.Čejnová:
None. V. Harma: None. P. Kajanová: None. R.
Chladová: None.
E-P01.12
Rapid, ef ﬁcient, non-invasive fetal sex determination direct
from maternal plasma
L. K. Steel1, F. McKay1, N. Chandler1, S. Best1, M. Parks2,C .
Sale2, L. Jenkins1
1North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London,
United Kingdom,2Nonacus Ltd., Birmingham, United
Kingdom
Objective: Many European countries determine fetal sex by
analysis of cell free DNA (cfDNA) extracted from maternal
plasma, signi ﬁcantly reducing the invasive testing rate for
pregnancies at high risk of X-linked disorders or congenitaladrenal hyperplasia. Here we present validation of a method
analysing unextracted cfDNA direct from maternal plasma
in a diagnostic lab.
Method: Our current protocol involves duplicate cfDNA
extractions (QIAsymphony SP) from 2ml of double spun874 J. del Picchiaplasma followed by detection of the SRY and CCR5 genes
by quantitative real-time PCR (Q/RT-PCR) (Taqman, ABI
7300). We identi ﬁed 100 stored plasma samples from high
risk pregnancies of 7-10 weeks gestation with fetal sex
tested previously and clinically con ﬁrmed. Up to thirteen
80ul plasma samples with controls were tested perCell3™Direct: Fetal Sex Determination kit (Nonacus,
UK) which detects the SRY, TSPY, DAZ and CCR5 genes
by multiplexed Q/RT-PCR.
Results: Thresholds for classi ﬁcation of male or female
were established. 89 of the 100 plasmas analysed showed
conclusive concordant results ﬁrst time. This includes 10 of
the 13 previously reported inconclusive by our standard
protocol and 5 samples below 9 weeks gestation. Of the
remaining 11 plasmas, these showed concordance withrepeat testing.
Conclusion: This ﬁrst direct from plasma, non-invasive
prenatal test to determine fetal sex is more sensitive than thestandard protocol. Removal of the extraction step reduces
time, consumables and labour costs. The reduced plasma
volume requirement allows for a smaller blood collection orfor further testing if required. Ongoing validation will
compare the methods in parallel.
L.K. Steel: None. F. McKay: None. N. Chandler: None.
S. Best: None. M. Parks: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Nonacus. C. Sale: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Nonacus. L. Jenkins: None.
E-P01.13
The relationship between genes related folate metabolismand blood coagulation parameters in Ukrainian couples
with reproductive disorders
Z. I. Rossokha1,2, S. Kyriachenko1,2, N. Gorovenko2
1State Institution “Reference-centre for molecular diagnostic of
Public Health Ministry of Ukraine ”, Kyiv, Ukraine,2State
Institution «Genetic and Regenerative Medicine of the National
Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine», Kyiv, Ukraine
Introduction: Folate metabolism disturbance (hyperhomo-
cysteinemia, folate de ﬁciency or excess) and adverse folate
genetic variants remain signi ﬁcant risk factors for repro-
ductive disorders. Preventive folate consumption by cou-
ples, pregnant women and anticoagulants treatment inclinical cases provided by many national guidelines. But the
relationship between these components (when genetically
determined thrombophilic disturbances started) in coupleswith reproductive disorders has not been studied enough.
Materials and Methods: 170 couples (female/male) with
reproductive disorders (primary infertility/early pregnancyloss) examined. There were investigated folate related genes
polymorphism: MTHFR (C677T; A1298C), MTRR (A66G),MTR1 (A2756G); folate metabolism (plasma homocysteine/
serum folate levels) and coagulation parameters (activated
partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT),
thrombin time (TT), ﬁbrinogen level). We collected data
about folic acid consumption and life style (including
smoking, diet, coffee, physical activity). Statistical analysesdone used Pearson's correlation and binary logistic regres-
sion (SPSS_17.00).
Results: Plasma homocysteine levels signi ﬁcantly corre-
lated only with serum folate levels of investigated patients.
Serum folate levels signi ﬁcantly correlated with additional
folate consumption and coagulation parameters (APTT, PT,TT and ﬁbrinogen levels). Folate de ﬁciency (according
WHO recommendation 2012) signi ﬁcantly associated with
MTHFR (1298CC genotype), MTR1 (2756AG and 2756GG
genotypes) genes, family history of cardiovascular diseases
and smoking. Folate excess signi ﬁcantly associated with
MTRR gene (66AA genotype). Fibrinogen levels signi ﬁ-
cantly depended from MTHFR (C677T) and MTR1
(A2756G) genotypes.
Conclusions: Individual rational vitamins use and
optimizing folate serum levels can improve in patients with
reproductive disorders the quality of infertility treatment
and reduce the risk of reproductive losses due coagulationparameters to normalize.
Z.I. Rossokha: None. S. Kyriachenko: None. N.
Gorovenko: None.
E-P01.14
The patient with fragile site on chromosome 16 and fourmissed abortions : a case report
M. Komneni ćRadovanovi ć1, B. Petrovic1, M. Dencic-Fekete2,J .
Jovanovic2, V. Djordjevic2, G. Cuturilo3,4, B. Dimitrijevic3,A .
Miletic3, J. Ruml Stojanovic3, M. Radovanovic5, O. Kontic-
Vucinic1,4
1Clinic for gynecology and obstretrics, Clinical centre of
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia,2Clinic for hematology, Clinical
centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia,3University Children's
Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia,4Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,5Clinic for urology, Clinical
centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: We report a case of 31-year-old woman who
had four missed abortions. In ﬁrst two missed abortions
genetic analysis from aborted material was not done, but in
third one karyotypic analysis revealed trisomy of chromo-some 16 (20 mitosis). In fourth missed abortion the same
karyotypic abnormality was detected again, with the fragile
site on the long arm of two chromosomes 16 (fra(16)(q22)[10]). Genetic counceling of the couple con ﬁrmed no pre-
vious missed abortion in their families.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 875Material and Methods: After analysis of constitutional
karyotypes of the partners, we found abnormalities of
chromosome 16 in the karyotype of the woman: deletion of
16q22 was found in two mitosis while fragile site of one of
the chromosome 16 was seen in 5 mitoses. The rest of 42
mitoses analysed were normal. The karyotype wasdescribed as follow: 46,XX,del(16)(q22)[3]/46,XX,fra(16)
(q22)[5]/46,XX[42]. Fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) method with the probe for 16q22 (Abbott, Vysis,CBFB BreakApart probe) showed deletion of the 5 ’region
of the CBFB gene in all of the nuclei/metaphases analysed .
In addition, array-CGH analysis performed in the womanshowed no aberration in 16q22 region, while the next
generation sequencing analysis has not been started yet.
Conclusion: To exclude any possibility of trisomy of
chromosome 16 in further pregnancies, we suggested
in vitro fertilization (IVF) followed by preimplantation
genetic screening of embryos (PGD). The fragile site of 16qis considered to be a normal variation in human population,
but its role in possible missed abortions still have to be
completely clari ﬁed.
M. Komneni ćRadovanovi ć:None. B. Petrovic: None.
M. Dencic-Fekete: None. J. Jovanovic: None. V.
Djordjevic: None. G. Cuturilo: None. B. Dimitrijevic:
None. A. Miletic: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M.
Radovanovic: None. O. Kontic-Vucinic: None.
E-P01.15
Novel serum-free culture conditions for growing primary
human granulosa cells
K. Hensen1, M. Pook1, A. Sikut2, T. Maimets1, A. Salumets3,A .
Kurg1
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,2Women's Clinic of Tartu University Hospital,
Tartu, Estonia,3The Competence Center on Health
Technologies, Tartu, Estonia
During folliculogenesis the oocyte is surrounded by gran-
ulosa cells (GCs), that are crucial to its development and
maturation. The oocyte is not capable of some metabolicprocesses and needs nutritional support from granulosa
cells. They provide the oocyte with growth factors, hor-
mones, and cytokines. Long-term culturing and testing ofprimary granulosa cells would help to reveal granulosa-
related fertility problems. There is still need for more ef ﬁ-
cient and de ﬁned conditions for studying these cells. Our
aim was to develop serum-free culture conditions which
would support long-term cultivation of primary
granulosa cells.
Primary luteinized human GCs were cultivated in serum-
free growth media containing either no growth factors,IGF2, FGF2, or both, up to 24 days. The expression levels
of GC markers were analysed by qPCR.
The expression of FSHR increases while AMHR level
does not signi ﬁcantly change during the ﬁrst four days of
culture but start to decrease after that. The expression of
LHR andCYP19A1 decreases during time of cell culture.
CYP19A1 is expressed very highly at the starting point but
starts decreasing rapidly in cell culture. After four days the
expression drops about 2-5 folds.
Currently, this cell culture protocol could be used for
short term GC culturing. For long term experiments adding
additional hormones like FSH is currently being tested tosee if that might help to maintain GC identity.
K. Hensen: None. M. Pook: None. A. Sikut: None. T.
Maimets: None. A. Salumets: None. A. Kurg: None.
E-P01.17
Prenatal diagnosis of hypospadias and issues
A. Kondo1, M. Morine1, C. Fukano1, D. Nakaoku1,M .
Yamasaki1, K. Takahashi2, K. Hinokio1, S. Izumi1, K. Maeda1
1Shikoku Medical Center for Children and Adults, Kagawa,
Japan,2Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan
Introduction: Urinary tract abnormalities are frequently
detected during obstetrical ultrasonography. However,
hypospadias is often missed on prenatal US, despite it being
the most common congenital defect of the male externalgenitalia. The prenatal recognition of hypospadias is
important because it will alert the physician to order kar-
yotyping and to look for any possible associated dys-morphic syndromes.
Materials and Methods: 16 patients neonatally diag-
nosed hypospadias between 2007 and 2017 were analysedretrospectively based on obstetrics/neonatal chart and
ultrasound data.
Results: Regarding the type of hypospadias, 15/16 were
distal hypospadias and only one case was diagnosed as mid-
shaft hypospadias. We did not have severe type of
hypospadias during 10 years. In total, 8/16 (50%) caseswere diagnosed prenatally with ultrasound examination. All
the case prenatally diagnosed had other ﬁndings such as
FGR, CHD. There were two cases diagnosed as syndromiccondition neonatally such as ATR-X syndrome and Noonan
syndrome and three other syndromic conditions were still
on the genomic analysis.
Conclusion: Some reported that severe type of hypospa-
dias could be easier to pick up at prenatal ultrasound
examination, however out prenatally diagnosed case wereall mild type. It is most important that we have to be aware
that those patients might have other complicated conditions876 J. del Picchiaand look carefully as neonates as well. In Japan, most of
pregnant women want to know the fetus ’s sex, however
prenatal ultrasound scans should include a study of the
genitals and should not only be used for sex determination.
A. Kondo: None. M. Morine: None. C. Fukano: None.
D. Nakaoku: None. M. Yamasaki: None. K. Takahashi:
None. K. Hinokio: None. S. Izumi: None. K.
Maeda: None.
E-P01.18
Evaluation of Clinical, Cytogenetic and Molecular
Parameters in SRY-positive 46,XX Testicular Disorder ofSex Development: Presentation of Nine Cases
O. S. Akar, G. Ogur, U. Abur, R. Asci, E. Altundag, H. S.
Aymelek, M. K. Alpaslan, S. Gunes
ONDOKUZ MAYIS UNIVERSITY MEDICAL FACULTY,
SAMSUN, Turkey
Introduction: 46,XX testicular disorder of sex develop-
ment (tDSD) is a rare condition with an incidence of 1/
20,000 male newborn. Patients have 46,XX karyotype, yet
they have male external genitalia and male identity. Theyhave hypogonadism, gynecomastia and azoospermia.
Majority of patients have SRY gene translocated to Xp or
an autosome. Up till now more than 250 patients have beenreported. Here we present 9 more cases.
Methods: Clinical and laboratory ﬁndings (hormone
proﬁle, sperm analyses) cytogenetics, FISH (SRY-CEPX)
and Y microdeletion analysis were studied; genetic results
were correlated with clinical and laboratory parameters.
Results: Mean height was below the mean height of
normal Turkish men (166.7 cm versus 174.3 cm); mean age
and weight was normal. All cases had a decreased testicular
volume, all had male phenotype. All patients hadhypergonadotropic hypogonadism and azoospermia. 6/9
patients had a decreased pubic and axillary hair. 3/9 patients
had gynecomastia. 6 of 9 patients had 46,XX, 3 patients hadY to X translocation. In FISH analysis SRY gene have been
located on Xp. Y microdeletion analysis revealed that
AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd regions were deleted butSRY was present in all patients.
Conclusion: All of our patients had a SRY component.
All had azoospermia, gonadotropine levels were high in allof them. All cases presented with male external genitalia
and hypogonadism in contrast to SRY(-) tDSD which
presents mostly with ambiguous genitalia. Azoospermiawas suggested to be the result of AZFa,b,c and d region
deletions.
O.S. Akar: None. G. Ogur: None. U. Abur: None. R.
Asci: None. E. Altundag: None. H.S. Aymelek: None. M.
K. Alpaslan: None. S. Gunes: None.E-P01.19
A rare case in literature: isochromosome Xq in Klinefelter
syndrome
L. Simsek1, A. G. Zamani1, H. H. Taskapu2, M. S. Yildirim1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey,2Department of
Urology, Meram Medical Faculty,Necmettin ErbakanUniversity, Konya, Turkey
Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome(KS), affecting 1 in 500
to 1,000 newborn males, is the most common sex chromo-
some aneuploidy among males with primary hypogonadism.
Isochromosome Xq on the other hand, is a rare variant ofKlinefelter syndrome, accounting approximately 0.3% of all
KS and associated with normal height and androgenization
compared to classical KS. Here we present another case ofisochromosome Xq variant of KS with similar clinical and
cytogenetic ﬁndings with the few cases reported before.
Materials and Methods: 25 years old male patient
referred to our clinic with complaint of infertility. He is son
of a consanguineous couple who are ﬁrst cousins and there
was no family history of reproductive dif ﬁculty. In physical
examination synophrys, prominent ear and small testicles
noted. His height, weight and secondary sexual character-
istics were within normal range. The patient ’s spermiogram
showed azoospermia and scrotal USG revealed testicular
atrophy with heterogenity in paranchyma.
Results: Karyotype analysis using G-banding resulted as
47,X,i(X)(q10),Y and Short Tandem Repeat (STR) analysis
showed no deletion in AZF and SRY loci of interest.
Conclusion: Although dozens of isochromosome Xq
variant of KS can be found in literature, it is our duty to
expand our knowledge about this syndrome as far as
possible and emphasize importance of karyotyping forpatients with reproductive diffuculty who may not have all
features of a well-known syndrome.
L. Simsek: None. A.G. Zamani: None. H.H. Taskapu:
None. M.S. Yildirim: None.
E-P01.20
MAGEL2 in the prenatal setting: Beyond fetal akinesia and
arthrogryposis
G. D'Amours1,2, F. Rossignol1,2, F. Rypens3,4, S. Naudion5,A .
Trimouille5, E. Lasseaux5, J. L. Michaud1,6, J. Soucy1,6,M .
Delrue1,4,6
1Service de Génétique médicale, CHU Sainte-Justine,
Montréal, QC, Canada,2Faculté de Médecine, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada,3Département de
Radiologie, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 8774Centre Intégré de Diagnostic Prénatal, CHU Sainte-Justine,
Montréal, QC, Canada,5Service de Génétique médicale, CHU
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,6Département de Pédiatrie,
Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
Introduction : Truncating mutation on the paternal allele of
MAGEL2 is associated with Schaaf-Yang syndrome. The
phenotype of affected individuals ranges from lethal arthro-
gryposis multiplex to mild intellectual disability or autismspectrum disorder. Approximately 30 cases have been
reported to date, but data on prenatal phenotype are scarce.
Methods : We performed a ﬁle review of six patients
(including three from the same family, and two siblings)
diagnosed after birth with Schaaf-Yang syndrome at our
centers in a clinical setting, compiled prenatal andmolecular data, and reviewed the literature.
Results : Prenatal ﬁndings in our patients include fetal
akinesia (2/6), pyelectasis (2/6), increased nuchal translu-cency (1/4), intra-uterine growth retardation (1/6), contrac-
tures (1/6), and cerebral anomalies (1/6). All were severely
affected after birth with progressive contractures anddevelopmental delay. Two had severe hydronephrosis,
while another had renal failure. Molecular analyses
identi ﬁed truncating variants in MAGEL2 : c.1762C>T,
c.3043C>T, and c.1996dupC. We reviewed data on 33
cases reported between 2009 and 2017, including 10 with
prenatal manifestations. Prenatal features include fetalakinesia (7/10), contractures (4/10), and polyhydramnios
(3/10). In addition, two children without reported prenatal
features were small for gestational age.
Conclusions : Although Schaaf-Yang syndrome can
present prenatally, the features may be mild or absent.
Fetal akinesia, contractures, and polyhydramnios arerecurrent, but are absent in more than 50% of cases. The
syndrome should be considered when fetal akinesia or
contractures are associated with growth retardation, pye-lectasis or oligohydramnios.
G. D'Amours: None. F. Rossignol: None. F. Rypens:
None. S. Naudion: None. A. Trimouille: None. E.
Lasseaux: None. J.L. Michaud: None. J. Soucy: None.
M. Delrue: None.
E-P01.24
Array CGH usefulness identifying a low-level mosaic small
marker chromosome detected at prenatal diagnosis
B. Mendez1, E. Lloveras1, A. Borrell2, M. Augé1,C .d el a
Iglesia1, D. Fernández1, M. Herrero1, J. Mendoza1, C. Pérez1
11Departament de Genètica. Laboratori Central Barcelona.
SYNLAB International Group, Barcelona, Spain, Esplugues deLlobregat, Spain,
2BCNatal-Hospital clinic Barcelona,
Barcelona, SpainIntroduction: Detection of a mosaic small marker chro-
mosome (SMC) represents a diagnostic challenge for pre-
natal diagnosis. Their clinical relevance depends on factors
such as size, genetic content, and distribution of mosaicism.
Herein, we present a case of low-level mosaic SMC char-
acterized by arrayCGH allowing to evaluate and discardUPD, and to perform a more accurate genetic counselling.
Patient and Results: A 38 years old woman was referred
for prenatal diagnosis because of maternal anxiety.Karyotype of amniotic ﬂuid cells showed a “de novo ”
SMC in 20% of metaphases analyzed, from two indepen-
dent culture ﬂasks. C-band staining was performed; the
results suggested that the small marker chromosome was
not composed only of heterochromatin. The CytoSure ™
Constitutional v3 8x60k (Oxford Gene Technology, UK)was used according to the manufacturer ’s protocol. The
sample was analyzed as a patient once and as a control
twice in order to distinguish between a real copy numbervariation from an artifact. The results were compatible with
a 5.4 Mb dose increase from the 7p12.1p11.2 band.
Fluorescence "in situ" hybridization (FISH) with a cen-tromeric chromosome 7 probe was performed. Three
hybridization signals were detected in 9.5% of the nuclei
analyzed and the origin of the marker chromosome wasconﬁrmed as derived from chromosome 7. UPD(7) was
excluded.
Conclusions: - ArrayCGH is a powerful tool to
characterize SMCs regarding size and genes even in low-
level mosaics.
- The appropriate use of conventional and molecular
cytogenetic techniques can be determinant for more
accurate SMC/phenotype correlation improving the genetic
counselling.
B. Mendez: None. E. Lloveras: None. A. Borrell: None.
M. Augé: None. C. de la Iglesia: None. D. Fernández:
None. M. Herrero: None. J. Mendoza: None. C.
Pérez: None.
E-P01.25
Minor ultrasonographic ﬁndings with major fetal
chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis
A. G. Pavel1,2, A. Ursuleanu3, L. Dimos1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1,D .
Stambouli1
1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania,
2Stefan S. Nicolau Institute of Virology, The Romanian
Academy, Bucharest, Romania,3Dr. I. Cantacuzino Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania
Introduction: Sonographic markers have been shown to be
effective in screening for aneuploid conditions; moreover,
ultrasonography is a non-invasive, risk-free method that can878 J. del Picchiabe used throughout pregnancy, at relatively low costs. As
many of the chromosomal syndromes have similar sono-
graphic ﬁndings, a de ﬁnitive diagnosis cannot be deter-
mined based on ultrasound alone, usually requiring follow-
up genetic investigations.
Prenatal diagnosis of chromosome abnormalities through
the analysis of amniocytes or chorionic villus samples is the
standard of prenatal care. The application of chromosomal
microarray analysis in routine chromosomal analysis hasrapidly and substantially increased the diagnostic yield in
clinical cytogenetics.
Materials and Methods: We selected three prenatal
cases with minor ultrasound ﬁndings and major structural
chromosomal abnormalities. Molecular karyotyping analy-
sis was performed with either oligo or SNP-basedmicroarrays developed for the detection of copy-number
alterations: microdeletions, microduplications, aneuploidy
and unbalanced translocations.
Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed
abnormal results for each of the three mentioned cases that
are summarized in the table.
Case Sonographic ﬁndings Genomic microarray result
1 Unilateral multicystic
dysplastic kidneyarr[GRCh37]17q12
(34817422_36168104)x1
2 Unilateral club foot arr[GRCh37]17p11.2
(16657318_20433723)x3
3 Ventriculomegaly arr[GRCh37]1q42.2q44
(233141951_249205158)
x3,13q33.2q34
(106642740_115107733)x1
Conclusions: Identi ﬁcation of any fetal malformation
should alert the sonographer for further investigation.
Ultrasonographic markers may hint to genetic imbalances
associated with severe consequences after birth. Our caseshighlight the need of further invasive tests and genetic
analysis, as that many rare microdeletion/microduplication
syndromes can be present even with a normal sonographicexam. Therefore, the invasive testing remains the gold
standard for prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal syndromes.
A.G. Pavel: None. A. Ursuleanu: None. L. Dimos:
None. A. Tutulan-Cunita: None. D. Stambouli: None.
E-P01.26
MicroRNA-200 regulated trophoblast invasion by targeting
EG-VEGF in preeclampsia
M. Su
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-
Kung University Hospital, Tainan, TaiwanPreeclampsia is a severe gestational complication char-
acterized by new onset of high blood pressure and protei-
nuria after 20 weeks of gestation. It is one of the leading
hypertensive disorders in pregnant women, affecting 2 to
8% of pregnancies worldwide. Recently, endocrine gland-
derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) wasregarded as a critical factor for embryo implantation and
placental development. Micro-RNA 200 family, including
miR-200a, -200b, -200c, -141- and -429, were highlyexpressed in human placenta and maternal circulation dur-
ing pregnancy. Both EG-VEGF and miR-200 family have
been shown to be associated with several pregnancy com-plications, including abnormal embryo implantation,
intrauterine fetal growth restriction, preterm birth and pre-
eclampsia. Besides, miR-200 family was predicted to targeton 5’UTR of EG-VEGF. In order to investigate the roles of
miR-200 family and EG-VEGF in preeclampsia, we ana-
lyzed these miRNAs and EG-VEGF expression in thepregnant women of healthy control (n =55) and pre-
eclampsia (n =33). The expression level of miR-141 and
miR-200a in preeclamptic women was signi ﬁcantly higher
in maternal blood (p <0.05), while EG-VEGF was sig-
niﬁcant lower in the maternal blood and placenta of pre-
eclamptic women (p <0.05). Further, we veri ﬁed miR-141
and -200a were target on 5 ’UTR region of EG-VEGF and
affect the migration and invasion ability of trophoblast
(HTR-8/SVneo). The results suggest miR-141 and -200atarget on EG-VEGF and inhibit trophoblast migration and
invasion, and may therefore predispose to develop pre-
eclampsia in human early pregnancy.
M. Su: None.
E-P01.27
Association of oxidative stress-related genes with
miscarriage
E. Mashkina, K. Kovalenko, A. Bukreeva
Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian
Federation
Introduction: 15% of all human pregnancies end in mis-
carriage before 12 weeks of gestation. Oxidative stress may
play a very important role in the miscarriage with unknown
etiology. This study was conducted to investigate theassociation of polymorphisms in oxidative stress-related
genes with miscarriage.
Materials and Methods: A total of 127 women with
miscarriage and 138 controls were genotyped for SOD1
rs4998557, SOD2 rs4880, CAT rs1001179, GPX4
(rs713041), EDN1 rs5370 and NOS3 rs2070744.
Results: A protective effect of SOD1 rs4998557-G allele
on spontaneous abortion was shown in individual SNPAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 879analysis: P =0.03, OR =0.49, 95% CI 0.26-0.93. It was
established that the genotype AsnAsn EDN1 rs5370 was
associated with an increased risk of missed abortion in the
ﬁrst trimester (OR 6.7, 95% CI 1.3-34.2). The multi-factor
dimensionality reduction approach revealed gene-gene
interactions for NOS3, GPX4 and EDN1 genes onspontaneous abortion. Cumulative gene risk score analysis
demonstrated that genotype LysLys198 EDN1 /-786TT
NOS3 / 718CC GPX4 was associated with spontaneousabortion (P =0.003, OR =4.28, 95% CI 1.63-11.2). The
missed abortion was associated with interaction of GPX4,
NOS3 and SOD2 genes. Cumulative gene risk scoreanalysis demonstrated that more than three risk alleles in
the genes GPX4 (rs713041-T), NOS3 (rs2070744-C),
SOD2 (rs4880-Val) were associated with missed abortion(P=0.038, OR =4.23, 95% CI 1.2-15.1).
Conclusion: Gene-gene interactions of oxidative stress
related genes are able of modulating of miscarriage risk.This study was supported by the federal assignment №
6.6762.2017 from Russian Ministry of Science and
Education.
E. Mashkina: None. K. Kovalenko: None. A.
Bukreeva: None.
E-P01.28
The incidence of particular types of chromosomal
numerical aberrations in miscarriages is associated withmaternal age
K. Bernatowicz1,I .Łaczma ńska2, J. Zimowski3,M .S ąsiadek2,
M. Bednarska-Makaruk3, K. Piotrowski4, S. Zaj ączek1,J .
Gronwald1
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland,2Genetics Department, Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroc ław, Poland,3Department of
Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warszawa,
Poland,4Diagen Prediag Prenatal & Cytogenetic Unit,
Szczecin, Poland
It is commonly known that the risk of giving birth to a child
with trisomy 13, 18 and 21 increases rapidly with thematernal age. The relationship between advanced maternal
age and incidence of Down syndrome was initially reported
more than 75 years ago. On the other hand it has beenproven that maternal age has no impact on the incidence of
monosomy X in liveborns.
In this study 579 unselected products of conceptions were
analysed using commercially available kits for chromo-
somes 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y (QF-PCR) and for all
chromosomes (MLPA)In contrast to QF-PCR, MLPA isunable to detect 69,XXX triploidy. Overall 170 different
trisomies, 38 monosomies X, 40 triploidies and 8 doubleaberrations were detected using MLPA or QF-PCR. Using
MLPA, trisomies of all chromosomes except of chromo-
some 1 and 19 were diagnosed and the most common
trisomies were of chromosome 16, while for QF-PCR the
most common aberration was monosomy X. Similarly as in
previously described studies, average age of women withtrisomic pregnancy was signi ﬁcantly higher than in women
with euploid pregnancy (35.73 vs 33.63 p<0.005) and the
difference in maternal age for euploid foetuses and foetuseswith X monosomy was insigni ﬁcant (32.73 vs 33.63, p =
0.31). Interestingly, frequency of triploidy in aborted
foetuses seemed to decrease with maternal age (averageage 31.23 vs 33.63, p<0.05). Meiotic error in egg is a
leading genetic cause of trisomy, however still little is
known about the molecular basis of aneuploidies related tomaternal age.
K. Bernatowicz: None. I.Łaczma ńska: None. J.
Zimowski: None. M. S ąsiadek: None. M. Bednarska-
Makaruk: None. K. Piotrowski: None. S. Zaj ączek:
None. J. Gronwald: None.
E-P01.31
Results of prospective study of utilisation of Trisomy test in
noninvasive prenatal testing for trisomies of chromosomes21, 18 and 13
M. Sekelska1,2, L. Valentinova1,2, A. Izsakova1,2,M .
Harsanyova1, Z. Kuchova1, R. Lukackova1, D. Landlova1,M .
Hyblova3, J. Budis3, T. Szemes3, P. Krizan1,4, G. Minarik1,2
1Medirex Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Trisomy test Ltd.,
Bratislava, Slovakia,3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Nemocnicna Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia
Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal testing of most com-
mon trisomies, based on analysis of circulating DNA fromblood of pregnant women, becomes an important part of
prenatal screening.
Aim: Aim of the work was prospective study of
utilisation of Trisomy test for noninvasive prenatal testing
(NIPT) of the most common trisomies of chromosomes 21,
18 and 13.
Materials and Methods: From September 2015 till April
2017, 4109 samples of pregnant women were analyzed
using Trisomy test. For high risk samples detection wholegenome low coverage scan was used in association with
home-made bioinformatic pipeline and our own biostatis-
tical approach.
Results: Of 4109 analysed samples 3847 were reported as
euploid and 76 as trisomic. After analysis of the ﬁrst blood
sample, 184 cases were found to be nonreportable, aftersecond blood sample analysis only 42 samples were still
unreportable, so no call rate of the test was 1%. Among880 J. del Picchiatrisomic samples 55 samples were reported as high risk for
trisomy 21, 15 samples as high risk for trisomy 18 and
6 samples as high risk for trisomy 13. Two false negatives
(1x T21 and 1x T18) and two false positives (1x T21 and 1x
T13) were recorded in the whole cohort. Total sensitivity of
the method used for detection of all three trisomes was97.37%. Total speci ﬁcity of the method was 99.95%.
Conclusions: Trisomy test performance based on calcu-
lations of its sensitivity, speci ﬁcity and no call rate is fully
comparable with other commercial tests used in NIPT
worldwide.
M. Sekelska: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. L. Valentinova: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employ-ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. A.
Izsakova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. M. Harsanyova: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. Z. Kuchova:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex
Inc.R. Lukackova: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. D. Landlova: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc. M. Hyblova:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton
Ltd. J. Budis: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. P. Krizan: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Nemocnicna Inc..
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex
Inc. G. Minarik: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Medirex Inc..
E-P01.32
NLRP7 affects the differentiation of human decidualmacrophages
Y. Li1, J. Huang2, Y. Huang2, P. Kuo2
1Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chung-Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan,2Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
Tainan, Taiwan
Introduction: The decidual M2 macrophage plays a vital
role in the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. It
is different from the abundant M1 macrophages existing indeciduae of spontaneous abortions. However, it is unknown
what the molecular regulator of decidual macrophage dif-
ferentiation is. In our published studies: MPA (Medrox-yprogesterone acetate; a progesterone analog with an anti-
inﬂammatory property) drove macrophages differentiatingtoward a phenotype of decidual M2 macrophage; also,
NLRP7 expressed in the decidualized endometrial stromal
cells induced by MPA. NLRP7 has a well-studied role in
regulating immune responses. Therefore, this study aimed
to examine whether NLRP7 plays a role in decidual mac-
rophage differentiation.
Materials and Methods: We detected the expressions of
M1-cell markers (IL-1 β, TNF- α, and iNOS) and M2-cell
markers (IL-10, IDO, and MRC) respectively in LPS/IFN- γ
and IL-4/IL-13 inducing the PMA primed THP-1 cell line,
which was either siNLRP7 knockdown expressed or LV-
NLRP7 overexpressed. We also examined the subtypes ofthe decidual macrophages by immuno ﬂuorescence staining
in paraf ﬁn embedded the ﬁrst-trimester endometrium.
Results: The expressions of M1-cell markers are
signiﬁcantly lower in LV-NLRP7 overexpressed and higher
in siNLRP7 knockdown expressed THP-1 cell line. The
expressions of M2-cell markers slightly increase anddecrease in LV-NLRP7 overexpressed and siNLRP7
knockdown expressed THP-1 cell line, respectively.
NLRP7 expresses in IL-10
+CD68+M2 macrophage of
theﬁrst-trimester endometrium.
Conclusions: We suggest that NLRP7 suppressed the
differentiation of M1 macrophages in deciduae. However,NLRP7 was necessary but not suf ﬁcient for decidual M2
macrophages differentiation. This research was supported
from MOST of Taiwan (103-2314-B-006-079-MY3).
Y. Li: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; MOST, Taiwan. J.
Huang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
MOST, Taiwan. Y. Huang: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; MOST, Taiwan. P. Kuo: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received);
Signi ﬁcant; MOST, Taiwan.
E-P01.33
Increase of selected single chromosome aneuploidies inembryos of older mothers
E. Linhartova, V. Becvarova, J. Horacek, H. Pekova, R.
Mansfeldova, V. Sucha, M. Spacirova, P. Sidova, L. Hnykova, J.
Starkova, M. Koudova, M. Trkova
Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic
Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) on
day-5 embryos by VeriSeq PGS Kit is routinely used in
Gennet since 2016. In 2017 trophectoderm biopsies of 2767
embryos in 939 IVF cycles were performed with 98%examination success rate; 2631 examined embryos. Overall
1295 euploid embryos (49%) were recommended for theAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 881embryotransfer and 190 mosaic embryos (7%) were con-
sulted with clinical geneticist. Five age groups were estab-
lished for the evaluation of the maternal age-dependent
aneuploidy frequency: I.<29 (mean age 26.8), II. 30-34
(32.6), III. 35-39 (37.4), IV. 40-44 (41.6) and V.>45 (46.8).
The embryos of the oocyte donors were used as a controlgroup VI. (24.9). Unsurprisingly, the aneuploidy frequency
in the age groups III, IV and V compared to the control
group VI was signi ﬁcantly higher (t-test, αlevel 5%), with
signiﬁcant growth of the incidence of the aneuploid
embryos from group I to V (P =0.05). The relevant age-
dependent increase of single chromosome aneuploidy perembryo was found in monosomies 15, 16, 21, 22 and tri-
somies 16, 19, 21, 22. The linear correlation was found only
for chromosome 15 monosomy (P<0.05). The groups I toIII had the exponential increase of single chromosome
aneuploidy for chromosomes 16, 19 and 22. When com-
pared to the frequency of the aneuploidies in the sponta-neous abortion, the frequent 16, 19 and 22 trisomies and 15,
16 and 22 monosomies are likely lethal for the embryos.
Our results provide important clues for the assessment ofthe potential risk for the embryotransfer of the mosaic
embryos.
E. Linhartova: None. V. Becvarova: None. J. Horacek:
None. H. Pekova: None. R. Mansfeldova: None. V.
Sucha: None. M. Spacirova: None. P. Sidova: None. L.
Hnykova: None. J. Starkova: None. M. Koudova: None.
M. Trkova: None.
E-P01.34
Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT-M) in the family with
SMN1 duplication/deletion
I. Soldatova, M. Sekowská, L. Reismüllerová, K. Veselá, J.
Diblík, M. Bittóová, M. Koudová, D. Stejskal
Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine
GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by
muscle weakness and atrophy resulting from progressive
degeneration and loss of motor neurons in the spinal cordand the brain stem. SMA is caused in more than 95%
cases by recessive mutation in the SMN1 gene resulting in
deﬁciency of SMN (survival motor neuron) protein.
Approximately 95-98 % of SMA patients lack both copies
ofSMN1 exon 7. About 3% of carriers have SMN1
duplication in cis associated with SMN1 deletion on
homologous chromosome. SMN1 duplication/deletion in
ciscannot be detected by MLPA commonly used at carrier
screening.
We present the case of SMN1 exon 7 del carrier couple in
which risk haplotype suitable for PGT-M may not beunambiguously determined by direct MLPA SMN1 testing.
Male partner has typical heterozygous SMN1 exon 7del
genotype as well as his parents. His affected sister is
homozygous. Female partner and her brother are hetero-
zygotes of SMN1 exon 7del, but their both parents have two
SMN1 copies.
We assumed that one of parents of female partner is false-
negative carrier –has SMN1 duplication/deletion. By
combination results of MLPA analysis and comparinghaplotypes of all relatives of female´s family we conclusion
that mother of female partner is heterozygous for SMN1
deletion with SMN1 duplication in cis .
The linkage analysis is available for families with not
sufﬁciently informative results of direct testing. This
method may be used for the con ﬁrmation of results from
carrier screening or for PGT-M preparation as
mentioned above.
I. Soldatova: None. M. Sekowská: None. L. Reismül-
lerová: None. K. Veselá: None. J. Diblík: None. M.
Bittóová: None. M. Koudová: None. D. Stejskal: None.
E-P01.36
Decoding the role of regulatory element polymorphisms in
preeclampsia
E. Trifonova1,2, T. Gabidulina2, V. Serebrova1, V. Stepanov1,A .
Beliaeva1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian
Federation,2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk,
Russian Federation
Preeclampsia is a common pregnancy-speci ﬁc disorder with
unknown etiology. It is the leading cause of maternal and
perinatal morbidity and mortality. We used a new approach
to detecting genetic markers of preeclampsia based on acombination of genomic, transcriptomic, and bioinformatic
methods. Our prior genome-wide transcriptional pro ﬁling of
placental tissue led to a novel set of 63 preeclampsia can-didate genes (differentially expressed genes, (Fold Change
>1.5, FDR<0.1)). In this report, we present study on the role
of variability in these genes in the genetic susceptibility topreeclampsia. We analyzed 48 regulatory single nucleotide
polymorphisms (rSNPs) in 23 genes ( ANKRD37, BCL6,
BHLHE40, CEBPA, CCSAP, CORO2A, ENG, GPT2,GSTA3, HK2, INHA, KRT19, LEP, LHB, NDRG1, PLIN2,
PPP1R12C, RDH13, SASH1, SIGLEC6, SYDE1,
TMEM136 andZNF175 ) in 519 patients with preeclampsia
and 718 women with uncomplicated pregnancies from
Russian, Buryat and Yakut populations using MassArray
iPLEX (Sequenom). We have detected signi ﬁcant associa-
tions for preeclampsia with eleven rSNPs in PLIN2,
BHLHE40, RDH13, SYDE1 andZNF175 genes in Russian882 J. del Picchiaand Buryat population. In Yakut population, only three
genes (NDRG1, CORO2A, SASH1 ) were associated with
increased risk of preeclampsia. rSNP in PPP1R12C genes
was associated with preeclampsia in Buryat population
only. This results demonstrate a signi ﬁcant role rSNP of
placental tissue genes in susceptibility to preeclampsia indifferent ethnic groups of Russia. Integrative transcriptome-
based approach proved its ef ﬁciency and may be applied to
detecting new potential genetic markers of preeclampsia,which reduces missing heritability. This work was sup-
ported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant
№18-44-700007).
E. Trifonova: None. T. Gabidulina: None. V. Sereb-
rova: None. V. Stepanov: None. A. Beliaeva: None.
E-P01.37
Analysis of genes associated with preeclampsia for
purposes of the disease prognosis
L. Strieskova1,2, J. Gazdarica1,2, J. Budis2,3,4, M. Harsanyova1,2,
T. Szemes2,3,1,5
1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava,
Slovakia,2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,3Slovak centre
of scienti ﬁc and technical information, Bratislava, Slovakia,
4Faculty of Mathematics, Physics, and Informatics, Comenius
University, Bratislava, Slovakia,5Medirex a.s., Bratislava,
Slovakia
Introduction: Preeclampsia is a serious and poorly under-
stood complication of pregnancy and remains one of the
leading cause of maternal and perinatal mortality and
morbidity. It is a multi-systemic disorder usually recognisedby new-onset of hypertension and proteinuria in the second
half of pregnancy. Although the etiology of preeclampsia is
not elucidated yet, the placenta plays an important role inthe pathogenesis. There are many genes and biochemical
markers closely associated with placental function which is
associated with preeclampsia.
Materials and Methods: Low coverage whole genome
sequencing data obtained in NIPT test from pregnant
women was mined for identi ﬁcation of candidate genes
mostly associated with preeclampsia. Maternal polymorph-
isms were identi ﬁed and veri ﬁed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: We were able to determine allelic frequencies of
preeclampsia associated SNVs speci ﬁcally in our popula-
tion. In addition, we veri ﬁed selected polymorphisms
associated with preeclampsia by conventional Sangersequencing after suggesting speci ﬁc average values.
Conclusion: Population study con ﬁrmed our assumptions
that using next generation sequencing and Sanger sequen-cing may, at least partially, extend the possibilities of
diagnostics in the ﬁeld of preeclampsia.L. Strieskova: None. J. Gazdarica: None. J. Budis:
None. M. Harsanyova: None. T. Szemes: None.
E-P01.38
preimplantation genetic testing for carriers of balanced
chromosomal rearrangements
O. Yacuts, J. Tsukerman, A. Zhabinskaya, A. Alekseeva, S.
Volokhanovitch, O. Tishkevich
Centre of assisted reproduction «Embryo», Minsk, Belarus
Introduction: Structural chromosome abnormalities may
be associated with infertility, multiple miscarriage and
delivery of chromosomally unbalanced offspring. Pre-implantation genetic testing for structural rearrangements
(PGT-SR) was used to select embryos without chromoso-
mal imbalance for transfer.
Materials and Methods: We conducted 13 cycles of IVF
+PGT-SR. A-CGH (Illumina 24Sure +) was used to detect
structural rearrangements of chromosomes and wholechromosome aneuploidies.
Results: PGT-SR was performed for 48 blastocysts. In 6
cycles for robertsonian translocation carriers 28 blastocystswere obtained, 13 from them had normal/balanced chromo-
some number (46,4%). After 4 embryo transfers 3 patients
achieved pregnancy. The ﬁrst pregnancy resulted in delivery
of a healthy child and 2 pregnancies are prolonging. In 5
cycles for reciprocal translocation carriers 14 blastocysts were
obtained, 2 from them (from different patients) had normal/balanced chromosome number (14,3%). After 2 embryo
transfers both patients became pregnant. In 2 cycles for
inversion carriers we obtained 6 blastocysts, in both casesthere was one blastocyst with normal/balanced chromosome
number (33,3%). One patient has ongoing pregnancy, the
other one is waiting for embryo transfer.
Conclusions: Transfer of embryos without chromosomal
imbalances is important factor for successful implantation,
pregnancy and delivery a healthy baby. IVF +PGT-SR is
effective method for carriers of balanced chromosomal
rearrangements that can be used for the earliest prevention
of hereditary pathology.
O. Yacuts: None. J. Tsukerman: None. A. Zhabins-
kaya: None. A. Alekseeva: None. S. Volokhanovitch:
None. O. Tishkevich: None.
E-P01.40
Results of karyotype analysis of 7975 pregnancies prenatalyidenti ﬁed with amniocentesis in Turkey
A. Pazarbasi1, O. Demirhan1, H. U. Luleyap1, S. Kocaturk-Sel1,
D. Alptekin1, M. B. Yilmaz1, S. N. Ilgaz1, L. Ozpak1, I. N. Uslu1,
G. Ay1, S. Buyukkurt2Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 8831Cukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey,2Cukurova University,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Adana, Turkey
Introduction: Amniocentesis is a very crucial diagnostic
procedure for preventing the birth of genetically defective
fetuses in order to decrease the prevalence of genetic dis-
eases in populations.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective review of our
amniocentesis database for the period from January 2000 to
February 2018 was carried out. The karyotyping of 7975fetuses was carried out in Department of Medical Biology
from the samples of amniotic ﬂuids which were sent from
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics of BalcaliHospital. A standart nomenclature has been developed to
describe each of types of abnormality found in human
chromosomes.
Results: A total of 7975 amniocentesis specimens were
processed during the study period. 545 fetuses (6.83%) had
various chromosomal abnormalities. 56.33% of abnormalkaryotypes (307 cases) were numerical and 41.46% (226
cases) were structural. Both numerical and structural
chromosomal aberrations were observed in 12 cases(2.20%). The ratios were as: trisomy 21 (46.90%), trisomy
18 (18.24%), monosomy X (10.42%), trisomy 13 (6.84%),
Triploidy (5.21%), Klinefelter Syndrome (3.58%), TrisomyX (1.30%), XYY Syndrome (0.97%), and the others in all
numerical abnormalities. The frequent structural abnormal-
ities were as: 46,XX/XY,inv(9)(p11;q12)/(p11;q13)(33.18%), 46,XX/XY,1qh( +)(10.17%), 46,XY,Yqh(-)
(5.30%), 46,XX/XY,16qh( +)(4.86%), 46,XX/XY,9qh( +)
(4.42%) and 46,XY,Yqh( +) (4.98%). Balanced and unba-
lanced translocations, deletions and duplications were also
found in less ratio.
Conclusions: According to the literature and our results,
advanced maternal age is the main cause of fetal
chromosomal abnormalities. Fetal chromosomal abnorm-
ality ratio that we found was 6.83%. This ratio emphasizethe importance of prenatal diagnosis.
A. Pazarbasi: None. O. Demirhan: None. H.U.
Luleyap: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. D. Alptekin:
None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S.N. Ilgaz: None. L. Ozpak:
None. I.N. Uslu: None. G. Ay: None. S.
Buyukkurt: None.
E-P01.41
Prenatal diagnosis of foetuses with cardiac sonographicabnormalities by array comparative genomic hybridization
K. Sobecka1, M. Bartnik-G łaska1, M. Smyk1, I. Plaskota1,J .
Castañeda1,B .W i śniowiecka-Kowalnik1, J. Bernaciak1,M .Kędzior1, A. Kuci ńska-Chahwan2, A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak1,
T. Roszkowski2,M .D ębska3, N. Bezniakow1, A. Barczyk1,P .
Kretowicz3,P .W łasienko1, K. Jakubów-Durska1, E. Obersztyn1,
B. A. Nowakowska1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,2I Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Centre of Postgraduate
Education (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland,3II Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Centre of PostgraduateEducation (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland
Congenital heart defects occur in 8-10 out of 1000 live born
newborns and are one of the most common causes of their
death. In fetuses, congenital heart defects are found 3-5
times more often. Currently, Array Comparative GenomicHybridization (array CGH) is recommended by the Amer-
ican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists as a ﬁrst
line test in the prenatal diagnosis of fetuses with sono-graphic abnormalities especially cardiac defects.
We present the results of oligonucleotide array applica-
tion in a cohort of 353 prenatal cases with the fetal cardiacabnormalities, detected by ultrasound scan. In all cases
amniocentesis was performed at 12-24 weeks of gestation.
DNA was extracted from amniotic ﬂuid and trophoblast.
Array CGH was performed using 60K microarrays 8x60K
from Oxford Gene Technology (CytoSure ISCA, v2
and v3).
The most commonly found (56%) are aneuploidy:
chromosomal trisomy 21, 18, 13 and Turner syndrome. In
cases with aneuploidy, the most common heart malforma-tions are atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), ventricular
septal defect (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), atrial septal
defect (ASD) and hypoplastic left heart syndrome, (HLHS).Heart defects are a characteristic phenotypic feature in
common microdeletion/microduplication syndromes (34%),
for example in the cases with deletion syndrome 22q11.2the most commonly defects are TOF, VSD and aortic
coarctation (CAT). Rare aberrations accounted for 10% of
all abnormal results.
Prenatal array-CGH is the only method permitting to the
identi ﬁcation of all unbalanced aberrations (number and
structure) with a much higher resolution than the currentlyapplied traditional assessment techniques karyotype.
K. Sobecka: None. M. Bartnik-G łaska: None. M.
Smyk: None. I. Plaskota: None. J. Castañeda: None. B.
Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. J. Bernaciak: None. M.
Kędzior: None. A. Kuci ńska-Chahwan: None. A. Kut-
kowska-Ka źmierczak: None. T. Roszkowski: None. M.
Dębska: None. N. Bezniakow: None. A. Barczyk: None.
P. Kretowicz: None. P. W łasienko: None. K. Jakubów-
Durska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B.A.
Nowakowska: None.884 J. del PicchiaE-P01.42
Detection of chromosomal anomalies from South of
Turkey: QF PCR versus cytogenetic
S. Kocaturk-Sel1, A. Pazarbasi1, B. Yilmaz1, U. Luleyap1,O .
Demirhan1, D. Alptekin1, S. Ilgaz1, L. Ozpak1, N. Uslu1,G .A y1,
S. Buyukkurt2
1University of Cukurova Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey,2University of Cukurova
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Adana, Turkey
Introduction: In the early 1990 s, FISH and, more
recently, QF-PCR entered to the ﬁeld of prenatal diag-
nosis, to overcome the need of fetal cell culturing, hence
to allow rapid diagnosis of some selected chromosomal
anomalies. Rapid QF-PCR analysis for the common tri-somies 13, 18, and 21 and sex chromosome aneuploidy is
now offered in many centers to women, who undergo
invasive prenatal diagnosis b y amniocentesis or chorionic
villus sampling. This is usually performed in addition
to the subsequent full chromosome analysis of
cultured cells.
Materials and Methods: The karyotyping and QF-PCR
were carried out to amniotic ﬂuids of 1380 fetuses from
January 2013 to January 2018. The diagnosis of commonchromosomal numerical and structural anomalies were
routinely performed by standard cytogenetic techniques.
The QF-PCR ampli ﬁcations were performed using trisomy
detection kit. The results from both methods were compared
in terms of structural anomalies.
Results: In our retrospective study, we detected 135 cases
with numerical (48/135) and structural (87/135) anomalies.
The various types of structural anomalies were found with
conventional cytogenetic methods in 87 cases, who,however, were found normal with QF-PCR. No false
aneuploidic results were observed by QF-PCR method and
two methods are in accordance with each other. Discussion:
Aneuploidic QF-PCR results were validated with cytoge-
netic analyses to complete the diagnosis. The QF-PCR is an
easier and a faster test, it has a limitation of not to be able toscan full karyotype. In conclusion, QF-PCR and cytogenetic
methods are important prenatal tests that completes
each other.
S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. A. Pazarbasi: None. B. Yilmaz:
None. U. Luleyap: None. O. Demirhan: None. D.
Alptekin: None. S. Ilgaz: None. L. Ozpak: None. N.
Uslu: None. G. Ay: None. S. Buyukkurt: None.
E-P01.43
Distribution of FMR1 andFMR2 repeats in Argentinean
patients with primary ovarian insuf ﬁciencyL. D. Espeche1, V. Chiauzzi2, I. Ferder2, M. Arrar3, A. P. Solari1,
C. D. Bruque1, M. Delea1, S. Belli4, C. S. Fernández1,N .D .
Buzzalino1, E. H. Charreau2, L. B. Dain1
1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica- ANLIS, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina,2Instituto de Biología y
Medicina Experimental (IByME)-CONICET, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina,3Instituto de Química-
Física de los Materiales, Medio Ambiente y Energía,CONICET, and Departamento de Química Inorgánica,
Analítica y Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma deBuenos Aires, Argentina,
4División de Endocrinología,
Hospital de Agudos Carlos G. Durand, Ciudad Autónoma de
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Introduction: the premutation state of FMR1 (Fragile X
Mental Retardation 1) has been associated with primaryovarian insuf ﬁciency (POI), and is the most common
known genetic cause for 46,XX patients. Nevertheless, very
few studies have analyzed its frequency in Latin Americanpopulations.
Additionally, a relationship between alleles carrying a
cryptic microdeletion in the 5 ’UTR of FMR2 and the onset
of POI has only been studied in one population. Our aim
was to analyze the incidence of FMR1 premutations and
putative microdeletions in exon 1 of FMR2 in a cohort of
Argentinean women with POI.
Materials and Methods: we studied 133 patients and 84
controls. Fluorescent PCR was performed, and the FMR2
exon 1 was further sequenced in samples presenting less
than 11 repeats.
Results: we found the frequency of FMR1 premutations
to be 6.7% and 2.9% for familial and sporadic patients,
respectively. Among controls, 1/84 women presented a
premutation. In addition, although we did not ﬁnd
microdeletions in FMR2 , we observed a change (T >C)
adjacent to the repeats in two sisters with POI. Given the
repetitive nature of the sequence involved, we could notascertain whether this represents a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) or a deletion.
Conclusion: a relationship between FMR2 and POI could
not be established for our population.
This research was supported by grants from the Agencia
Nacional de Promoción Cientí ﬁca y Tecnológica
(ANPCYT, grant number PICT-00208), from the Admin-
istración Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud
(FOCANLIS) and from Fundación Roemmers.
L.D. Espeche: None. V. Chiauzzi: None. I. Ferder:
None. M. Arrar: None. A.P. Solari: None. C.D. Bruque:
None. M. Delea: None. S. Belli: None. C.S. Fernández:
None. N.D. Buzzalino: None. E.H. Charreau: None. L.B.
Dain: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 885E-P01.45
Association analysis of HLA-G (rs41557518) and VEGF-A
(rs2010963) polymorphisms with recurrent miscarriages
V. Kalotra1,2, G. Singh1,3, V. Sharma3, I. Sharma3, M. Lall2,I .
Verma2, S. Sharma3, A. Kaur1
1Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar, India,2Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics,
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India,3Shri Mata
Vaishno Devi University, Katra, India
Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is de ﬁned as the loss of 2 or
more clinical pregnancies and affects 15-20% of couples.
Nearly 50% RM cases remain idiopathic. A successfulpregnancy requires coordinated interaction of several com-
ponents between mother and fetus. It has been postulated
that abnormal maternal and fetal expression of genes whichare associated with immunity, angiogenesis and apoptosis
may be contributing to cases of recurrent miscarriages.
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A) protein isan antiapoptotic, mitogenic and major angiogenic factor and
a prime regulator of endothelial cell proliferation. It plays an
essential role in physiological vasculogenesis and vascularpermeability. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G gene is a
non-classical HLA class Ib gene and favours maternal
acceptance of the semi-allogenic fetus by modulating thematernal immune system during pregnancy. The present
study determines the association of HLA-G (rs41557518)
and VEGF-A (rs2010963) polymorphisms in 100 RM
women who had experienced at least two or more con-
secutive miscarriages, their 100 male partners and 100
healthy control females who had at least one healthy liveborn and no miscarriage. The genotyping was performed by
using AGENA MassARRAY. The variants showed dis-
tribution following Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.05).The variant rs41557518 showed a signi ﬁcant association
(p<0.05) for recurrent miscarriages when compared
between RM women and control women. Further investi-gations with increased sample size may provide conclusive
results about the association of these variants with recurrent
miscarriages. The ﬁnancial assistance to Vishali Kalotra
(DST/ INSPIRE Fellowship/ 2013/ 889) from Govt. of India
is duly acknowledged.
V. Kalotra: None. G. Singh: None. V. Sharma: None. I.
Sharma: None. M. Lall: None. I. Verma: None. S.
Sharma: None. A. Kaur: None.
E-P01.46
Increased risk for recurrent pregnancy loss in FXIII V34L
and PAI-1 4G/5G compound heterozigots
I. Joksic1, G. Joksic21Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia,
2Institute of Nuclear Sciencies 'Vinca, Belgrade, Serbia
Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a heterogeneous condi-
tion affecting up to 5% of women of reproductive age.
Proper formation of placenta is necessary for successfulpregnancy outcome. It has been postulated that FXIII V34L
and PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphisms can interfere with ﬁbri-
nolysis and ﬁbrin cross-linking, and thus contribute to
pregnancy loss. Here we examined the prevalence of
aforementioned polymorphisims among women with his-
tory of recurrent miscarriages and fertile controls.
The study included 70 women with history of at least two
early pregnancy losses (before 20
thgestation week) and 30
fertile controls with no miscarriages. We investigatedpolymorphisim in FXIII (V34L) and PAI -1 (4G/5G) genes
using reverse PCR Vienna lab CVD StrippAssays.
Our results showed no statistically signi ﬁcant difference
in prevalence of FXIII and PAI-1 gene polymorphisms
between two tested groups. However, relative risk for PRL
among women heterozygous for FXIII V34L was 2.81times increased (CI 95%, p 0.02). Using stepwise logistic
regression analysis we showed that combined presence of
high risk genotypes for FXIII and PAI-1 increases relativerisk for RPL 13.98 times (CI 95%, p 0.04).
FXIII V34L polymorphism leads to change in ﬁbrin
structure making it more resistant to ﬁbrinolysis. In
combination with decreased fybrinolitic activity of PAI-1
4G variant it can lead to improper formation of placenta.
Therefore, compound heterozygots for FXII V34L and PAI-1 4G can have increased risk for RPL.
I. Joksic: None. G. Joksic: None.
E-P01.47
Single nucleotide polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor and
recurrent miscarriage
A. Barii ć1, N. Pereza1, S. Ostoji ć1, A. Hodi ć2, B. Peterlin2
1Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia,2Clinical Institute of
Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Introduction: Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is a reproductive
disorder de ﬁned as the loss of two or more pregnancies
from the time of conception until 22 weeks of gestation.Despite the fact that several mechanisms have been pre-
viously described for the pathogenesis of RM, causes of
approximately 50% remain unknown. Recent studies indi-cate association of vitamin D with adverse pregnancy out-
come, including RM. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a
crucial mediator of the pleiotropic cellular effects of vitaminD and its function is in ﬂuenced by several single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). The main objective of the present886 J. del Picchiastudy was to assess whether three different VDR SNPs are
associated with the risk of RM in Slovenian women.
Materials and Methods: A case - control study was
designed to examine the potential association of VDR
polymorphisms (FokI rs222857, Cdx2 rs115688, Taq1
rs731236) with RM. A total of 149 women with a historyof≥3 spontaneous miscarriages of unknown aetiology were
included in the study. The control group consisted of 149
age-matched, healthy women with at least two live births.Genotyping was performed using PCR-RFLP methods.
Results: No statistically signi ﬁcant differences were
found in the distribution of genotype and allele frequenciesof either SNP between patients and controls or patients with
primary and secondary RM. Moreover, we found no
association between abovementioned SNPs and RM underdominant, recessive and codominant genetic models.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that VDR gene
polymorphisms are not a genetic marker for RM inSlovenian women. Research grant numbers:
16.06.2.1.02, 13.06.1.3.32
A. Barii ć:None. N. Pereza: None. S. Ostoji ć:None. A.
Hodi ć:None. B. Peterlin: None.
E-P01.48
Prenatal diagnosis of ring chromosome 4 and Wolf-
Hirschorn syndrome with bilateral polycystic kidney
disease
P. TASDEMIR1, N. D. Gultekin2, F. Ercan3, F. H. Yilmaz2,A .
Acar3, H. Altunhan2
1Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey,2Necmettin
Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty, Department of
Pediatrics. Division of Neonatology, Konya, Turkey,
3Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Division of
Perinatology, Konya, Turkey
Ring chromosomes are unusual abnormalities that are
observed in prenatal diagnosis. A 34-year-old patient
referred for amniocentesis due to abnormal maternal serumscreening result in the 16th week of pregnancy. Cytogenetic
analysis of cultured amniyotic ﬂuid cells revealed out ring
chromosome 4. Both maternal and paternal karyotypes werenormal. Terminal deletion was observed in both 4p and 4q
arms of ring chromosome 4 by ﬂuorescence in situ hybri-
dization (FISH). Also deletion was observed in the Wolf-Hirschorn Syndrome (WHS) critical region of ring chro-
mosome 4 by an additional FISH study. These results were
conﬁrmed by means of microarray analysis showing term-
inal deletions on 4p16.3 (8412 Mb) and 4q35.2 (5361 Mb).
A girl infant born at 36-week gestational age throughceaserean section with severe intrauterine growth retarda-
tion, dysmorphic facial features, hypoplasia of the corpus
callosum and bilateral polycystic kidney disease diagnosed
within prenatal period. Our report describes the prenatal
case with a ring chromosome 4 abnormality with Wolf
Hirschorn Syndrome completely characterized by array-CGH which provided complementary data for prenatal
diagnosis and genetic counseling of this syndrome.
P. Tasdemir: None. N.D. Gultekin: None. F. Ercan:
None. F.H. Yilmaz: None. A. Acar: None. H.
Altunhan: None.
E-P01.49
Co-occurrence of two rare disorders in a non-
consanguineous family
M. Atanasoska1, R. Vazharova1,2, S. Andonova3, L. Balabanski1,
R. Raynova3, I. Bradinova3, A. Savov3, D. Toncheva1,4
1Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov
MD”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,2Soﬁa University St Kliment Ohridski,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical genetics
and Microbiology, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3National Genetic
Laboratory, UHOG “Maichin dom ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of So ﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and Alport
syndrome are rare genetic conditions characterized with
different symptoms and outcomes. Here we present a rarecase with co-occurrence of these two unrelated disorders in
one family. The family came to our attention because of
SMA diagnosed in their ﬁrst child. A heterozygous variant
COL4A5 :c.4228C>T (p.Arg1410Cys), associated with
Alport syndrome, was found accidentally in the mother
through NGS. The family has several further pregnancieswith different outcomes: two miscarriages, one healthy girl
born after prenatal diagnosis and one terminated pregnancy
with SMA.
Materials and Methods: The CVS sample from the sixth
present pregnancy with a male fetus was ﬁrst examined for
deletion of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene by RFLP
analysis. Еxon 46 of COL4A5 was investigated then in the
fetus and the mother ’s father by targeted amplicon
sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq system.
Results: A homozygous deletion of exons 7 and 8 of the
SMN1 gene was not detected. The grandfather and male
fetus were found to be hemizygous carriers of the variantCOL4A5 :c.4228C>T.
Conclusion: The X-linked recessive form of Alport
syndrome is progressive but characterized with largeclinical heterogeneity and variable age of onset in affected
males. Despite unilateral hearing loss, arterial hypertoniaAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 887and visual problems, a diagnosis of Alport syndrome is not
established in the grandfather. Dif ﬁcult ethical questions
concerning the decision about this pregnancy outcome and
the health of the unborn child are raised in this rare case
with co-occurrence of two rare disorders.
M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. S.
Andonova: None. L. Balabanski: None. R. Raynova:
None. I. Bradinova: None. A. Savov: None. D.
Toncheva: None.
E-P01.50
Can tangier disease cause male infertility? A case reportand an overview on genetic causes of male infertility &
hormonal axis involved
L. Stocchi1, E. Giardina2, L. Varriale1, A. Sechi3, A. Vagnini1,G .
Parri1, M. Valentini1, M. Capalbo1
1Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti Marche Nord, Pesaro,
Italy,2Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS-Univ. Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy,3Regional Center for Rare Diseases Academic
Hospita, Udine, Italy
Introduction: Tangier disease is an autosomal recessive
disorder caused by mutations in the ABCA1 gene and
characterized by the accumulation of cholesteryl ester in
various tissues and a near absence of high-density lipo-protein. The subject in this investigation was a 36-year-old
man with Tangier disease and with a severe oligoastheno-
teratozoospermia diagnosis. Testosterone is the sex hor-mone necessary for spermatogenesis and cholesterol is its
precursor; hence, we hypothesized that the characteristic
cholesterol de ﬁciency in Tangier disease patients could
compromise their fertility. The aim of the study was to
therefore to determine if there is an association between
Tangier disease and male infertility.
Materials and Methods: After excluding viral, infec-
tious, genetic and anatomical causes of the subject ’s
oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, we performed a hormonalanalysis to verify our hypothesis.
Results: The patient was found to be negative for
frequent bacteria and viruses. The subject showed a normalmale karyotype and tested negative for Yq microdeletions
and Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator
gene mutations. A complete urological examination wasperformed, and primary hypogonadism was also excluded.
Conversely, hormonal analyses showed that the subject had
a high level of follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizinghormone, low total testosterone and a signi ﬁcant decline in
inhibin B.
Conclusion: We believe that the abnormally low
cholesterol levels typically found in subjects with Tangier
disease may result in a reduced testosterone productionwhich in turn could affect the hormonal axis responsible for
spermatogenesis leading to a defective maturation of
spermatozoa.
L. Stocchi: None. E. Giardina: None. L. Varriale:
None. A. Sechi: None. A. Vagnini: None. G. Parri: None.
M. Valentini: None. M. Capalbo: None.
E-P01.51
A supernumerary ring chromosome 18 in a fetus withtetralogy of Fallot
J. B. Gaillard1, A. Schneider1, J. Puechberty2, P. Blanchet2,C .
Wells2, F. Fuchs3, T. Guignard1, F. Pellestor1, V. Gatinois1
1Génétique Chromosomique, CHU, Montpellier, France,
2Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France,3Centre
Pluridisciplinaire de Diagnostic Prénatal, CHU, Montpellier,
France
In prenatal diagnosis, small Supernumerary Marker Chro-
mosomes (sSMC) occur in 0.072%. We report here a fetuswith a sSMC, identi ﬁed as a ring chromosome 18, asso-
ciated with a cardiac defect.
Patient: We present a 36-year old pregnant patient who
was referred to the Center for Prenatal Diagnosis at
Montpellier University Hospital for a ventricular septal
defect, conotruncal type, consistent with a diagnosis oftetralogy of Fallot, revealed on 32 weeks ’gestation
ultrasound screening.
Results: Rapid interphase screening performed on 133
uncultured amniocytes showed 58 nuclei with 3 signals for
centromere 18 probe (D18Z1). Surprisingly the karyotype
showed a mosaic ring chromosome 18, dicentric in somemetaphases, objectived by additional FISH analysis with
D18Z1 probeConsequently, the chromosomal formula was
established as follows:47,XX, +r(18)(p11.22q11.2)[19/20]/
46,XX[1/20].ish r(18)(wcp18 +,D18Z1 +)[11/49]/r(18)
(wcp18 +,D18Z1 ++)[3/49]Array-CGH analysis was per-
formed to precise chromosomal content. It revealed thepresence of a 5.9-Mb duplication at chromosomal region
18p11.22p11.21 and a second one of 5.8-Mb at chromo-
somal region 18q11.1q11.2 encompassing the entire gene,GATA6 . Mutations in GATA6 are described in cases of
tetralogy of Fallot and some authors argue that GATA6 gain
can be observed in patients with conotruncal defect,suggesting a phenotype-gene dosage relationship.
Conclusion: To date, only ﬁve cases of supernumerary
ring chromosome 18 have been reported with a widephenotypic range due to variations in genetic content. In our
case, we identi ﬁedGATA6 as a good candidate gene to
explain cardiac defect. We suggest that molecular char-acterization of sSMC may help genetic counseling and a
better understanding of chromosomal imbalances.888 J. del PicchiaJ.B. Gaillard: None. A. Schneider: None. J. Puechb-
erty: None. P. Blanchet: None. C. Wells: None. F. Fuchs:
None. T. Guignard: None. F. Pellestor: None. V.
Gatinois: None.
E-P01.53
Family case of Turner syndrome in ring X chromosome
mosaicism
N. V. Oparina1, O. Pilyaeva1, S. Kalinenkova1, A. Latypov1,V .
Chernykh2
1Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institution, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Research Centre for Medical Genetics,
Moscow, Russian Federation
Clinical case: We report a family (mother, 52 years and two
her daughters - 32 and 25 years) with TS. The patients had asimilar phenotype: short stature (mother's height - 140 cm,
weight - 52 kg; daughter's height - 138/140 cm, weight - 38/
39 kg), narrow palate, a low-set and posteriorly rotated ears,short neck, low posterior hair line, shield shaped chest,
scoliosis, normal intelligence. The mother had menarche at
13 y.o., and menopause at 45 y.o., 5 pregnancies ended 2miscarriages, 1 medical abortion and two 2 births (2
daughters). They had a regular menstrual cycle. Older
daughter was infertile because of obstruction of the fallo-pian tubes, younger daughter was unmarried.
Materials and Methods: Chromosome analysis was
done on peripheral blood lymphocytes. FISH analysis withthe DNA probes (DXZ1, KAL Xp22.3) was performed on
peripheral blood lymphocytes and buccal smear cells. At
least 100 cells were analyzed for each FISH analysis.
Results: Mosaic ring (X)(p22.3q28).ish (DXZ1 +,KAL
+) was detected in mother and her daughters. The patients
presented 45,X/46,Xr(X) mosaicism with similar propor-tions of cells containing the r(X) in the lymphocytes and
buccal smear cells: 8% and 26% (mother), 9% and 40% and
11% and 47% (daughters, 32 and 25 y.o.), respectively. Theproportion of the cell lines with and with no ring X
chromosome is between tissues in the same TS patient.
There is a positive correlation between age and percentage(%) of r(X) in epithelia cells. There is no similar correlation
for mosaicism in the lymphocytes.
N.V. Oparina: None. O. Pilyaeva: None. S. Kalinen-
kova: None. A. Latypov: None. V. Chernykh: None.
E-P01.55
Which embryo should be transferred after preimplantation
genetic diagnosis (PGD) for X-3 reciprocal translocation in
male patient?S. CHAMAYOU, M. Sicali, D. Lombardo, E. Maniscalchi, C.
Alecci, A. Guglielmino
Unità di Medicina della Riproduzione, SANT'AGATA LI
BATTIATI (CT), Italy
Introduction: Balanced autosome-gonosome translocations
occur in about 1/30,000 live births. In women with a
balanced X-autosome translocation, the normal X chromo-some is preferentially lyonised and the phenotype is normal
but gene silencing may occur on X-autosome translocated
chromosome. The phenomenon is unpredictable and has asconsequence from premature ovarian failure to major
genetic disorders and mental retardation.
Materials and Methods: The female patient had normal
karyotype. The male patient had a karyotype with balanced
translocation 46,Y,t(X;3)(p11.2;p14)mat, and a normal
phenotype. The female patient underwent two cycles ofovarian stimulation. ICSI was performed on vitri ﬁed/
warmed and fresh oocytes. Embryos were biopsied at
blastocyst stage, on day 5. Chromosomal analysis wasperformed by Next Generation Sequencing.
Results: Eleven blastocysts were obtained and biopsied
from 23 vitri ﬁed/warmed and fresh metaphase II oocytes.
Two embryos were diagnosed 46,XY, two embryos were
diagnosed 46,XX; four embryos were diagnosed
3p14→cen→3qter and monosomy Xp11.2 →cen→Xqter,
from 2:2 segregation and adjacent-2 disjunction. Three
embryos were diagnosed aneuploid [45,X0;45,XY,del
(2);46,XY,del(8)(qter →q22.1)]. We knew that the two
46,XX embryos inherited the balanced translocation from
the father and the two 46,XY embryos had a normal
karyotype. Because the phenotype of balanced translocatedfemale embryos could not be predicted, the couple asked to
have a 46,XY embryo transferred. Clinical pregnancy was
obtained.
Conclusions: Proposing PGD-SR for gonosome-
autosome reciprocal translocation implies the risk to
exclude balanced translocated female embryos with anormal phenotype for transfer because the early and late
normal development at post-natal stage cannot predicted
based on by the only chromosomal analysis.
S. Chamayou: None. M. Sicali: None. D. Lombardo:
None. E. Maniscalchi: None. C. Alecci: None. A.
Guglielmino: None.
E-P01.56
Prevalence of Y microdeletions in Turkish azoospermia oroligospermia patients
Y. Karaca1, A. Durmaz1, A. Aykut1, E. Karaca1, B. Durmaz1,E .
Pariltay1, H. Akin1, H. Onay1, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay2Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 8891Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, İzmir, Turkey,2Ege University Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Genetics; Ege University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Pediatric Genetics, İzmir, Turkey
Infertiliy is considered to be a reproductive system disease.
It is estimated to affect 15% of couples worldwide. Male
factors contributing to infertiliy makes up around 40-50% of
the cases. Y chromosome infertiliy makes up 5-10% of thecases with azoospermia or severe oligospermia. Y chro-
mosome infertiliy is caused by the deletions azoospermia
factor (AZF) region located in proximal Yq.
Purpose of this study is to determine the frequencies of
AZFa, AZFb or AZFc deletions among the males with
azoospermia or oligospermia referred to our laboratory forfurther evaluation between 2009-2018.
Our study consisted of 1926 male patients with
azoospermia or oligospermia. We used ChromoQuant ®
AZF kit to detect the deletions. For AZFa sY86 and sY84,
for AZFb sY127 and sY134, for AZFc sY160, sY254 and
sY255 markers were utilized.
Among 1926 number of patients, 116 (6.2%) of them had
at least one of AZFa, AZFb or AZFc deletions. The most
common AZF deletion was AZFc deletion which wasdetected in 50.8% (n =59) of the patients. The others were
AZFb+c in 16.3% (n =19), AZFa +b+c in 15.5% (n =18),
AZFa in 11.2% (n =13) and AZFb in 6% (n =7) of patients,
respectively.
Percentage of Y microdeletions might be higher in more
select and homogeneous populations. It is hopeful thatmajority of AZF deletions were AZFc microdeletions in our
study, since males with AZFc deletions have an oppurtunity
for fertility via TESE.
Y. Karaca: None. A. Durmaz: None. A. Aykut: None.
E. Karaca: None. B. Durmaz: None. E. Pariltay: None.
H. Akin: None. H. Onay: None. O. Cogulu: None. F.
Ozkinay: None.
E-P01.57
Y-chromosome haplogroup architecture confers
susceptibility to AZFc microrearrangements
M. Kuzmanovska1, P. Noveski1, M. Terzic1, T. Plaseski2,K .
Kubelka-Sabit3, V. Filipovski3, S. Lazarevski3, E. Sukarova
Stefanovska1, D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska1
1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
“Georgi D. Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and
Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
2Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, Faculty of
Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republicof,
3Clinical Hospital “Acibadem Sistina ”, Skopje, Macedonia,
The Former Yugoslav Republic ofIntroduction: The lack of the entire AZFc region has long
been shown to cause azoospermia or severe oligozoos-
permia, however, it is still arguable to what extent AZFc
microrearrangements contribute to impaired spermatogen-
esis. The aim of our study was to investigate the potential
risk AZFc microrearrangements may deliver to spermato-genesis and to ascertain the possible association of Y-
haplogroups with distinct AZFc microrearrangements and
spermatogenic impairment.
Materials/methods: A total of 486 men were examined,
mainly Macedonians and Albanians, among which 338
were azoospermic/oligozoospermic and 148 normozoosper-mic. The AZFc microrearrangements were analyzed with
STS and SFV markers, QF-PCR and MLPA analysis.
Additionally, we determined the Y-haplogroups of allsubjects using direct SNP typing and indirect prediction
with Y-STR markers.
Results: We observed two microdeletions: gr/gr and b2/
b3, three microduplications: b2/b4, gr/gr, b2/b3 and one
complex rearrangement gr/gr del. +b2/b4 dupl. Our results
did not show a statistical association of impaired sperma-togenesis with microrearrangements, however a signi ﬁcant
correlation of speci ﬁc rearrangements with distinct hap-
logroups was observed. The b2/b4 and gr/gr duplicationswere statistically associated with HgR1a (p =7.27x10
-13
and p=0.0026 respectively), whereas the b2/b3 deletions
were detected almost exclusively in HgE (p =0.0051),
implying that the Y-chromosome background confers
susceptibility to AZFc microrearrangements. Subgroup
analysis based on ethnicity revealed a signi ﬁcant difference
between the frequency of Macedonian and Albanian HgR1a
b2/b4 duplication carriers (p =0.0315).
Conclusion: These results are speci ﬁc to a population of
Macedonians and Albanians, thus due to the perceived
“regionality ”of Y-chromosome microrearrangemets and
haplogroups this study further adds to the body of literature.
M. Kuzmanovska: None. P. Noveski: None. M. Terzic:
None. T. Plaseski: None. K. Kubelka-Sabit: None. V.
Filipovski: None. S. Lazarevski: None. E. Sukarova
Stefanovska: None. D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska: None.
E-P02 Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain)
E-P02.01
Spectrum of clinical phenotypes associated with PAX6
missense mutations
T. A. Vasilyeva1, V. V. Kadyshev1, A. A. Voskresenskaya2,O .A .
Shagina1, A. V. Marakhonov1, R. A. Zinchenko1,3;
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Cheboksary branch of S. Fyodorov Eye890 J. del PicchiaMicrosurgery Federal State Institution, Cheboksary, Russian
Federation,3Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Mutations of the PAX6 gene cause several
phenotypes characterized by complex of ocular mal-formations varying in expres sivity and combination. The
most part of loss-of-function (LoF) mutations causes
aniridia (absence of the iris a mong other signs) or closely
related phenotypes, while the majority of missense
mutations could lead to several other conditions. To make
steps towards investigation of phenotype-genotype cor-relations, the clinical picture of 6 patients with different
missense mutations in the PAX6 gene is analyzed.
Materials and Methods: A cohort of patients with PAX6
missense mutations underwent ophthalmological examina-
tion and molecular diagnosis.
Results: Two mutations cause aniridia phenotype, three
others result in closely related phenotypes. A single
missense is associated with iris damage different from
aniridia (see Table). A carrier of the mutation also hasretinal glial layer atrophy, macula hypoplasia, abnormal
retinal pigment epithelium structure, nystagmus and
achromatopsia.
Conclusions: A signi ﬁcant variety of clinical picture
might be partially explained by different etiopathogenetic
mechanisms related to the location and peculiarities ofaffected amino-acid residue. Functional consequences of
missense mutations are to be tested by at least in vitro
analysis. This work is partially supported by RFBR grant17-04-00475.
Phenotypes of PAX6 missense mutations
Mutations Phenotypes
p.(G51R) Iris hypoplasia, cataract, optic nerve hypoplasia
p.(G7R) Partial aniridia, cataract, keratopathy, fovea hypoplasia,
nystagmus
p.(Q47R) Partial aniridia, keratopathy, fovea and optic nerve
hypoplasia, nystagmus
p.(K55T) Complete aniridia, cataract, keratopathy, fovea hypoplasia,
nystagmus
p.(G72S) Iris hypoplasia, anterior synechiae, nystagmus, retinal glial
layer atrophy, macula hypoplasia, abnormal retinalpigment epithelium structure, achromatopsia
p.(S119R) Complete aniridia, nystagmus, cataract, fovea hypoplasia
T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.A.
Voskresenskaya: None. O.A. Shagina: None. A.V.
Marakhonov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.E-P02.03
A novel founder mutation in the ABCA4 gene found in
Bukharian Jewish population, causing cone-rod dystrophy
A. Bar-Shira1, R. Goldstein1, T. Naiman1, S. Simchoni1,Y .
Yaron1,2, A. Orr-Urtreger1,2, S. Ben-Shachar1,2
1Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel,2Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Introduction: Cone-rod dystrophy is a group of eye dis-
orders that affect the light sensitive cells of the retina withprevalence of 1 in 30,000-40,000 individuals. By mid-
adulthood most individuals are legally blind. The ABCA4
gene encodes an ATP-binding cassette transporter foundexclusively in the retina's photoreceptors. Biallelic Muta-
tions in ABCA4 gene cause cone-rod dystrophy.
Materials and Methods: We have performed exome
sequencing in an individual of Jewish Bukharian origin and
a family history resembles autosomal recessive with pseudo
dominant trait. We performed a segregation study for thedisease causing variant and screened this variant in
Bukharian Jewish population.
Results: A 20 year old male, currently blind with a
clinical diagnosis of cone-rod of consanguineous Jews of
Bukharian family was referred for a genetic counseling.
Family history includes maternal great-uncle and daughterwith a clinical picture similar to the probed. The patient was
found to have a novel homozygous mutation c.5059delA in
theABCA4 gene, leading to a premature stop codon and
lack of functioning protein. The parents and a sister were
heterozygous carriers for the familial mutation. The
c.5059delA mutation was found in 5 individuals out of169 Bukharian Jewish unrelated individuals, giving an
estimated carrier frequency of 1:34.
Conclusions: The prevalence of cone-rod dystrophy due
to this founder mutation in Bukharian Jews is expected to be
about 1:4600. It is yet unclear whether this speci ﬁc mutation
causes exclusively cone-rod dystrophy or includes thespectrum of retinal disorders caused by other ABCA4
mutations.
A. Bar-Shira: None. R. Goldstein: None. T. Naiman:
None. S. Simchoni: None. Y. Yaron: None. A. Orr-
Urtreger: None. S. Ben-Shachar: None.
E-P02.05
A novel SCN9A splicing mutation in a compound
heterozygous patient with congenital insensitivity to painand hyposmia
M. Marchi1, V. Provitera2, M. Nolano2,3, M. Romano4,S .
Maccora5, I. D'Amato1, E. Salvi1,6, M. Gerrits7, L. Santoro3,G .
Lauria1,8Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 8911Neuroalgology Unit, IRCCS Foundation “Carlo Besta ”
Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy,2Neurology Department,
Istituti Clinici Scienti ﬁci Maugeri, IRCCS Telese Terme,
Benevento, Italy,3Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive
Sciences and Odontostomatology, University Federico II,
Naples, Italy,4Department of Neurology, AOOR Villa So ﬁa
Cervello, Palermo, Italy,5IRCCS "Bonino-Pulejo", Messina,
Italy,6Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy,7Clinical Genetics and Department of Neurology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
Netherlands,8Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences
"Luigi Sacco", University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Congenital insensitivity to pain (OMIM 243000) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the absenceof pain perception and hyposmia or anosmia. Different loss
of function mutations in SCN9A gene (NM_002977.3),
encoding the sodium channel Nav1.7, have been associatedwith this condition.
A 10-year-old girl with clinical evidences of CIP
underwent the genetic analysis of SCN9A. Blood sampleswere collected from the proband, her unaffected twin and
both the parents. Genomic DNA was sequenced by next
generation sequencing. Transcript analysis were carried outin order to evaluate the mutation consequence on the
mRNA splicing. The cDNA was ampli ﬁed with a speci ﬁc
primer set and different size fragments separated andisolated on agarose gel, then sequenced by Sanger method.
We selected two mutations in SCN9A: a missense
mutation p.Arg896Gln (c.2687G>A), previously describedby Cox et al. and a splicing variant c.1108-2A>G, not yet
reported in public databases. The proband cDNA sequen-
cing showed the delocalization of the acceptor splice-site 46bp downstream, within the exon 10, inducing a deletion
which results in a premature stop codon. Co-segregation
analysis showed that the mother and brother were hetero-zygous carriers of the missense mutation while the father
was heterozygous for the splicing mutation.
The deleterious effect of the missense mutation on the
sodium channel activity is caused by the alteration of the
pore delimiting structure, which is highly conserved in the
evolution. The splicing mutation is a truncating mutationthat impairs the expression of Nav1.7 channel functioning,
providing the explanation of the phenotype.
M. Marchi: None. V. Provitera: None. M. Nolano:
None. M. Romano: None. S. Maccora: None. I.
D'Amato: None. E. Salvi: None. M. Gerrits: None. L.
Santoro: None. G. Lauria: None.
E-P02.06
A novel human mutation associates with increased painthreshold and impaired thermoregulationP. Majdalani1,2, S. Biton1, V. Pinsk3, Z. Shorer4, A. Broides3,R .
Defrin5, R. Zarivach6, D. Landau7, Z. Rudich8, R. Parvari1,2
1The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology
& Genetics; Faculty of Health Sciences (A.B.), Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,2National Institute
of Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,3Pediatric Outpatient Clinic,
Soroka University Medical Center, Ben-Gurion university ofthe Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,
4Pediatric Neurology Unit,
Soroka university medical center, Ben-Gurion university of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,5Department of Physical Therapy,
School of Allied Health Professions. Sackler Faculty of
Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel,6Department of Life Sciences, The
Faculty of Natural Sciences and The Ilse Katz Institute for
Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,7NICU, Soroka university
medical center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel,8Department of Anesthesiology, Soroka
Hospital, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,Israel
Introduction: Congenital insensitivity to pain is a rare
autosomal recessive disease, comprises absence of sensation
to noxious stimuli. The aim of this study is to identify and
characterize the mutation causing congenital insensitivity topain in two consanguineous Israeli-Bedouin families.
Materials and Methods: Two patients ’medical records
were carefully reviewed. Their ﬁrst-degree cousin parents
and siblings underwent a complete physical examination.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood.
Chromosomal microarray analysis, exome capture andsequencing were performed. Data was analyzed for quality,
exome coverage, and exome-wide SNP/InDel. Basic
bioinformatics analysis was performed using Fabric Geno-mics to search for variations.
Results: We found a new mutation in the PRDM12 gene
that was shared by both patients of the two families. Anadditional homozygous mutation presented only in one of
the patients, in a gene that expresses mainly in the CNS and
plays a role in modulating pain and temperature via theopioid system. The mutation leads to deletion of two exons
thus resulting in absence of important domains in the
protein. The mutation didn ’t present in 240 control
chromosomes in the healthy Bedouin population.
Conclusion: Here we present a new mutation in the
PRDM12 gene, thus a novel mutation in a gene that playsan important role in pain regulation. Identifying and
characterization of a new mutation in genes that are part
of the pain mechanisms can lead to developing a newdiagnostic tools, prevention and treatment.892 J. del PicchiaP. Majdalani: None. S. Biton: None. V. Pinsk: None. Z.
Shorer: None. A. Broides: None. R. Defrin: None. R.
Zarivach: None. D. Landau: None. Z. Rudich: None. R.
Parvari: None.
E-P02.07
Warsaw syndrome: two further cases
F. Faletra1, R. Bottega1, E. Colombo2, F. Sirchia1,A .M .
Spinelli1, G. D'Alessandro2, A. Carbone2, F. Fiocchi2,F .
Guidolin1, P. Gasparini1,3
1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,2Città della Salute e
della Scienza, Torino, Italy,3University of Trieste, Trieste,
Italy
Introduction: Warsaw syndrome is an autosomal recessive
cohesinopathy due to biallelic DDX11 mutations. Until now
have been described only seven patients and 7 different
mutations. The clinical picture is characterized by: 1) pre
and postnatal growth retardation; 2) severe microcephaly; 3)mild to moderate intellectual disability; 4) severe sensor-
ineural hearing loss with cochlear malformations; 5) skin
pigmentation anomalies; 6) facial dysmorphisms.
Case report . We report the case of two sisters (5 yo and
3½ yo), born to healthy and non consanguineous parents
who came to our Institute for a bilateral sensorineuralhearing loss and cochlear hypoplasia. The visit highlighted
hyposomia with values lower than the 3rd percentile from
the prenatal age and a severe and progressive microcephaly.They showed hyperpigmented straeks and hypopigmented
spots enlarging over time, and dysmorphic features: mild
bilateral epicanthus, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, promi-
nent nose with small alae nasi, cup ears, micrognathia, and
bilateral clinodactyly. Moreover, they showed a language
delay although the IQ tests were for both of them in thenormal range. There were no cardiac or abdominal
malformations. Since the cell cultures demonstrated an
elevated spontaneous and mitomycin C (MMC)-inducedchromosomal breakages, and sister chromatid cohesion
defects, a DDX11 gene analysis was carried out, showing
two novel variants (c.907_920del (p.Lys303Glufs*22) andc.2507T>C (p.Leu836Pro)) predicted to be likely pathoge-
netic according to the ACMG/AMP 2015 guidelines.
Conclusion . Our case enlarges the knowledge about the
clinical and molecular data of Warsaw syndrome. Func-
tional analysis are now in progress to demonstrate the
pathogenicity of the mutations.
F. Faletra: None. R. Bottega: None. E. Colombo: None.
F. Sirchia: None. A.M. Spinelli: None. G. D'Alessandro:
None. A. Carbone: None. F. Fiocchi: None. F. Guidolin:
None. P. Gasparini: None.E-P02.08
FGF3 gene mutations related to two syndromic Congenital
deafness cases: Congenital deafness with inner ear agenesis
(Michel aplasia), microtia, and microdontia and Otodental
dysplasia
A. Türky ılmaz1, B. B. Geçkinli1, E. Arslan Ate ş2,M .A .
Söylemez1, A. I. Güney1, P. Ata1, A. Arman1
1Marmara University School of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey,2Marmara University
Pendik Research and Training Hospital, Department ofMedical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Theﬁbroblast growth factors (FGFs) com-
prise a family of signaling molecules that regulate cell
proliferation, differentiation, and migration during embry-
ogenesis and are essential for appropriate patterning andformation of the developing inner ear. Congenital deafness
with inner ear agenesis, microtia, and microdontia is caused
by biallelic mutations in the FGF3 gene. Otodental dys-plasia is a syndrome of sensorineural deafness and globo-
dontia, which has been associated with heterozygous
microdeletions of chromosome 11q13 involving theFGF3 gene.
Materials and Methods: For case one, FGF3 gene
sequence analysis using Sanger sequencing method wasused whereas array-CGH was performed for case two.
Cases: Case one is a 5 year-old female who was born at
term by normal delivery. Her parents were consanguineous.(second cousins). She had a long face, with micrognathia,
microtia, microdontia and preauricular skin tags. Case two
is a one year-old male who was born at term by normaldelivery. He had a long face, long philtrum, anteverted
nostrils, cupped shaped ears, preauricular skin tags and
single transverse palmar crease on left hand. Percentilevalues of all anthropometric measurements were between
10 and 25 in both cases and audiologic examination of both
cases revealed bilateral sensorineural deafness.
Results: In case one a novel homozygous c.8T>G (p.
Leu3Arg) mutation was found in the FGF3 gene. Case two
had heterozygous 11q13.3q13.4 microdeletion (2,804 kbp)including FGF3 gene.
Conclusions: Our cases have typical clinic features of
FGF3 related syndromic deafness. These cases have beenreported to contribute to genotype-phenotype correlations in
FGF3 related syndromic deafness.
A. Türky ılmaz: None. B.B. Geçkinli: None. E. Arslan
Ateş:None. M.A. Söylemez: None. A.I. Güney: None. P.
Ata: None. A. Arman: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 893E-P02.09
Analysis of GJB2 mutations and the clinical manifestation
in a large Hungarian cohort
A. Gal1, N. Kecskemeti1,2, M. Szonyi2, A. Gaborjan2, M. Kustel2,
G. M. Milley1, A. Suveges1, A. Kekesi1, A. Illés1, L. Tamas2,A .
Szirmai2, M. J. Molnar1
1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,2Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: Pathogenic variants of the gap junction beta
2(GJB2 ) gene are responsible for about 50% of hereditary
non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL). In this
study, we report the mutation frequency of GJB2 in 239
Hungarian NSHL patients and the phenotype comparisonbetween homozygous / compound heterozygous and
heterozygous cases.
Methods: The total coding region of the GJB2 gene was
analyzed with Sanger or NGS sequencing for 239 patients
with NSHL and 160 controls.
Results: Homozygous and compound heterozygous
GJB2 mutations were associated with early oneset serious
NSHL in 28 patients. In 24 patients two deletion or
nonsense mutation were present with prelingual NSHL,while in compound heterozygous cases with the combina-
tion of deletion and missense mutation associated with
milder postlingual phenptype. Further 25 cases harboredsingle heterozygous GJB2 mutations associated with later
oneset, milder NSHL. The most common mutation was the
c.35delG deletion, with 12.6% allele frequency.
Conclusion: T he mutation frequency of GJB2 is lower
than other European cohort. The most serious cases
associated with homozygous and compound heterozygousmutations. In our cohort the hearing impairment and age of
oneset was not altered between in cases with only one
heterozygous GJB2 mutations and wild type genotype,
which might be exclude the opportunity of autosomal
dominant inheritance. In early onset, serve to profound
hearing loss cases if the GJB2 analysis results only one
heterozygous alterations further next generation sequencing
test is highly recommended. This study was supported
by the Hungarian Brain Research Program (KTIA_13_-NAP-A-III/6).
A. Gal: None. N. Kecskemeti: None. M. Szonyi: None.
A. Gaborjan: None. M. Kustel: None. G.M. Milley:
None. A. Suveges: None. A. Kekesi: None. A. Illés: None.
L. Tamas: None. A. Szirmai: None. M.J. Molnar: None.E-P02.10
A retrospective review of a multidisciplinary hearing loss
clinic: 2015-2017
H. Ho1,2, A. Springer1,2, M. F. Hunter1,2
1Monash Genetics, Melbourne, Australia,2Department of
Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
Background: We established a multidisciplinary paediatric
genetic hearing loss clinic for considering genetic diagnoses
in children and offering further genetic testing for a subset.Patients were prescreened for GJB2, microarray, imaging,
TFT, CMV and haematuria/proteinuria prior to genetics
assessment. Funded genetic testing was routinely offered incases where there was a family history, management or
pregnancy implications, or patients could self-fund.
Method: We performed a retrospective review to assess
rates of genetic testing and diagnosis from 2015-2017.
Outpatient records were reviewed and data, including
referral source, ethnicity, family history, inheritance pattern,phenotype, genetic testing, and diagnosis were extracted
and analysed for individuals seen in the clinic during 2015-
2017.
Results: A total of 90 patients were seen, 22 received a
genetic diagnosis and 7 a likely genetic diagnosis (32%). Of
these gene panel or exome sequencing was performed in 42and a genetic diagnosis was con ﬁrmed or likely in 17
(40%). Cascade testing was performed in relatives of 17
probands, and demonstrated that 13 cases were inherited. 25patients had syndromic or likely syndromic causes.
Discussion : This review reports on real world assessment
and selection for genetic testing in hearing loss. Clinicalprioritisation for genetic testing to maximise clinical utility
is appropriate within the public healthcare setting and the
application of methods that ef ﬁciently optimise outcomes
for patients effectively bene ﬁt the healthcare system. Our
diagnosis rate is higher than previously reported similar
studies and demonstrates the clinical utility of NGS testingin a carefully selected subset of patients.
H. Ho: None. A. Springer: None. M.F. Hunter: None.
E-P02.11
Allelic diversity of the GJB2 gene in deaf patients and
ethnically matched controls from Turkic-speakingpopulations of South Siberia
M. V. Zytsar1,2, M. S. Bady-Khoo3, E. A. Maslova1,2,V .Y .
Danilchenko1,2, N. A. Barashkov4,5, I. V. Morozov2,6,A .A .
Bondar6, O. L. Posukh1,2
1Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics,
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,894 J. del PicchiaNovosibirsk, Russian Federation,2Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Scienti ﬁc
Research Institute of Medical-Social Problems and
Management of the Republic of Tuva, Kyzyl, Russian
Federation,4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MK Ammosov
North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, RussianFederation,
5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Yakut
Scienti ﬁc Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk,
Russian Federation,6Institute of Chemical Biology and
Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
Mutations in the GJB2 gene have the most contribution to
hearing loss development in many populations. Spectrum of
theGJB2 mutations and polymorphic variants and their pre-
valence are highly population-speci ﬁc. We analyzed allelic
diversity of GJB2 in deaf patients from Turkic-speaking
indigenous populations of South Siberia (Tuvinians andAltaians) and in ethnically matched controls. Contribution of
GJB2 pathogenic mutations (c.-23 +1G>A, p.V37I, p.R75Q,
c.235delC, c.299_300delAT, p.W172C) to deafness was15.1% in Altaian and 17.5% in Tuvinian deaf patients,
according to our estimations. We also evaluated the fre-
quencies of known and new polymorphic GJB2 variants ( р.
V27I, р.E114G, p.V153I, p.F192L, p.I203T, c.-23 +27G>A,
rs5030700, rs3751385, rs9552101, rs117685390,
SNP13:20767153C>T) in Tuvinians and Altaians. Variants р.
V27I and р.E114G are speci ﬁc for Asian populations and
were found in deaf patients and controls. The р.V27I can be
detected as a single variation and also together with р.E114G
while р.E114G is almost never found alone. At present,
ambiguous association of р.V27I and р.E114G with hearing
loss is widely discussed in literature. We proved cis-conﬁg-
uration of р.V27I and р.E114G by pedigree analysis and
molecular cloning and postulated the presence of allele p.
[V27I;E114G] in all cases where р.E114G was found. We
estimated frequency of p.[V27I;E114G] in Tuvinian and
Altaian controls as 4.78% и8.68%, respectively, which is
higher than in deaf patients (3.93% in Tuvinians, 4.73% inAltaians). Thus, our data con ﬁrmed coincidence of р.V27I
andр.E114G in cis-conﬁguration and absence of association
of p.[V27I;E114G] with hearing loss. Study was supported byProject #0324-2018-0016 and RFBR grants (#18-34-
00166_mol-a, #17-29-06016_o ﬁ-m).
M.V. Zytsar: None. M.S. Bady-Khoo: None. E.A.
Maslova: None. V.Y. Danilchenko: None. N.A. Barash-
kov: None. I.V. Morozov: None.
A.A. Bondar: None. O.
L. Posukh: None.
E-P02.12
Molecular genetics of autosomal-dominant retinaldegeneration in two families suggests novel inherited retinal
disease lociK. Kamenarova1, C. Chakarova2, K. Koev3, V. Mitev1,S .
Bhattacharya4, S. Cherninkova5, R. Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom,3Clinic of Ophthalmology, University Hospital
Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,4Department of Regeneration and Cell Therapy,
Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine
Centre (CABIMER), Seville, Spain,5Department of Neurology,
University Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University –
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs),
among which congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB)
and macular degeneration (MD), encompass a large group
of clinically and genetically heterogeneous diseases. Byusing whole exome sequencing (WES) we aimed to identify
the disease-causing mutation in two large pedigrees with
IRD: one affected by peripheral dystrophy, such as CSNB,and the other with central RD, like MD.
Materials and Methods: Two large pedigrees with an
autosomal-dominant form of CSNB (Family 1) and MD(Family 2) were recruited. WES was then performed in 4
individuals from Family 1and in 2 patients from Family 2.
Subsequently, single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrayand linkage analysis were undertaken on both pedigrees.
Results: Inclusion of rare variants with minor allele
frequency (MAF) ≤0.5% was performed as an initial
ﬁltering step. Sequence variants in genes of the olfactory
receptor family and in other polymorphic genes (e.g.
mucins) were excluded for downstream analyses since theyare unlikely to cause IRDs according to other WES studies.
Thereafter, protein coding and splice-site variants were
ﬁltered and assessed using in silico prediction tools to
prioritize the remaining variants. We ﬁrstly searched for
mutations in IRD-associated genes. As no IRD-causing
mutations were identi ﬁed in the two pedigrees we
performed linkage analysis using autosomal-dominant
pattern of inheritance. Haplotype analysis de ﬁned different
genomic intervals co-segregating with the disease pheno-type in both pedigrees and mutation screening of positional
candidate genes must be done.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that novel IRD-loci
probably exist since no pathogenic changes were found in
known IRD-genes.
K. Kamenarova: None. C. Chakarova: None. K. Koev:
None. V. Mitev: None. S. Bhattacharya: None. S.
Cherninkova: None. R. Kaneva: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 895E-P02.13
A novel mutation in SCN9A gene involved in congenital
insensitivity to pain
M. Arafat1,2, V. Pinsk3, Z. Shorer4, R. Parvari1,2
1The shraga segal Department of Microbiology,Immunology
and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,2The National
Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,3Pediatric
Outpatient Clinic, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,
4Pediatric
Neurology Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
Introduction: Congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) is a
rare condition in which patients have no pain, caused bymutations in Sodium channel protein type 9 subunit alpha
(SCN9A) which encodes the voltage-gated sodium channel
Nav1.7.
Patient and Methods: A 3 year old girl who suffers from
indifference to pain and heat, recurrent episodes of
unexplained fever and attention de ﬁcient disorder. She has
normal growth and development, normal sweat and has
tears after emotional events. She was born to healthy no
consanguineous Jewish parents from the same diaspora. Themutation was sought by exome sequencing on the DNA of
the patient.
Results: Assuming homozygosity of a recessive mutation
as the likely cause of the disorder, with allele frequencies of
less than 1% in the public databases (ExAc browser, 1000
Genomes and dbSNP). We identi ﬁed a homozygous variant
changing an amino acid in the SCN9A gene with high
bioinformatics predictions for damaging effect. The variant
segregated as expected in the family members that included2 unaffected siblings.
Conclusions: Our novel identi ﬁed missense mutation in
SCN9A further expands the spectrum of mutations seen inthis gene in association with congenital insensitivity to pain,
where most missense mutations cause hypersensitivity to
pain. Early identi ﬁcation of the mutation provides early
preventive care instructions to the families in handling these
patients and contributes for further family planning.
M. Arafat: None. V. Pinsk: None. Z. Shorer: None. R.
Parvari: None.
E-P02.14
A Novel Missense Mutation in CNNM4 underlying Jalili
Syndrome
N. WasifInstitut für Humangenetik, Uniklinik Ulm, Ulm, Germany, Ulm,
Germany
Introduction An autosomal recessive syndrome (Jalili
syndrome) associating cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and
amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) have been reported in litera-ture. Mutations in CNNM4 have been described to cause
this anomaly. The encoded protein may play a role in metal
ion transport.
Materials and Methods: In the present study, a clinical
and genetic investigation was performed in a consangui-
neous family of Pakistani origin, showing typical features ofJalili syndrome. Direct Sanger sequencing was performed in
affected and unaffected members of the enrolled family.
Results: Sanger sequencing of CNNM4 identi ﬁed a novel
missense variant (p.Arg407Leu). The variant is predicted
damaging by three in silico prediction tools [SIFT:
damaging 0.01; MutationTaster: disease causing; Poly-Phen-2: probably damaging 1.000)] and it is not reported in
gnomAD. To address the mutational consequences in
structure, mutant Arg407Leu was modelled along with thepreviously reported mutations and deciphered the binding
mode of ATP with the aid of docking analysis. Furthermore,
molecular dynamics simulations were executed on wild-type and mutant CNNM4 to understand the structural and
energetic information after 100ns production run in altering
the protein structure, dynamics, and stability. It wasexamined the conformational shift of ATP binding site in
Arg407Leu and binding free energy (MM-GBSA) is lower
than the wtCNNM4. Additionally, some important hydro-
gen bonds of Arg407Leu mutant are disrupted during the
MD simulations which remained stable in wtCNNM4
Conclusion: T he present study gives a novel insight into
the role of CNNM4 as a metal transporter in visual function
and biomineralization.
N. Wasif: None.
E-P02.15
A case of intragenic PAX2 duplication as a novel cause ofrenal coloboma syndrome
J. Gardner1, O. Murch1, D. Laws2, A. Kamath1
1University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom,
2Singleton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom
Introduction: Renal coloboma syndrome (RCS) involves
renal and optic nerve abnormalities. PAX2 encodes a tran-
scriptional regulator. Biallelic expression of PAX2 prevents
programmed cell death. Clinical features of RCS corre-
spond to tissue-speci ﬁc expression of PAX2 during early
embryonic development.896 J. del PicchiaPAX2 mutations are identi ﬁed in approximately 50% of
RCS cases and are the only identi ﬁed genetic cause
associated with RCS. Also, ten percent of children with
isolated renal hypodysplasia have PAX2 mutations. Most
mutations are missense, nonsense or small deletions/
duplications of a few nucleotides in exons 2, 3 and 4which encode the paired domain. Few duplications of PAX2
have been reported and have mainly been whole gene
duplications. Large intragenic duplications have not beenreported in patients with RCS.
Case: Aﬁve month old boy presented with a history of
renal hypodysplasia and “morning glory ”appearance of his
optic nerves. He had pre-axial polydactyly and distinctive
facial features. Karyotype, analysis for 22q11 deletion and
chromosome breakage studies were all normal. No sequen-cing abnormality of the paired box domain (exons 2,3,4)
and octapeptide domain (exon 5) of PAX2 was identi ﬁed.
Following a renal transplant at 8 years, Array CGH
showed a de novo 13kb duplication of 10q24.31, resulting
in an intragenic gain including exon 5 of PAX2 .
Conclusion: We describe a child with clinical features of
RCS with a novel intragenic PAX2 duplication. This is a
previously unreported pathogenic mechanism for RCS. This
case demonstrates the importance of considering dosageanalysis investigations when a clinical phenotype is
suggestive of RCS.
J. Gardner: None. O. Murch: None. D. Laws: None. A.
Kamath: None.
E-P02.16
Progressive post-lingual sensorineural hearing loss with
unknown etiology in subarctic part of Russia (Sakha
Republic)
N. A. Barashkov1,2, G. P. Romanov2,1, F. M. Teryutin1,2,V .G .
Pshennikova1,2, A. V. Solovyev2,1, N. N. Gotovtsev1,2,A .A .
Nikanorova1,2, L. U. Dzhemileva3,4, E. K. Khusnutdinova3,5,O .
L. Posukh6,7, S. A. Fedorova2,1
1Yakut Scienti ﬁc Centre of Complex Medical Problems,
Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern
Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,3Institute of
Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scienti ﬁc Center, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation,4Bashkir State
Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation,5Bashkir State
University, Ufa, Russian Federation,6Federal Research
Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk,
Russian Federation,7Novosibirsk State University,
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is genetically heterogeneous
sensory disorder. To date more than 140 loci have been
mapped and ~ 100 genes were associated with HL. It isknown that some orphan genetic diseases being rare in
worldwide populations can be accumulated in small isolate
populations due to founder effect. We have found 20 cases
of progressive post-lingual sensorineural HL (mean age of
HL onset 7.22±2.52 years) in indigenous peoples (Yakuts,
Evens, Yukaghirs) living in subarctic part of Russia (theSakha Republic). In 13 out of 20 families we revealed
segregation of HL according to autosomal recessive type of
inheritance. No any pathology of other organs and systemswere found in affected individuals. Speech was preserved in
70% of affected children. However, only 10% of children
were able to ﬁnish public school while most of patients
attended special school for deaf children. Progressive
bilateral sensorineural HL of variable degree with onset in
theﬁrst seven years of life was revealed in affected children
while in adult patients (over 18 years) profound deafness
was registered. No any pathogenic mutations were found in
other genes associated with HL: GJB2, GJB3, GJB6,
SLC26A4, POU3F4 and12SrRNA which were previously
found in other deaf patients in the Sakha Republic [Dzhe-
mileva et al., 2009; Barashkov et al., 2016; 2018; Pshen-nikova et al., 2017]. Further studies are necessary for
identi ﬁcation of genetic etiology of these HL cases. The
study was supported by Ministry of Education and Scienceof Russia #6.1766.2017, FASO BRK_0556-2017-0003 and
RFBR (17-29-06016_o ﬁ_m, 18-015-00212_A).
N.A. Barashkov: None. G.P. Romanov: None. F.M.
Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. A.V. Solo-
vyev: None. N.N. Gotovtsev: None. A.A. Nikanorova:
None. L.U. Dzhemileva: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova:
None. O.L. Posukh: None. S.A. Fedorova: None.
E-P02.17
Mutation Screening of Stargardt Disease by Next
Generation Sequencing: clinical implication of p.
Gly1961Glu ( ABCA4 ) mutation
B. Jimenez-Rolando1, R. Martin-Arenas2, S. Noval3, I. Rosa-
Perez3, A. del Pozo Mate4, K. Ibañez4, H. Gonzalez-Pecellin2,V .
F. Montaño2, E. Vallespin2
1Ophthalmology Unit - Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid,
Spain,2Structural and Functional Genomics Unit - Medical
and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM) - Hospital La Paz
- IdiPaz - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,3Ophthalmology Unit -
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,4Bionformatics
Unit - Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) -
Hospital La Paz - IdiPaz - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: Stargardt disease (STGD1, MIM #248200) is
the most common hereditary macular dystrophy affectingchildren, with a prevalence of approximately 1:10000.
STGD is predominantly inherited as an autosomal recessiveAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 897trait. Biallelic mutations in ABCA4 are found in most
patients with autosomal recessive STGD (arSTGD) as well
as in some patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pig-
mentosa (arRP) and autosomal recessive cone-rod dystro-
phy (arCRD).
Patients and methods: In this study, we present two
clinical cases of Bull's eye maculopathy with early cone
degeneration and the absence of ﬂecks studied by NGS.
Genes involved in arSTGD, arRP and arCRD were studiedby INGEMM NGS custom panel, Oft-v1.0, designed with
NimbleDesign, target bases covered >99%. Bioinformatic
analysis was carried out by the Clinical Bioinformatics Unitof INGEMM center.
Results and discussion: Patient 1: ABCA4 gene,
compound heterozygous: p.Gly1961Glu and p.Thr1019Met. Patient 2: ABCA4 gene, compound hetero-
zygous: p.Gly1961Glu and p.Asn96Thrfs*19. The p.
Gly1961Glu mutation in both patients explains the sameBull's eye maculopathy with early cone degeneration and
the absence of ﬂecks phenotype. NGS panel in clinical
diagnosis permits develop rapid, high-throughput, highlysensitive and accurate testing. Custom panels offer better
base-pair coverage, running times, costs and dataset
handling than other NGS applications such as wholegenome sequencing and whole exome sequencing. Working
with custom panels also poses new challenges in variant
interpretation, data handling and bioinformatic analyses. Tooptimize the analyses, panel testing should be performed by
bioinformaticians, clinicians and laboratory staff in close
collaboration.
B. Jimenez-Rolando: None. R. Martin-Arenas: None.
S. Noval: None. I. Rosa-Perez: None. A. del Pozo Mate:
None. K. Ibañez: None. H. Gonzalez-Pecellin: None. V.
F. Montaño: None. E. Vallespin: None.
E-P03 Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney,
liver, gastrointestinal)
E-P03.01
Hihg frequency of the severe Q318X mutation in the
CYP21A2 gene among Macedonian patients with mild lateonset form of 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency
V. Anastasovska, M. Kocova, E. Sukarova-Angelovska
Genetic Laboratory, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of
Introduction: 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency is an autosomal
recessive endocrine disorder, present as severe salt wast-ing (SW) or simple virilizing (SV) form, or the milder late
onset form (LO). Nine pseudogene-derived pointmutations account for about 80% of all defects in the
CYP21A2 gene coding the 21-hydroxylase enzyme.
Materials and Methods: DNA samples from 23
Macedonian patients with clinical and laboratory signs of
LO form of 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency, 5 male and 18
female, were collected and subjected to polymerase chainreaction for the detection of presence of nine CYP21A2
point mutations. The patients were evaluated at the
Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, UniversityPediatric Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia.
Results: Five different mutations were detected in 82.6%
(19/23) of the patients on 58.7% (27/46) alleles. The mostprevalent mutation was P30L, present in 17 alleles (37%),
followed by the Q318X in 7 (15.2%), and V281L, IVS2 and
Del 8ntG110 in only 1 (2.2%) allele, each. I172N, clusterexon 6, InsT307 and R356W mutations were not found. In
34.8% (8/23) of the patients complete genotype was
revealed (P30L/P30L in 6 patients, Q318X/Q318X andP30L/Q318X in one patient, each). Eleven of the patients
were heterozygotes, with no detected mutation on the
second allele, and in four patients no one mutation wasdetected.
Conclusions: We found high frequency of nonsense
Q318X mutation, speci ﬁc for severe classical phenotype of
the disease, among Macedonian LO patients. Our founding
is comparable to the neighboring Serbian LO population but
not with the most of the other European countries.
V. Anastasovska: None. M. Kocova: None. E. Sukar-
ova-Angelovska: None.
E-P03.02
5-Alpha-Reductase 2 de ﬁciency in two siblings with a rare
genotype Mirjana Kocova1, Dijana Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska2,
Predrag Noveski2, Elena Sukarova-Angelovska1, Maja
Kuzmanovska2
M. Kocova1, D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska2, P. Noveski2,E .
Sukarova-Angelovska1, M. Kuzmanovska3
1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of,22Research Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of
Science and Arts, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,32Research
Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D.
Efremov ”, Macedonian Academy of Science and Arts, Skopje,
Republic of Macedonia ediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia,
The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: 5-Alpha-Reductase 2 de ﬁciency causes
DSD in 46,XY individuals char acterized with a variable
genital phenotype. Determination of the sex of rearing
can be complicated. Genetic diagnosis consists of898 J. del Picchiadetecting SRD5A2 mutations mostly located in exons
1a n d5 .
Materials and Methods: We present two siblings with
46, XY karyotype presenting with female external genitalia
at birth. Diagnosis was based upon the detection of bilateral
inguinal testis in the older child in the neonatal period, anddeep voice and Adam ’s apple enlargement in a second pre-
pubertal child. Measurement of testosterone/dihydrotestos-
terone was performed. Molecular analysis included multi-plex quantitative ﬂuorescent PCR screening for sex
chromosome aneuploidies and SRY presence, and MLPA
analysis for detection of exon copy number changescombined with Sanger sequencing of exons and exons/
introns boundaries of the SRD5A2 gene.
Results: Both patients were compound heterozygotes for
two novel mutations in SRD5A2 gene: c.146C>A (p.
Ala49Asp) point mutation in the ﬁrst exon inherited from
the mother, and deletion involving entire ﬁrst exon inherited
from the father. Delayed puberty in the ﬁrst patient was
treated with estrogens with a poor response. Breast
implantation and vaginoplasty were performed at the age20 and 22 years respectively. In the younger sister bilateral
orchiectomy was performed with a consecutive slight
change in the voice and disappearance of the Adam ’s
apple. The follow up continued up to 22 and 13 years.
Conclusions: Genetic analysis is very useful in precise
diagnosis in patients with 5-Alpha-Reductase 2 de ﬁciency.
However, ﬁnal gender assignment is dif ﬁcult and requires
combined medical interventions.
M. Kocova: None. D. Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska: None. P.
Noveski: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M.
Kuzmanovska: None.
E-P03.03
Gonadotropin independent precocious puberty and adrenal
insuf ﬁciency: common clinical presentation of different
genetic defects
M. Mucciolo1, C. Bizzarri2, E. Pisaneschi1, C. Guzzetti3,E .
Bellacchio4, A. Ibba3, L. Casula3, S. Loche3, A. Novelli1,M .
Cappa2
1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Rome, Italy,2Endocrinology Unit, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy,3Pediatric Endocrine Unit,
Pediatric Hospital Microcitemico “Antonio Cao ”, AO Brotzu,
Cagliari, Italy,4Genetics and Rare Diseases, Research
Division, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy
Primary adrenal insuf ﬁciency can occur at any time during
life, including the neonatal period, infancy, and childhood.Children usually present with neonatal salt wasting crisis,
failure to thrive with poor feeding, hypoglycemia,vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, shock, and generalized
pigmentation. The development of gonadotropin inde-
pendent (peripheral) precocious puberty in male children
with primary adrenal insuf ﬁciency suggest a steroidogenic
enzyme de ﬁciency. The most frequent form of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is due to a 21-hydroxylase(CYP21A2) defect. We report two young boys with a
similar clinical phenotype including early onset primary
adrenal insuf ﬁciency and gonadotropin independent pre-
cocious puberty, both negative for CYP21A2 variants.
DNA from the two patients were targeted resequencing
using a customized panel of genes involved in adrenaldiseases and DSD. A homozygous variant in CYP11B1
and a hemizygous variant in NR0B1 were identi ﬁed.
Mutations of CYP11B1 gene reduce or abolish the activityof 11 β-hydroxylase enzyme and cause classical CAH
characterized by low cortisol levels and excessive adrenal
androgen production starting during fetal life. The typicaldisorder of puberty in patients with NR0B1 mutations or
deletions is represented by hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism, but few cases of peripheral precocious puberty,ACTH-dependent precocious puberty and central pre-
cocious puberty have been reported. The identi ﬁed var-
iants have never been reported in literature but homologymodeling of the genes demonstrate that both variants affect
protein functionality. This study demonstrate as the use of
NGS analysis can be decisive in the characterization ofcases with apparently similar clinical phenotypes but
completely different genetic defect.
M. Mucciolo: None. C. Bizzarri: None. E. Pisaneschi:
None. C. Guzzetti: None. E. Bellacchio: None. A. Ibba:
None. L. Casula: None. S. Loche: None. A. Novelli:
None. M. Cappa: None.
E-P03.04
Role of Rho-quinase polymorphisms in alcohol-induceddisorders
P. Segovia-Alonso1, E. Bueno Martínez2,1, M. Perez1, J. Torres1,
A. Chamorro2,1, R. González Sarmiento2,1, F. Laso2,1,M .
Marcos2,1
1Ibsal, Salamanca, Spain,2Universidad de Salamanca,
Salamanca, Spain
Introduction: Rho kinases (ROCKs) are proteins involved
in regulating a variety of physiologic functions including
the activation of in ﬂammatory response and hepatic ﬁbrosis
through NF- κB signaling pathway. To date, there are no
studies showing an association between polymorphisms in
rho kinase genes and alcohol abuse or dependence(according to DSM IV criteria) or alcoholic liver
disease (ALD).Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 899Here, we have analysed the polymorphisms ROCK 2
rs2230774, ROCK 2 rs978906, ROCK 1 rs35996865 in
patients suffering from these conditions in order to evaluate
the role of these variants in modulating alcohol abuse or
dependence and ALD risk.
Patients and methods: 650 men with alcohol abuse-
induced disorders and 220 healthy controls were included in
the study. In all cases, DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood using phenol/chloroform procedure and genotypedusing TaqMan 5 ’-exonuclease allelic discrimination assays
(Applied Biosystems). Statistical analysis was performed
using SPSS software.
Results: No signi ﬁcant differences were found in
genotype distribution for ROCK2 rs2230774 and ROCK2
rs978906 between patients with alcohol abuse or depen-dence and control subjects or between alcoholics with liver
disease and those without liver damage. However, statistical
differences in genotype distribution for ROCK1rs35996865 were found (p =0,05) comparing patients with
ALD versus those without ALD.
Conclusions: Our study does not support the hypothesis
that polymorphisms ROCK2 rs2230774 y ROCK2
rs978906 are related to alcoholism or ALD. Nevertheless,
ROCK 1 rs35996865 may be associated with geneticsusceptibility to develop ALD.
Funded by ISCIII, FEDER PI16/01548 and Junta de
Castilla y León GRS 1362/A/16, GRS 1199/A/15 and INT/M/17/17
P. Segovia-Alonso: None. E. Bueno Martínez: None.
M. Perez: None. J. Torres: None. A. Chamorro: None. R.
González Sarmiento: None. F. Laso: None. M.
Marcos: None.
E-P03.06
Alport as part of contiguous gene deletion syndrome:
Further characterization and recommendations
L. S. Benyamini1, M. Regev1, M. Mashevich1, O. Reish1,2
1Genetic Institute, Bear Yacov, Israel,22The Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel
Alport with diffuse leiomyomatosis is a rare contiguous
gene deletion syndrome occurring in 1:1,000,000 in general
population.
Aim: To alert for this condition in the differential
diagnosis of Alport syndrome, as it might be under-
recognized when next generation sequencing panelsare used.
Methods and results: Two generation multiplex family
is described. The ﬁrst case was disclosed at age 20y due to
leiomyomatosis of her vulva and prior to resection of the
excessive muscular tissue. Her examination along withsigns of Alport suggested this syndrome on clinical basis.
MLPA (research) detected deletion of 250kb consisting of
the entire COL4A5 and COL4A6 genes. Further familial
evaluation disclosed clinical signs of Alport to her son and
daughter with leiomyomatosis. The deletion well segregated
in the family and was con ﬁrmed by CMA.
Conclusions: Intra familial variability has been detected .
As preventable treatment is indicated to both Alport and
leiomyomatosis, early diagnosis should be sought as well asPGD or prenatal diagnosis . As several genes causing
Alport are currently known, panels using NGS are being
offered without del/dup in some. We emphasize the need forseeking this contiguous deletion and the use of appropriate
methods for its detection.
L.S. Benyamini: None. M. Regev: None. M. Mashe-
vich: None. O. Reish: None.
E-P03.07
HLA and non-HLA genetic predisposing factors and
environmental effects at Celiac Disease pathogenesis
P. Ata1, B. Erkal2, B. S. Akkelle3, S. Sisko4, Z. Ergin2,M .S .
Helvac ı2, S. Celik5, A. M. Sasmaz5, F. Yilmaz2, D. Ertem6
1Marmara University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics
Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey,2Marmara University
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey,
3Marmara University School of Medicine, Pediatric
Gatroenterology Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey,4Marmara
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey,5Marmara
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul,
Turkey,6Marmara University School of Medicine, Pediatric
Gastroenterology Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Genetic predisposition plays a key role in
celiac disease. The aim of this study is to investigate theeffects of CTLA-4 CT60 A/G polymorphism and environ-
mental factors on Celiac Disease.
Materials and Methods: 45 celiac patients whose
HLADQ tissue groups had been known / studied and
corresponding number of control subjects were given a
questionnaire and a peripheral blood sample was collectedfor the analysis of CTLA4 polymorphism. CTLA-4
genotype analysis was performed by Sanger Sequencing.
Results: Of the 45 patients, 27 were females with an
average age of 11. Of all patients DQB1
02homozygosity
found in 57% and DQB1 02and DQA1 allele homozygosity
in 26% . DQB1 08allele was negative in 80% and DQB1 02
DQA1 allele was positive in 86% of patients. Among all
celiac patients, 75% were breastfed less than two months,
and 45% were introduced to gluten within the ﬁrst 6 months
of birth. The one who were homozygous for DQB1 02 and
DQA1 alleles were symptomatic. Abdominal swelling was900 J. del Picchialess common at the patients with gluten exposure of 2yrs
and older (p =0,042). Bone pain observed at 66% of 3
allele carriers (DQ2 homozygous DQ B1and positive DQ A1).
The CTLA-4 CT60 A/G allele was frequent among controls
(p<.05).
Conclusion: We determined that HLA DQ allele status
effects growth and development at Celiac patients. The
HLA DQ2 allele (DQB1 02and DQA1 05) was related to
more severe symptoms. The age of gluten exposure isimportant and CTLA-4 CT60 A allele might have effect on
disease etiology.
P. Ata: None. B. Erkal: None. B.S. Akkelle: None. S.
Sisko: None. Z. Ergin: None. M.S. Helvac ı:None. S.
Celik: None. A.M. Sasmaz: None. F. Yilmaz: None. D.
Ertem: None.
E-P03.13
MLPA based identi ﬁcation of compound heterozygous
CYP21A2 mutations in Polish patient with congenital
adrenal hyperplasia
A. Tomaszewska1, M. Straburzynski1, M. Piechota1, K. Lacna2,
A. Materna-Kiryluk1,3
11. Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,
21. Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,
32. Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland
Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a
group of inherited genetic disorders resulting from a de ﬁ-
ciency in one of the enzymes involved in cortisol bio-
synthesis. In about 95% of cases, CAH is caused bydeﬁciency of the 21-hydroxylase, encoded by the CYP21A2
gene. More than 100 mutations in the CYP21 Α2gene have
been found to cause 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency.
Materials and Methods: Presented case concerns a 3
year old girl with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The
CYP21A2 was screened for deletion(s)/duplication(s) and
subset of frequent point mutations using the multiplex
ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) technique
and the SALSA MLPA Kit P050-C1 CAH (MRC-Holland).
Results: MLPA analysis demonstrated the presence of
compound two different heterozygous CYP21A2 mutations
which was consist of a large heterozygous deletion of theCYP21A2 gene and the fragment of pseudogene CYP21A1P
(the result suggests lower signal for all the probes
complementary for CYP21A2 gene and probes complemen-
tary for exons 4 and 7 of the pseudogene CYP21A1P ) and
smaller heterozygous deletion consisting of exons 1-3 of
CYP21A2 .
Conclusions: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a com-
mon disorder with genetic and clinical heterogeneity. Themolecular analysis of CAH is useful in con ﬁrming the
diagnosis, and provides a powerful tool in genetic
counseling. On the basis of the important role of the 21-
hydroxylase in the occurrence of CAH symptoms we
concluded that this compound heterozygous CYP21A2
mutation may be a sound candidate for the disease-causing mutation in this patient. In order to determine the
inheritance of identi ﬁed mutations, parental studies are
pending.
A. Tomaszewska: None. M. Straburzynski: None. M.
Piechota: None. K. Lacna: None. A. Materna-
Kiryluk: None.
E-P03.14
Mutations in the CFTR gene in Bulgarian patients withcystic ﬁbrosis
N. Yaneva1, M. Libik2, G. Petrova3, M. Macek4, A. Savov1
1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of
Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
2. Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University-2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,3Pediatric cilinic, UMHAT
"Alexandrovska"; Pediatric department, Medical University of
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Biology and Medical
Genetics, Charles University-2nd Faculty of Medicine andMotol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
Cystic ﬁbrosis is the most common life-limiting genetic
disease, which affects man y body systems and proceeds
with progressive lungs damage. Up to now 2025 muta-
tions have been described in association with the disorderpresenting a high allelic heterogeneity of the CFTR gene.
According to their effect on the protein they are divided in
VII classes. The study of mutations in the CFTR gene inBulgarian patients has been conducted for more than 30
years. More than 900 patients have been referred to the
National Genetic laboratory. The methodology for muta-tion detection includes SSC P, Sanger sequencing, MLPA
analysis and NGS in a small group of a 25 patients
with only one mutation. We described 63 mutations inBulgarian CF patients located in all exons (excluding
eighteen) of the gene. Approximately 5% of the molecular
defects remained unknown. The distribution of mutationsin different classes shows that 12.8% of Bulgarian patients
are carriers of class I mutations, 65.3% of class II, 0.4% of
class IV, 1% of class V. A part of the mutations (5%)is dif ﬁcult to be classi ﬁed, because they are described
in single patients and detailed functional studies
have not been performed. The determination of themolecular defects played and will continue to play
important role for the persona lized approach to treatingAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 901and achieving a normal lifespan for the patients with
cystic ﬁbrosis.
N. Yaneva: None. M. Libik: None. G. Petrova: None.
M. Macek: None. A. Savov: None.
E-P03.15
Genetic markers associated with osteopenia and
osteoporosis in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis in Republic of
Macedonia
M. Kirijas1, T. Jakovska2, D. Trajkov1,O .E ﬁnska
Mladenovska1, O. Sibinovska1, A. Petlichkovski1
1Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Medical
faculty, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, 1109 Skopje,Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
2University
Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, University “Ss. Cyril
and Methodius ”, 1109 Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of
Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is the most common
autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population
which affects most critically the lungs, and also the pan-
creas, liver and intestine. These patients also frequentlyhave low bone mineral density, osteopenia or osteoporosis.
The aim of our study was to determine whether poly-
morphisms in 4 genes ( VDR ,COL1A1 ,CTR and ESR1 )
included in the metabolism of calcium are associated with
decreased bone mineral density in patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis in Republic of Macedonia.
Material and Methods: Sixty ﬁve patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis were divided in three groups according to their
DXA scans: patients with normal bone density, osteopeniaand osteoporosis. DNA was isolated with standard phenol-
chlorophorm method of isolation and SSP method was used
to determine the polymorphisms in the four genes.
Results: TC genotype of the TaqI polymorphism, CT
genotype of Fok1 and AG genotype of BsmI polymorphism
in VDR gene were the most frequent in all three groups.23.4% of the patients with normal bone density had the CC
genotype, 61.7% CT and 14.89% TT, whilst in patients with
osteopenia 10% had CC genotype, 60% had CT and 30%had TT; and in patients with osteoporosis 66.67% had CT
and 33.33% had TT genotype in PvuII (IVS-397)
polymorphism in the ESR1 gene.
Conclusion: Polymorphisms in genes involved in the
calcium metabolism are not contributing factor to develop-
ing osteopenia or osteoporosis in patients with cysticﬁbrosis.
M. Kirijas: None. T. Jakovska: None. D. Trajkov:
None. O. E ﬁnska Mladenovska: None. O. Sibinovska:
None. A. Petlichkovski: None.E-P03.16
Role of CLDN16 gene in one Iranian-Kurdish family with
end-stage renal disease
R. Miri-Moosavi1, S. Saber1, A. Ebrahimi1, M. Faghihi2,T .
Malakoutian3
1YAS Medical Molecular genetic laboratory, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,2Hussman Institute for Human Genomics
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine University of Miami,
Miami, FL, United States,3Department of Nephrology,
Hasheminejad Kidney Center, Iran University of MedicalSciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Introduction: End-stage renal disease (ESRD) occurs when
your kidneys clearly begin to shut down. Diabetes, hyper-
tension, and hyperlipidemia increase risk of ESRD. A three-
to nine-fold greater risk of ESRD is observed in individualswith a family history of ESRD (Satko SG et al, 2005), so
role of genetic study is important now a day.
Material and Method: A 35-year-old, Iranian man who
had ESRD with hypercalcemia and hyperoxaluria were
detected, and regards to imaging ﬁnding medullary
nephrocalcinosis was found. According to nephrologistdecision, primary hyperoxaluria was considered as one of
probably differential diagnosis then who was candidate of
kidney and liver transplant. So, genetic analysis wasrequested to approve mentioned diagnosis. His parents
had consanguineous marriage. One brother and one of his
sister suffered of same signs and symptoms. Accordingly, toresults of whole exome sequencing (WES) and analysis all
genes responsible to renal disorder, one likely pathogenic
variant (p.C113Y) was found in CLDN16 gene. This gene is
responsible to Hypmagnesia type 3 renal disease with
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. Clinical manifesta-
tions in patients ﬁt to Hypomagnesia type 3 renal disease,
after reevaluation of clinical data. Familial segregation was
done and his parents and one of his sister (they are healthy)
are carrier of this variant. It seems organs transplant don ’t
need to do in this case.
Conclusion: Genetic analysis should be considered in
renal failure to do the best management in therapy.
R. Miri-Moosavi: None. S. Saber: None. A. Ebrahimi:
None. M. Faghihi: None. T. Malakoutian: None.
E-P03.17
Polyposis coli due to a large deletion of the chromosomal
Region 5q22.1-q23.1
U. Siebers-Renelt, M. Vockel, A. Röpke, P. Wieacker
Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany902 J. del PicchiaWe report on an 18 year-old man who presented with
recurrent diarrhea and abdominal pain. Colonoscopy
revealed classical polyposis coli and additionally adenomas
of the duodenum were present. No other affected family
members are known. Molecular analysis of the APC-gene
showed a de novo heterozygous deletion of the completeAPC-gene. In order to check if the loss of one APC copy
was part of a greater deletion a microarray analysis was
performed and showed a loss of approximately 5.4 Mb inthe chromosomal region 5q22.1 –q23.1. Clinically, our
propositus did not show any dysmorphic features, but his
mother reported about learning dif ﬁculties and a develop-
mental delay during childhood. Nevertheless, he was able to
attend successfully a regular school and is now working as a
craftsman.
Although deletions of several exons of the APC-gene
may account for about 15% of classical FAP patients, whole
gene deletions are described only in a few patients. In theera prior to MLPA-analysis some patients with cytogeneti-
cally visible interstitial 5q deletions have been described
with a combined phenotype of polyposis and mentalretardation. Our case illustrates, that in case of a lack of
biallelic ﬂanking markers in the MLPA-test a microarray
should be considered to quantify the size of the deletion.Moreover, this case illustrates the problems that may arise
when including a screening for microdeletions in prenatal
testing as a ﬁrst tier test and underlines the necessity of a
detailed information of pregnant women prior to testing.
U. Siebers-Renelt: None. M. Vockel: None. A. Röpke:
None. P. Wieacker: None.
E-P03.18
Familial Mediterranean fever; looking into ten years'experience
R. Bayramov, M. E. Do ğan, B. Aynekin, R. Emekli, F. Yavuz, M.
Cerrah Güne ş,A .Z .Y ılmaz, Y. Özkul, M. Dündar
Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey
FMF is a hereditary autoin ﬂammatory disorder caused by
alteration in Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV). FMF canbe seen in all ethnic groups but, it usually occurs in people
of Mediterranean origin; Turks Azerbaijanis Jews, Arabs,
Greeks, and Italians, Armenians. In general, it is accepted tobe autosomal recessive disorder (OMIM # 249100), but
there are observed clinical complaints in heterozygous
patients, which also suggests the possibility of autosomaldominant (OMIM # 134610) inheritance.Fever, abdominal,
chest and joint pain, skin eruption are the most common
complaints and AA-amyloidosis with kidney failure is worstoutcome. So early diagnosis is essential for improvement of
life quality and survival of patients.In this study wecorrelate the most frequently observed heterozygous and
homozygous pathogenic variants with symptoms of
patients. In total 4987 patient were analysed for MEFV
gene. Patient ’s data, such as age, gender, consanguinity of
parents, complaints, complications, heterozygosity and
homozygosity sequence variants were correlated amongeach other.Pathogenic variants were observed in %52.22 of
patients and most common ones were M694V, R202Q,
E148Q, M680I and V726A. Most frequent complaints wereabdominal pain, arthralgia, fever and chest pain. Con-
sanguinity ratio revealed to be %15.78, but homozygote
variants were detected only in %10.8 patients.In conclusionwe can say that heterozygous patients also may have a
clinical signs and patients with same sequence variants may
show phenotypic differences.
R. Bayramov: None. M.E. Do ğan:None. B. Aynekin:
None. R. Emekli: None. F. Yavuz: None. M. Cerrah
Güne ş:None. A.Z. Y ılmaz: None. Y. Özkul: None. M.
Dündar: None.
E-P03.23
Locus heterogeneity in goiter and hypothyroidism
N. Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, E. Bueno Martínez1,2, M. Ovejero-
Sánchez1,2,3, S. Siffo4,5, M. Gomes Pío4,5, C. M.Rivolta4,5,J .
Walker6,7, K. Lachlan6,7, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3,H .M .
Targovnik4,5
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Salamanca, Spain,2Institute of
Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,Spain,
3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer
(IBMCC). University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,
4Department of Microbiology, Inmunology, Biotechnology and
Genetics, Faculty of Farmacy and Biochemistry, University of
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina,5CONICET-University
of Buenos Aires. Institute of Inmunology, Genetic andMetabolism (INIGEM)., Buenos Aires, Argentina,
6Wessex
Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton,
Princess Anne Hospital., Southampton, United Kingdom,
7Portsmouth Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen Alexandra Hospital,
Portsmouth, United Kingdom
Introduction: The thyroglobulin (TG) gene is organized
in 48 exons on human chromosome 8q24. Up to now,
120 inactivating mutatio ns in the TG gene have been
identi ﬁed in patients with congenital goiter and endemic
or non-endemic simple goiter. The purpose of the present
study is to identify the mutations that cause goiter andhypothyroidism in two members (siblings) of the same
family.
Methods: TG gene alterations were identi ﬁed by Sanger
sequencing. Additionally, other genes (TSHR, PAX8,
NKX2, FOXE1, DUOX2, TG, TPO, SLC5A5, SLC26A4Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 903IYD, DUOXA2) related with these diseases were studied
by NGS.
Results: Both patients inherited the c.2359C>T [p.
R768*] mutation from their father, however no alteration
was detected in the other allele. The absence of a second
mutation in the exonic coding or noncoding (5 ′and 3 ′UTR)
sequences, the promoter region or the exon/intron bound-
aries, suggested no additional inactivating mutation of the
TG gene. Since the single mutation in heterozygosis did notexplain the phenotype, further genes related to the disease
were studied by next generation sequencing analysis. These
studies discovered additional mutations in heterozygosis ingenes related to thyroid dysgenesis and dishormogenesis
like the c.899-2A>C mutation in PAX8, which affects the
splicing process.
Conclusions: These results suggest that several mono-
allelic defects in different genes which belong to the same
pathway could explain the phenotype. However, furtherstudies need to be performed to con ﬁrm the cause of the
disease in this family.
This work was funded by FIS PI16/01920N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. E. Bueno Martínez: None. M.
Ovejero-Sánchez: None. S. Siffo: None. M. Gomes Pío:
None. C. M.Rivolta: None. J. Walker: None. K. Lachlan:
None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. H. M.
Targovnik: None.
E-P03.24
Association of cagA positive strains of Helicobacter pylori
with gastric erosions in Yakut patients (Eastern Siberia,Russia)
N. N. Gotovtsev1,2, N. A. Barashkov1,2, T. V. Borisova2,M .P .
Alekseeva3, N. N. Innokentieva2,3, V. G. Pshennikova1,2,A .M .
Rafailov2, S. N. Lekhanova2, S. A. Fedorova1,2
1Yakut Scienti ﬁc Center of complex medical problems, Yakutsk,
Russian Federation,2MK Ammosov North-Eastern Federal
University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,3Republican hospital
№1 National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federation
Helicobacter pylori (Hp) is a gram-negative, spiral bacter-
ium that colonizes gastric mucosa of human. Clinical out-
come after infection related to environmental conditions,
immunological factors of host and virulence of micro-organisms [Suerbaum et al., 2002]. Hp isolates with
cagA «+» strains are associated with a higher rate of damage
and in ﬂammation of stomach, compared to the cagA «-»
strains [Wu et al., 2003; Hatakeyama et al., 2005]. Clinical
outcomes of gastroduodenal diseases depending on viru-
lence and pathogenicity factors of Hpis unexplored in
Yakut population living in Eastern Siberia (Russia). Our
aim was to study association of cagA gene presence witherosive gastritis (EG) and chronic gastritis (CG) in Yakuts.
We studied HpDNA samples extracted from biopsies of
172 patients with EG (n =77) and CG (n =95). 106 were
adolescents (mean age 14.09 ± 2.4 years) and 66 were
adults (mean age 41.22±11.84 years). In the group of
patients with diagnose EG cagA "+" strains was detected in
64/77 patients (83.1%) and cagA "-" strains was detected in
13/77 patients (16.9%) (p<0.001). Similar data obtained in
CG group of patients: cagA "+" - 54/95 patients (56.8%),
cagA "-" - 41/95 patients (43.2%) (p<0.001). The high per-
centage of cagA «+» strains may indicate an increased risk
development of gastric erosions as well as pre-ulcerouscondition. Presence of cagA gene is a predictive marker of
EG in our patients. The study was supported by the Project
of the Ministry of Education and Science of the RussianFederation (#6.1766.2017), by the Project of the NEFU, by
the FASO project (BRK 0556-2017-0003).
N.N. Gotovtsev: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. T.V.
Borisova: None. M.P. Alekseeva: None. N.N. Innoken-
tieva: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. A.M. Rafailov:
None. S.N. Lekhanova: None. S.A. Fedorova: None.
E-P03.25
Cys282Tyr, His63Asp and Ser65Cys mutations in 42patients with hereditary hemochromatosis type 1
S. Turyk, M. Sakurai, J. Benavides, S. Bonsergent, O.
Rabinovich, M. Curia, M. Notaris, A. Gomez, E. Ludueña Clos,
L. Garcia de Rosa
Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Hereditary hemochromatosis type 1 (HH) is an autosomal
recessive disorder of iron metabolism. It is characterized by
progressive iron overload and caused by mutation in the
HFE gene. The predominant feature of HH is excessiveabsorption of dietary iron and its deposition in parenchymal
tissues and results in cirrhosis, diabetes, skin pigmentation
and testicular failure. 42 HH patients (12 females and 30males) and 106 healthy controls were screened for the
Cys282Tyr, His63Asp and Ser65Cys, using polymerase
chain reaction ampli ﬁcation of genomic DNA, followed by
digestion with Rsa 1 and Bel-1. All patients had the fol-
lowing parameters: iron studies including serum Fe, ferritin
and transferrin saturation, serology for hepatitis B and C,liver function tests and abdominal echography . The mean
age at genotype diagnosis was 51.3 years in males and 55.3
years in females. 38 from 42 (90.5%) HH patients werehomozygous for Cys 282Tyr mutation . Three (7.1%) were
compound heterozygous for Cys 282Tyr/His63Asp and one
(2.4%) was for Cys282Tyr/Ser65Cys. Five (6.9%) of ourcontrols were heterozygous for Cys282Tyr and one (1.3%)
was heterozygous for His63Asp. Hereditary904 J. del Picchiahemochromatosis type 1 is an underdiagnosed disorder. The
most frequent form is associated with homozygosity of the
Cys282Tyr mutation. We note that the clinical form in our
heterozygotes for Cys282Tyr/His63Asp is much less than
that for Cys 282Tyr homocygotes.
S. Turyk: None. M. Sakurai: None. J. Benavides:
None. S. Bonsergent: None. O. Rabinovich: None. M.
Curia: None. M. Notaris: None. A. Gomez: None. E.
Ludueña Clos: None. L. Garcia de Rosa: None.
E-P03.26
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis: a study of 6Tunisian patients
y. elaribi1, h. jilani1, i. rejeb1, s. hizem1, h. ouerda2, a. meherzi2,f .
broly3, l. ben jemaa1, S. Karoui4
1service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis,
Tunisia,2Pediatric department mongi slim hospital, tunis,
Tunisia,3genetic department, lille, France,4Department of
Genetics Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Introduction: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
(PFIC) is a serious disorder, classi ﬁed into three types
namely PFIC1, PFIC2 and PFIC3, related to mutations in
ATP8B1 gene, ABCB11 gene and ABCB4 gene, respec-
tively. The birth prevalence of PFIC is estimated between 1/50000 and 1/100000. Clinical signs of cholestasis in PFIC 1
and PFIC 2 usually appear in the ﬁrst months of life,
whereas the onset of PFIC3 is often delayed. Patientsusually develop ﬁbrosis and liver failure before adulthood.
Materials and Methods: We report one patient with
PFIC 1, one patient with PFIC 2 and 4 patients with PFIC 3.The molecular genetic analysis was performed in all cases.
A total of 167 genes, which have previously been found to
be involved in cholestasis disorders, were selected fortargeted next-generation sequencing.
Results: Three novel mutations, missense, frameshift and
non-sens, were identi ﬁed in ATP8B1 ,ABCB11 andABCB4
genes. All mutations were found to co-segregate with the
disease in the three familial cases.
Conclusion: The molecular study of the progressive
cholestasis genes allowed to con ﬁrm the diagnosis and then
to propose a prenatal diagnosis for future pregnancies. In
Tunisia, there are no data on genetic variations in thisdisorder. This study expands the mutational spectrum of
PFIC genes.
Y. elaribi: None. H. jilani: None. I. rejeb: None. S.
hizem: None. H. ouerda: None. A. meherzi: None. F.
broly: None. L. ben jemaa: None. S. Karoui: None.E-P03.27
Bilateral Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney in a three-
generation family
I. Jurca-Simina1, A. Chirita-Emandi1, N. Andreescu1,N .
Olariu2, R. Isac2, F. Farkas3, Z. Andrei2, M. Gafencu2, M. Puiu1
1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania,2University of
Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania,
3Louis Turcanu Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara,
Romania
Introduction: Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) is
deﬁned by multiple cystic dilatations replacing the normal
renal parenchyma and leading to organ dysfunction. Herein
we present a three-generation family with chronic kidney
disease (CKD) on bilateral MCDK. Methods: The clinical
workup was performed for each affected individual. NGS
was performed using the Illumina TruSight One Sequencing
Panel, on MiSeq Illumina platform for index.
Results: 12years old girl with CKD IIIB diagnosed at age
4 years presents multiple millimeter cysts in bilateral renal
parenchyma showed on MRI. The patient's father is on renalreplacement therapy with the same renal cystic appearance
and associates bi ﬁd distal phalanx of one thumb, bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss; paternal grandmother is ondialysis with a mild hearing loss and myopia forte. Renal
biopsy was yet performed due to parent refusal. NGS
results: no pathogenic or probably pathogenic variants weredetected ( PKHD1 ,PKD1 ,COL4A5 ,PRKCSH ,TSC2 ,
TSC1 ,EGF ,TTR,FN1,UMOD ,MUC1 ,SALL1 and other
genes associated with ciliopathies). Three heterozygousvariants were considered as candidates: RET: c.C3152T:p.
A1051V; BBS2 :c.C1229G:p.T410, INPP5E :c.G304T:p.
D102Y, but with no clinical relevance. All three patientsand the only sister of our patient ’s father with no renal
impairment present a variant with uncertain signi ﬁcance in
GLA gene: c.G937T:p.D313Y.
Conclusions: MCKD with autosomal dominant transmis-
sion were considered, but the large NGS panel used did not
identify any signi ﬁcant variant for the phenotype. Genetic
work-up will continue with SNP array for microdeletions/
microduplications and whole exome sequencing. Renal
biopsy will enlarge the clinical data for a better orientationin molecular analysis and diagnosis.
I. Jurca-Simina: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. N.
Andreescu: None. N. Olariu: None. R. Isac: None. F.
Farkas: None. Z. Andrei: None. M. Gafencu: None. M.
Puiu: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 905E-P03.29
Two novel pathogenic NBAS gene ’s variants in a patient
with infantile recurrent acute liver failure
N. Semenova1, I. Anisimova1, N. Taran2, T. Strokova2, I. Tin2
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Federal Research Center of Nutrition and
Biotechnology, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Acute liver failure (ALF) in infancy and
childhood is a life-threating emergency and remains unex-plained in about 50% cases. Recently, bi-allelic pathogenic
variants in NBAS were reported as a new molecular cause
of ALF in infancy, leading to recurrent liver failure.
Materials and Methods: we describe a male patient
2y.5m. of age with episodes of ALF. His infantile period
was normal. The ﬁrst episode of ALF occurred at the age of
1y.9 m. with greatly elevated liver transaminases (ALAT
and ASAT more than 1000 U/L), succeeded by sever
coagulopathy without jaundice. Alkaline phosphatase wasnormal, gamma-GT was slightly elevated. Blood amino
acids, acylcarnitines and very-long chain fatty acids pro ﬁle
were normal. Organic acids in urine were normal. He hadno extrahepatic symptoms. Over 6 months 5 episodes of
ALF without fever occurred. After liver crisis, liver function
completely repairs and remained normal in the interval.
Results: NGS was used to analyze 47 genes responsible
for hereditary diseases with predominant liver damage. Two
nucleotide variants in NBAS gene were identi ﬁed: c.3928
A>G (p.T1310A) and c.4228 A>G (p.T1410A) in com-
pound heterozygous state. Parents and younger sibling are
healthy and heterozygous for one or another mutant allele.p.T1310A is benign according to Polyphen2.2 and
MutationTaster but located in the conserved region, p.
T1410A is possibly damaging and located in the conservedregion. ExAc frequency of both substitutions is <0,02%.
Conclusion: Two novel NBAS variants correspond to
patient ’s phenotype and could be the cause of infantile liver
failure syndrome-2 in the patient.
N. Semenova: None. I. Anisimova: None. N. Taran:
None. T. Strokova: None. I. Tin: None.
E-P03.30
The CFHR5 nephropathy is not a frequent cause ofhematuria in Czech non-Alport families
K. Plevová1, P. Plevova2
1Wichterle Grammar School, Ostrava-Poruba, Czech
Republic,2Department of Medical Genetics, University
Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech RepublicIntroduction: Complement factor H-related 5 nephropathy
is a form of inherited kidney disease. It is endemic in Greek
Cypriots, in whom the disease is caused by 6.3 kbp internal
duplication in the CFHR5 gene. This duplication includes
exons 2 and 3.
Materials and Methods: The study included eighty
patients with microscopic hematuria. We detected no
pathogenic variants in COL4A3 ,COL4A4 and COL4A5
genes in these patients previously. Thus Alport syndromewas excluded. The CFHR5 gene was sequenced using
sequence capture-based next generation sequencing tech-
nology. Copy number variation analysis was also per-formed. Polymerase chain reaction and 5% polyacrylamid
gel electrophoresis were used to detect the Cypriot
duplication.
Results: The Cypriot duplication was not detected in any
of the patients. Neither pathogenic variants, nor large exonic
deletions or duplications were found using next generationsequencing technology in the patients.
Conclusion: The CFHR5 nephropathy is not a frequent
cause of hematuria in Czech non-Alport families.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the
Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic - Conceptual
Development of Research Organizations, Faculty Hospitalof Ostrava (2015).
K. Plevová: None. P. Plevova: None.
E-P03.31
Clinical exome sequencing: a new strategy for differential
diagnosis of complex phenotypes
P. Constantoulakis1, A. Oikonomaki2, S. Samara1,G .
Christopoulou2, P. Kollia3
1BioAnalytica-GenoType S.A., Athens, Greece,2Science Labs
M.S.A., Athens, Greece,3Department of Genetics &
Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, National Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece
Introduction: In the genomics era, multiple gene inves-
tigations by exome sequencing may reveal known or
novel variants which are potentially disease causingallowing for effective healthcare management, previously
not feasible.
Materials and Methods: A 35-year-old male with a
maternal origin family history of renal failure, with
unspeci ﬁed kidney disease, was referred to us for genetic
testing. The clinical description was not indicative of aspeciﬁc gene target therefore, clinical exome sequencing
was recommended. Following preparations according to the
manufacturer ’s protocol (SOPHiA Genetics), DNA libraries
were sequenced on a NextSeq-500 NGS system (Illumina).
Data were analyzed by a bioinformatics pipeline (Sophia906 J. del PicchiaDDM). A gene panel consisting of 101 genes associated
with nephropathies was created to ﬁlter variants related to
the phenotype investigated.
Results: The analysis revealed 3 variants of unknown
signiﬁcance (VUS) in the PKD1 (c.12817C>T and
c.11246G>A) and ANKS6 (c.1360G>A) genes. Proband ’s
affected and unaffected family members were subsequently
tested and the analysis revealed that the two VUS alleles in
the PKD1 gene co-segregated with the investigated
phenotype, while the ANKS6 variant was also found in
healthy individuals.
Discussion: Even though further investigation is required
to reach de ﬁnite genetic diagnosis, this case highlights the
utility of clinical exome sequencing in clinical practice.
Clinical exome sequencing can support de ﬁnitive diagnosis
or clarify differential diagnosis cases in patients with renal
diseases of unknown etiology, contributing to precise
prognosis, systematic monitoring, and when appropriate,identi ﬁcation of other family members, as well as the
possibility of family programming with pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis.
P. Constantoulakis: None. A. Oikonomaki: None. S.
Samara: None. G. Christopoulou: None. P. Kollia: None.
E-P03.32
May being a carrier of CAH lead to phenotypic variability
in PAIS?
M. N. Somuncu1, A. G. Zamani1, B. S. Eklioglu2, M. S. Yildirim1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey,2Department of
Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Meram MedicalFaculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey
Introduction: Androgen Insensitivity syndrome is esti-
mated to be present in 1: 20,000 –64,000 male births and
variable phenotypic expression. Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase de ﬁciency (21-
OHD) is an autosomal recessive disorder with impaired
synthesis of cortisol and aldosterone and oversecretion of
androgens from the adrenal cortex. We present a patientwho has a clinical pre-diagnosis of CAH but underwent
sequence analysis and he was diagnosed as PAIS.
Materials and Methods: A consultation was requested
from the medical genetics clini cf o ras i x - d a y - o l dn e w b o r n
with diagnosis of CAH. Bi ﬁd scrotum, hypospadias
and pigmentation of the areo lae and genital skin were
detected in physical examination. Free testesterone
and 17- hydroxyprogesterone levels were high. Karyotype
analysis was done and then reverse dot blot and MLPAanalyses of 21-hydroxylase gene and sequence analysis of
the subject's AR gene were performed.Results: The patient's karyotype was 46,XY. Molecular
genetic analysis show a heterozygous mutation c.841G>T
of the 21-hydroxylase gene and a hemizygous point
mutation c.1174C>T(pPro392Ser)of the AR gene.
Conclusion: Hormonal levels and hyperpigmentation of
the patient were misleading in diagnosing. Whether thecombination of heterozygous CAH and hemizygous AR
mutations may affect the phenotype was discussed by
considering the clinical, radiological and biochemicalﬁndings of the patient. It was emphasized that PAIS should
not be forgotten in the differential diagnosis of patients with
minor CAH ﬁndings.
M.N. Somuncu: None. A.G. Zamani: None. B.S.
Eklioglu: None. M.S. Yildirim: None.
E-P03.33
HLA class II protein and mRNA expression pro ﬁles in
cultured parathyroid tissues
B. Goncu1, N. Kandas2, S. Atasoy3, B. Ozdemir1, E. Yucesan4,H .
Basoglu5, F. Akbas6, E. Aysan7
1Bezmialem Vakif University, Experimental Research Center,
Istanbul, Turkey,2Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology,
Istanbul, Turkey,3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,
4Bezmialem Vakif University, Institute of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Istanbul, Turkey,5Bezmialem Vakif University,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biophysics, Istanbul,Turkey,
6Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,7Bezmialem
Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of GeneralSurgery, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Allorecognition of antigen presenting cells
activated by peptide/human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
complex and thus changing its course through lymph nodes
where T cells reside.In solid organ transplantation,culturedtissue cells were presumed as passenger-leukocyte free
which ensures prolonged graft survival. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the potential changes of HLA class IImRNA and protein expression levels during parathyroid
cell culture.
Materials and Methods: Parathyroid hyperplasia tissues
were obtained from patients who diagnosed with secondary
hyperparathyroidism (n =11).After histopathological con-
ﬁrmation,glands were digested using collagenase type II
and cultured.Afterwards, cells were collected at day 0(after
isolation) and 3,6,9 respectively. HLA class-II (-DR,-DP,-
DQα1,-DQ α2) antibodies were selected according to
binding region and dissociation constant (KD) value which
is the equilibrium between antibody and target, then veri ﬁedAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 907by BLAST. Primers were designed for HLA-DR and -DQ
but not for DP. Correlation between protein and gene level
results were investigated.
Results: HLA-DR mRNA expression levels remained
unchanged, only HLA-DQ mRNA expression level
decreased during culture (p =0.03).Protein expression
levels of HLA-DP and -DQ α2 were higher than -DR and
-DQα1 levels during culture (p<0.0001).
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that cultured para-
thyroid tissues are still potential targets for allorecognition
even during culture. In addition, -DQ α2 and -DR protein
expression was found higher in parathyroid tissues.Con-cordance between DQ and DR indicates a possible linkage
in rejection/poor graft survival of parathyroid tissue
transplantation via allorecognition. Presented work wasﬁnancially supported by Bezmialem Vakif University
Scienti ﬁc Research Funding Unit (3.2016/7).
B. Goncu: None. N. Kandas: None. S. Atasoy: None. B.
Ozdemir: None. E. Yucesan: None. H. Basoglu: None. F.
Akbas: None. E. Aysan: None.
E-P03.34
Association of PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 variants with
alcoholic liver cirrhosis in Serbian population
B. Nesic1, I. Grubisa1, J. Djordjevic2, D. Vrinic Kalem3,P .
Svorcan3,4
1Department for Human Genetics and Prenatal Diagnostics,
Zvezdara University Medical Center, University of Belgrade,Belgrade, Serbia,
2Belmedic General Hospital, Belgrade,
Serbia,3Clinic of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Zvezdara
University Medical Center, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,Serbia,
4School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia
Introduction: A recent GWA study identi ﬁed a missense
variant in TM6SF2 (C>T) and con ﬁrmed (C>G) variant in
thePNPLA3 gene as risk loci for alcohol-related cirrhosis.
Our aim was to study the association of those variants with
the development of cirrhosis in Serbian patients.
Materials and Methods: A total of 103 patients with
clinically diagnosed cirrhosis and 103 age and sex matched
controls without clinical or laboratory evidence of liver
disease were genotyped for TM6SF2 and PNPLA3 using
PCR-RFLP methodology. Data analysis was performed
using IBM SPSS Statistics 21.0.
Results: The prevalence of GG genotype of PNPLA3
gene was 50% in the group of patients and 21% in control
group. We found signi ﬁcant association between GG
genotype and cirrhosis (OR 3.8; 95%CI 2.06-6.98;P<0.0001), as well as between G allele and disease (OR
3.09; 95%CI 2.07-4.62; P < 0.0001). There was nosigniﬁcant association between TM6SF2 genotypes and
cirrhosis (OR 1.75; 95%CI 0.82-3.72; P =0.1444), but we
observed a signi ﬁcant association between minor T allele of
TM6SF2 and alcohol-related cirrhosis (OR 2; 95% CI 1.05-
3.8; P=0.0336).
Conclusions: The variants in PNPLA3 and TM6SF2
genes are associated with increased risk of alcoholic liver
cirrhosis in Serbian population. Further prospective studies
are required to con ﬁrm these results and to evaluate the
potential of PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 as predictors and
therapeutic targets in alcoholic liver cirrhosis.
B. Nesic: None. I. Grubisa: None. J. Djordjevic: None.
D. Vrinic Kalem: None. P. Svorcan: None.
E-P03.35
Search for a genetic factor for pleuroparenchymal
ﬁbroelastosis (PPFE)
E. Yildiz Bolukbasi1, S. Ozkaya2, S. Asker3, A. Tolun1
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici
University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Department of Pulmonary
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bahçe şehir University,
Istanbul, Turkey,3Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine, Van Yuzuncu Yil University, Van, Turkey
Introduction: Pleuroparenchymal ﬁbroelastosis (PPFE) is
an interstitial lung disease characterized by upper-lobe
predominant ﬁbrosis. It is a rare idiopathic disease with ﬁrst
symptoms of dyspnea (respiratory distress), dry cough andchest pain due to pneumothorax. Here we present two
Turkish consanguineous families af ﬂicted with PPFE.
Materials and Methods: Candidate disease loci in
family 1 was detected (LOD score >2.52) by linkage
mapping using SNP genotype data of parents and three
affected and one unaffected sib. Exome sequencing for onepatient from each family was evaluated for rare variants and
variants in telomere-related genes ( TERT ,TERC ,RTEL1
and PARN ) implicated in PPFE aetiology in some families.
Lastly, genes harbouring rare or novel heterozygous or
homozygous variants in both patients were evaluated as
possible risk factors.
Results: In family 1 we identi ﬁed novel/rare homozygous
variants in FAM35A and TNKS2 and possibly a hetero-
zygous variant in either FAM22A orFAM22D which are
paralogs in a large duplicated region. All variants were
predicted as disease causing by computational algorithms.
TNKS2 c.1146A>T segregates with the disease, and
FAM35A c.540_541insCC will be validated. No candidate
variant was found in telomere-related or the common genes
with variants.
Conclusion: We had hypothesized that PPFE was a
monogenic disease and we would be able to identify the908 J. del Picchiaresponsible gene. However, we could not discriminate
whether FAM35A orTNKS2 variant is causative. TNKS2
interacts with telomere-related proteins and is highly
conserved among species. We hope that our ﬁndings would
be helpful for future genetic studies on PPFE. (Grant:
TUBITAK 114Z829)
E. Yildiz Bolukbasi: None. S. Ozkaya: None. S. Asker:
None. A. Tolun: None.
E-P03.36
The contribution of the main genetic marker of type 2
diabetes to the genetic architectonics of type 1 diabetes
O. N. Ivanova, E. V. Titovich, T. L. Kuraeva, T. V. Nikonova
National Medical Research Center of Endocrinology, Moscow,
Russian Federation
Introduction: A variant of TCF7L2 rs7903146 Тhas the
strongest association with type 2 diabetes in most popula-
tions and has not the association with type 1 diabetes (t1d)overall. It was shown that TCF7L2 was associated with a
subset of children with t1d (with fewer markers of islet
autoimmunity) and children with t1d who carried thers7903146 ТT genotype were less likely to carry high-risk
HLAII genotypes. The aim of this study is analysis of
association rs7903146 ТT and low-diabetogenic HLAII
genotypes among t1d children.
Materials and Methods: 249 children (Russian ethnic
group) with type 1 diabetes were studied. Allele identi ﬁca-
tion was performed with Real-Time PCR technique. HLA
haplotypes DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 and
DRB1*04-DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 were consideredhigh-risk, all others low-risk. The chi-squared was used,
and p-value<0,05 were taken to indicate statistical sig-
niﬁcance of differences.
Results: Carriers of one or two high-risk HLAII
haplotypes in the total sample - 56%. The frequency of
rs7903146TT genotype in the total sample was 7.3%.Comparison of frequencies of TT genotype in groups
stratiﬁed by HLAII showed statistically signi ﬁcant differ-
ences. 70% of carriers of the TT genotype did not carryhigh-risk HLAII haplotypes, 10% of carriers of the TT
genotype carried two high-risk HLAII haplotype.
Conclusions: The main genetic marker of type 2 diabetes
is associated with low-diabetic HLAII genotypes in children
with type 1 diabetes. This supports the hypothesis of the
possible simultaneous participation of autoimmune andnon-autoimmune mechanisms in the development of the
disease. This study was supported by the grant №17-75-
30035 of the Russian Science Foundation.
O.N. Ivanova: None. E.V. Titovich: None. T.L.
Kuraeva: None. T.V. Nikonova: None.E-P03.37
Diagnosis of novel splicing defect in the CFTR gene in
Russian patient with cystic ﬁbrosis living in Tomsk region
O. Odinokova, L. Nazarenko
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National
Research Medical Center, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Tomsk, Russian Federation
Introduction: CF is the most common severe inherited
disorder, but most CFTR gene mutations are rare. Wepresent here new CFTR mutation in CF-patient from a
Russian family, revealed by CF-newborn screening in
Tomsk region.
Materials and Methods: We report case of newborn
patient with severe CF, pancreatic insuf ﬁciency. Different
mutation detection methods were combined. The DNAassay for 50 common mutations (Elucigene
®CF-EU2v1)
and fragment analysis of the CFTR gene fragments were
performed as the ﬁrst test followed by sequencing analysis
of the coding and splicing regions of the CFTR gene.
Results: With the Elucigene®CF-EU2v1 assay we
identi ﬁed only one mutant allele p.Phe508del. Analysis of
CFTR gene fragments, performed on a capillary sequencer,
revealed some abnormalities in peaks pro ﬁle suggested 5-bp
deletion in exon 3. By sequencing analysis of the of exon 3of the CFTR gene we identi ﬁed 5-bp deletion mutation in
3’-region of exon 3, which may be due to one of three
events in exon-intron junction (according to nucleotidesequence): 1) deletion of Ggtaa - deletion of the last
nucleotide in exon 3 and the four nucleotides in intron 3; 2)
deletion of gtaag - deletion of 1-5 nucleotides in intron 3; 3)deletion of taagg - deletion of 2-6 nucleotides in intron 3.
Conclusions: New splicing mutation was located in the
invariant donor splice site, the mutation name: c.273+2_273+6delTAAGG or IVS3 +2_6delTAAGG. As far
as we know this mutation was not been previously
described. Identi ﬁcation of mutations has important impli-
cations for genetic counselling in families.
O. Odinokova: None. L. Nazarenko: None.
E-P03.38
The association of the TNFSF15 polymorphism rs7848647
and surgical diverticular disease in the Bulgarianpopulation
I. Tourtourikov1, A. Chavoushian2, A. Petrov2, T. Todorov1,A .
Todorova1,3
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica ”,S oﬁa,
Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2City Clinic Cancer Center,
Department of Gastroenterology, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 909Bulgaria,3Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Diverticulosis and diverticular disease are one of the most
common gastroenterological conditions in the westernworld. Although believed to be primarily a disease of the
elderly, recently there has been an increasing number of
cases worldwide, especially in patients under 40 years. Theclinical manifestation of diverticular disease can range from
mild and uncomplicated to potentially life-threatening
inﬂammation. Recurrent or complicated cases can involve
abscess, perforation, ﬁstulizing disease and strictures/
obstruction usually requiring surgical intervention. Recent
insights into the genetic background of diverticular diseasehave revealed an association between the polymorphism
rs7848647 in the TNFSF15 gene and complicated diverti-
culitis, requiring surgical intervention. The TNFSF15 geneitself has been associated with other in ﬂammatory bowel
diseases such as ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn ’s disease
(CD). In this study, 30 Bulgarian patients with variousdegrees of diverticulitis have been genotyped for rs7848647
in the TNFSF15 gene via Sanger Sequencing. The per-
formed genetic testing has revealed that the most prevalentallele in the selected cohort is the risk allele G, further
implicating the role of TNFSF15 as a factor, determining
the manifestation and progression of diverticular disease.The results presented here are preliminary and a part of a
larger study, aimed at investigating the effects of poly-
morphic variants within TNFSF15 and their relation togastrointestinal disease. The increasing number of diverti-
culosis worldwide prompt for further investigation on the
underlying genetic factors of this condition.
I. Tourtourikov: None. A. Chavoushian: None. A.
Petrov: None. T. Todorov: None. A. Todorova: None.
E-P03.39
Case report of a trichohepatoenteric syndrome due to
heterozygous compound of novel mutations in ttc37 gen
B. Polo1, A. Zúñiga2, P. Marín3, A. Parra3, L. Pedrola4,J .
Cervera2
1Serv. Digestivo. HUP La Fe, Valencia, Spain,2Unidad de
Genética. HUP La Fe, Valencia, Spain,3Serv. Pediatría. HUP
La Fe, Valencia, Spain,4Unidad de Genetica. HUP La Fe,
Valencia, Spain
Introduction: Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (THES; MIM
222470) is an autosomal-recessive inherited disorder
(1:400,000-500,000 live births). THES clinical spectrumcomprises distinctive facial features (hypertelorism, broad
nasal bridge, prominent forehead), abnormal hair (coarseand fragile with trichorrhexis nodosa), and diarrhea. All
affected children require parenteral nutrition to maintain life
and growth.
Case Report : Our case is a 1-year girl born to the
37.5 weeks of uneventful pregnancy with weight at birth of
1800 g. At 5 months of age, she began tracking weightstagnation, refusal of food, and increase in the number of
bowel movements. She exhibited malnourished appearance,
no adipose panniculus, sparse, weak hair and highlightswith prominent forehead and hypertelorism dysmorphic
facial features. NGS analysis was performed using Illumina
(NextSeq 500) technology with a ClearSeq InheritedDisease panel (Agilent Thecnologies), and consisted in
the analysis of the coding and intronic regions of SKIV2L
and TTC37 gene. Genetic study detected in compoundheterozygosity, c.4514T > C (p.Leu1505Ser) and c.3514C >
T (p.Gln1172Ter) variants in TTC37 gene. First variant was
described as pathogenic in HGMD (CM103463). Thevariant c.3514C > T is not described in HGMD, ClinVar
or LOVD. Prediction in silico suggests that it is a
pathogenic change. Detected in 0,0016% frequently popu-lation gnomAD (no homozygous); not described in 1000G.
Deﬁning the molecular genetic basis of THES will facilitate
diagnosis and management. It will help in counsellingregarding prognosis and will enable prenatal and preim-
plantation diagnosis in families at risk and critical insight
into the mechanisms of diarrhea and thus treatment.
B. Polo: None. A. Zúñiga: None. P. Marín: None. A.
Parra: None. L. Pedrola: None. J. Cervera: None.
E-P03.41
Whole exome sequencing in children with colonic and ileum
agangliosis with deafness
J. Surikova1, J. Averyanova2, I. Povolotskaya3,H .
Zaklyazminskaya1,4
1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Russian Children's Clinical Hospital,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Medical Centre “Genetico ”,
Moscow, Russian Federation,4Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: The combination of Hirschsprung's disease,
hearing loss and pigmentation abnormality are evidence ofthe Waardenburg syndrome type IV (WS4). It is genetically
heterogeneous disease and pathogenic variants ﬁnds in the
EDNRB, EDN3 orSOX10 genes.
Material and Methods: We investigated 3 pediatric
patients with the Hirschsprung's disease and the deafness.
The DNA-diagnostics had included whole exome sequen-cing (WES) with following Sanger resequencing, bioinfor-
matic analysis, and cascade familial screening.910 J. del PicchiaResults: Unrelated boy and two girls were operated on
theﬁrst day of their life in connection with low intestinal
obstruction caused by total colonic and ileum aganglionosis.
In 2 years all probands had cochlear implantation due to
sensorineural hearing loss. Patients don ’t have skin
hypopigmentation, girls are blue eyed blondes.Waardenburg-Shan syndrome was suspected. WES has
revealed c.429-1G>A in the SOX10 gene, p.Pro428Leu and
p.Val275Met in the EDNRB gene, and c.1280-1281delTG
in the RET gene. Bioinformatics resources consider them as
probably pathogenic. Variants in the EDNRB gene have
been found in the parents of the proband, variants in theRET andSOX10 genes are de novo.
Conclusions: Allﬁnding variants evaluated as patho-
genic with strong or moderate evidence. Mutations in theRET gene have described for Hirschsprung's disease, but we
didn’tﬁnd any information that pathogenic variant in the
RET gene have been found in patients with WS4.
J. Surikova: None. J. Averyanova: None. I. Povolots-
kaya: None. H. Zaklyazminskaya: None.
E-P04 Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin
disorders
E-P04.02
Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome: ﬁrst report of a
consanguineous family with all members affected
S. Missaglia1, M. Durdu2, L. Moro3, D. Tavian1
1University, Milan, Italy,2Baskent University, Adana, Turkey,
3University, Novara, Italy
Introduction :α/β-hydrolase domain-containing protein 5
(ABHD5) is a lipid droplet-associated protein that promotesthe hydrolysis of triacylglycerols (TAGs) by activating
adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). ATGL is a lipase that
catalyzes the initial and rate-limiting step in lipolysis byremoving the ﬁrst fatty acid from TAGs. ABHD5 gene
mutations in humans lead to Chanarin Dorfman Syndrome
(CDS), a rare condition in which TAGs accumulate invarious tissues, mainly skin and liver. Indeed, CDS is also
known as Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Ichthyosis, an
autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by non-bullouscongenital ichthyosiform eryhthroderma, hepatomegaly and
liver steatosis. To date almost 110 patients have been
reported, 27 of them are from Turkey.
Material and Methods : We report here for the ﬁrst time,
the molecular and clinical characterization of an 8 years old
patient, born from affected parents.
Results : No particular complications were observed
during pregnancy. The child presented non-bullouscongenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, hepatosteatosis,
hepatomegaly and ectropion. Electropmyographic examina-
tion was compatible with myopathy. A cousin of the little
patient, born from not affected parents, was diseased too.
Leucocytes of patients, stained with May-Grünwald-
Giemsa, revealed lipid vacuoles. Molecular analysis showedthe homozygous N209X mutation, frequently identi ﬁed in
CDS patients.
Conclusions : to date, the child does not reveal distinctive
symptoms or a worsening of clinical traits in comparison
with his relatives and other CDS patients. The two children
started a diet poor in long chain fatty acids with MCT toimprove clinical condition and prevent severe systemic
damages.
S. Missaglia: None. M. Durdu: None. L. Moro: None.
D. Tavian: None.
E-P04.03
Craniosynostosis as an unusual ﬁnding in Noonan
syndrome - clinical and molecular description of 3 patients
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak1, M. Gos1, M. Karpi ński2, J. Bal1,E .
Obersztyn1
1Department of Medical Genetic, Institute of the Mother and
Child, Warsaw, Poland,2Institute of Cardiology, Jagiellonian
University School of Medicine, Krakow, Poland
Introduction: Craniosynostosis is a result of premature
fusion of cranial sutures leading to abnormal shape of headand dysmorphic facial features. In about 15% of cases,
craniosynostosis is syndromic and multiple sutures are
usually affected. Most of the syndromic patients have amutation in one of FGFR genes, that affect cell signaling
e.g. RAS/MAPK pathway.
Patients and methods: We present clinical evaluations of
3 patients with craniosynostosis and the clinical features of
Noonan syndrome. The mutation analysis in these patients
was performed using classic Sanger sequencing (2pts) orpanel next generation sequencing (1pt).
Results: All patients, besides typical features for Noonan
syndrome, like short stature, short neck and dysmorphicfeatures, had abnormal shape of the skull. The patient with
p.Ala72Ser mutation in the PTPN11 presented with
scaphocephaly, ASDII and cryptorchidism. Patients withmutations (p.Thr58Ile and p.Asp153Val) in the KRAS gene
had macrocephaly and developmental delay. One of them
had parietal foramina, submucous cleft palate and vertebraldefect, and the other one choanal stenosis and
cryptorchidism.
Conclusions: The fact that the craniosynostosis was
observed in our patients with Noonan syndrome caused by
mutations of genes of RAS/MAPK pathway con ﬁrms theAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 911role of this pathway in skull formation and suture fusion.
Clinical follow-up of craniosynostosis patients is recom-
mended to ascertain of additional signs that could help in
the diagnosis of non-FGFR-related syndromes.
Supported from NCN research project no. 2013/09/B/
NZ2/03164 and IM&Ch intramural grant.
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak: None. M. Gos: None. M.
Karpi ński:None. J. Bal: None. E. Obersztyn: None.
E-P04.04
A novel mutation of SALL4 gene resulting in Duane-radial
ray syndrome in a Hungarian family
R. Ripszám, Á. Till, J. Zima, K. Hadzsiev, A. Szabó, Z. Bánfai, B.
Melegh
Department of Medical Genetics & Szentagothai Research
Center, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical School,Pécs, Hungary
Introduction: SALL4-related disorders include Duane-
radial ray syndrome and acro-renal-ocular syndrome.
Duane-radial ray syndrome or Okihiro syndrome is an
autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized byupper limb and ocular malformations. The disease shows a
highly variable phenotype even in the same family.
Materials and Methods: We report a 15-year-old child
with radial ray defects: clubhand deformity on the left hand,
triphalangeal thumb on the right hand, hypoplasia of the left
shoulder girdle. His sister has triphalangeal thumbs andhearing impairment on the right ear. His father has Duane
anomaly and hypoplastic right thumb. With international
collaboration, Sanger sequencing was performed on thegene SALL4.
Results: A heterozygous deletion of 2 nucleotides
SALL4: c.474_475delGA was identi ﬁed in exon 2 of the
SALL4 gene. The variant is a novel variant not previously
described in other patients. The deletion causes a frameshift
that results in a premuture stop codon (SALL4: p.Glu158AspfsX22). Due to its truncating nature, it was
classi ﬁed as a pathogenic variant.
Conclusions: The above mentioned ﬁnding of a patho-
genic heterozygous SALL4 variant con ﬁrms the clinically
suspected diagnosis of Duane-radial ray syndrome. As the
father has Duane-anomaly and the sister radial defects, thetargeted variant is being tested in our laboratory.
R. Ripszám: None. Á. Till: None. J. Zima: None. K.
Hadzsiev: None. A. Szabó: None. Z. Bánfai: None. B.
Melegh: None.
E-P04.05
A case of infantile systemic hyalinosis associated with a
frameshift mutation in the ANTXR2 geneD. Brazdziunaite1, B. Burnyte2,3, U. Mickys4, R. Meskiene2,3,L .
Ambrozaityte2,3, G. Posiunas5, R. Cerkauskiene5,6,L .
Cimbalistiene2,3, A. Utkus2,3
1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
2Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania,3Centre for Medical Genetics,
Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius,
Lithuania,4National Center of Pathology, Af ﬁliate of Vilnius
University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania,
5Children ’s Hospital, Af ﬁliate of Vilnius University Hospital
Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania,6Children's Clinic,
Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
Background: Infantile systemic hyalinosis (ISH) is an
autosomal recessive condition characterized by the accu-
mulation of amorphous, hyaline material in the skin and
other organs. We report a case of infantile onset systemichyalinosis due to homozygous mutation c.1073_1074insC
in the ANTXR2 gene presenting as a limb joint stiffness
leading to a painful functional disability.
Case: A 2,5-year-old female was monitored since
3 months of age because of limb joint stiffness, and poor
weight gain. A patient was born to consanguineous couplefrom the 1
stfull-term pregnancy and delivery by C-section
with birth weight below 3rdcentile. Fetal movements were
weak and observed from the 18thweek of gestation. Since
the age of 6 months she presents multiple painful joint
contractures with limited movements, delay of motor
development, hyperpigmentation over bony prominences,gingival hyperplasia with impaired eating and failure to
thrive. Histopathological examination of skin revealed
massive collagenic ﬁbrosis with perivascular ﬁbroblastic
reaction. Sanger sequencing of whole coding region of the
ANTXR2 gene identi ﬁed a homozygous frameshift mutation
c.1073_1074insC (p.Ala359Cysfs*13) and in the unaffectedparents as heterozygous carriers.
Conclusions: About 50 cases have been described in the
literature up to date. This rare disease has been recognisedin various ethnic populations, often re ﬂecting presence of
consanguinity. Our results support the idea that insertion
mutations, causing a translational frameshift, are associatedwith more severe forms.
D. Brazdziunaite: None. B. Burnyte: None. U. Mickys:
None. R. Meskiene: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None. G.
Posiunas: None. R. Cerkauskiene: None. L. Cimbalis-
tiene: None. A. Utkus: None.
E-P04.06
Possible phenotypic expansion of IFT80 -related skeletal
ciliopathy912 J. del PicchiaC. F. Rustad1, K. Tveten2, Ø. L. Holla2, Ø. L. Busk2,E .
Merckoll1, H. Nordgarden3, I. Mero1, T. E. Prescott2
1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,2Telemark Hospital
Trust, Skien, Norway,3National Resource Centre for Oral
Health in Rare Medical Disorders, Lovisenberg DiaconalHospital, Oslo, Norway
Case: This girl had multiple admissions during the ﬁrst
18 months of life for respiratory compromise requiring
ventilator support. At age 6 years obesity and brachydactyly
led to a tentative diagnosis of Albright hereditary osteody-strophy which was not con ﬁrmed molecularly. At age 2
years, a narrow thorax and wide ribs were noted. At age 6
years, additional skeletal ﬁndings included: brachydactyly,
short wide metacarpals and metatarsals with cone-shaped
epiphyses, bilateral iliac hypoplasia and increased antever-
sion of the femoral necks. She had near complete lack ofenamel of the incisal two thirds of all incisors and canines,
and abnormally shaped molars with enamel hypoplasia. By
whole exome sequencing homozygosity was detected in theproband and heterozygosity in the parents for
NM_020800.2(IFT80):c.1646_1648del p.(Leu549del).
Discussion: Biallelic IFT80 mutations causing Jeune
asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy or short-rib polydactyly
syndrome type III have been reported in ﬁve individuals
including a mesomelic stillborn with bent femurs, tridentacetabular roofs, short middle phalanges and metacarpals.
Shared features in the others include: a narrow thorax, short
ribs, short bent femurs and brachydactyly. Abnormal teethand obesity have not been described previously in humans.
However, studies in mice suggest that IFT80 may be
involved in body weight control and in tooth development.
C.F. Rustad: None. K. Tveten: None. Ø.L. Holla:
None. Ø.L. Busk: None. E. Merckoll: None. H.
Nordgarden: None. I. Mero: None. T.E. Prescott: None.
E-P04.08
Identi ﬁcation of novel mutations in FGFR2 gene in two
families with LADD syndrome by Next-Generation
Sequencing
M. C. Martínez-Romero1,2,3, M. J. Ballesta-Martínez1,2,4,V .
López-González1,2,4, M. Barreda-Sánchez2,5, L. I. Rodríguez-
Peña4, M. T. Martínez-Menchón6, P. Sánchez-Pedreño6,G .
Glover1,2,3, P. Carbonell1,2,3, B. Gener7, P. La Fuente7,E .
Guillén-Navarro1,2, y grupo GIEDE (Grupo de Investigación
Español de Displasia Ectodérmica)
1Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB),
Murcia, Spain,2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica
en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,3Sección de Genética Molecular. Centro de Bioquímica y
Genética Clínica, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la
Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,4Sección de Genética Médica,
Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de
la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,5Cátedra de Genética Médica.
UCAM- Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,
6Servicio de Dermatología. Hospital Clínico Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,7Department of
Genetics. Cruces University Hospital. Biocruces HealthResearch Institute, Barakaldo, Spain
Introduction: Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD;
OMIM#149730) syndrome is an autosomal dominant syn-
drome with variable expression characterized by dental
anomalies and digital malformations, hypoplasia, aplasia oratresia of the lacrimal and salivary system with cup shaped
ears. Causal mutations have been described in FGF10,
FGFR2, FGFR3 and TP63 genes. We present the clinicaland genotype applying Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
in two Spanish patients affected by LADD syndrome.
Materials and Methods: Subjects: Patient 1(P1), male of
3 years-old, with of short stature, dental anomalies,
alacrimia and auricular dysplasia; father affected of short
stature. Patient 2(P2), male of 16 moth-old with auriculardysplasia, dental anomalies and scanty tears; mother
affected of ears and dental anomalies. NGS analysis:
Libraries and massively sequencing were performed usingstandard protocol, SureSelect XTPanel Custom(Agilent) in
a NextSeq(Illumina). Pathogenic variants were validated by
Sanger sequencing and segregation studies.
Results: NGS revealed two heterozygous variants in
FGFR2 (NM[[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]]
[[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]]_022970):c.1875_1902del;p.R625fs, deletion that causes a premature
stop signal (P1) and c.2165G>C;p.R722T, missense muta-
tion (P2). These variants have not been previouslydescribed, but in silico prediction software indicated that
are found in a highly conserved region with predicted
pathogenicity. Both mutations are located in exon 16 in theintracellular tyrosine kinase domain of FGFR2 affecting the
tyrosine kinase activity of FGFR2.
Conclusions: 1.We present two new mutations, extending
the mutational spectrum of FGFR2. 2.Our ﬁndings support
the implication of FGFR2 gene as responsible for LADD
syndrome suggesting a true hot spot for occurrence ofmutations in this gene.
M.C. Martínez-Romero: None. M.J. Ballesta-Martí-
nez: None. V. López-González: None. M. Barreda-
Sánchez: None. L.I. Rodríguez-Peña: None. M.T.
Martínez-Menchón: None. P. Sánchez-Pedreño: None.
G. Glover: None. P. Carbonell: None. B. Gener: None. P.
La Fuente: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 913E-P04.09
A rare hereditary connective tissue disease associated with
the TGF- βsignalling pathway:a case study of Loeys-Dietz
syndrome type 1
M. BALASAR1,M .B .O ﬂaz2, G. D. Emlik3
1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Medical Genetics, KONYA, Turkey,2Necmettin
Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of
Pediatric Cardiology, KONYA, Turkey,3Necmettin Erbakan
University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Radiology,KONYA, Turkey
Background: Loeys-Dietz syndrome is a rare hereditary
connective tissue disease associated with the transforming
growth factor beta (TGF- β) signalling pathway. This con-
dition is characterised by an autosomal dominant pattern ofinheritance. The global prevalence of Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome remains unknown. The clinical ﬁndings are similar to
those of other TGF- β-related connective tissue disorders,
i.e., Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
Materials and Method: An eight-year-old male patient
was referred to our clinic with a diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlossyndrome. The patient had had previous surgery for
craniosynostosis, bilateral inguinal hernia and clubfoot.
The patient ’s physical characteristics included low-set
prominent ears, a high palate, dolichocephaly, pectus
excavatum, skin-joint laxity, a translucent skin, micropenis
and hypospadias. An ophthalmological examinationrevealed optic atrophy in the right eye. The patient was
demonstrated to have aortic and pulmonary artery root
dilatation ( +3 SD), mitral valve prolapse, scoliosis, dural
ectasia, nasoethmoidal encephalocele, enophthalmos and
cleft palate on radiological imaging.
Results: The patient was diagnosed with Loeys-Dietz
syndrome type 1 as per the clinical and radiological
ﬁndings. TGFBR1 gene sequencing was performed and p.
Ser241Leu(c.722 C>T) heterozygote mutation was detectedin exon 4 of the TGFBR1 gene. Mutation was not seen in
the parents. Genetic counselling was provided to the family.
Conclusion: Genetic diseases associated with the TGF- β
pathway are known to have similar phenotypic effects . It is
important to make the correct clinical and genetics
diagnosis to ensure early diagnosis and treatment . Thiscase is presented here to increase awareness of differential
diagnoses of Loeys-Dietz syndrome.
M. Balasar: None. M.B. O ﬂaz: None. G.D.
Emlik: None.
E-P04.10
Novel frameshift mutations in ﬁbrillin-1 gene causing
Marfan syndromeA. Gusina, S. Miasnikov, N. Gusina
National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and
Child ”, Minsk, Belarus
Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MS) is an autosomal
dominant hereditary disorder of the connective tissue,
which is caused by mutations in the gene encoding ﬁbrillin-
1 (FBN1). Up to date, more than 3000 mutations have beenidenti ﬁed in FBN1 in relation to MS. Here we report about
two novel frameshift mutations found in family and
sporadic cases of MS.
Materials and Methods: Family case of MS presented
with mother and daughter manifested aortic root dilatation,
high myopia, abnormalities of the skeletal system includingtall stature and arachnodactyly. Daughter also had lens
dislocation. Sporadic case of MS presented with patient
exhibited mostly skeletal features of MS with only minorinvolvement of cardiovascular and ocular systems. The
genomic DNA from blood leukocytes of the patients was
isolated and the entire coding region and ﬂanking intronic
sequences of FBN1 were ampli ﬁed by PCR. Ampli ﬁed PCR
products were puri ﬁed and sequenced directly by an ABI
3500 Genetic Analyzer.
Results: Sequencing of FBN1 in mother and daughter
with classic MS revealed heterozygous single nucleotide
insertion in exon 38: c. 4640_4641insA. This mutationconverts threonine to asparagine at amino acid 1547 and
terminates translation at codon 1551 (p.Thr1547Asnfs*5).
A novel heterozygous one-base-pair deletion of thymidinewas found at nucleotide position 5155 in exon 42
(c.5155delT) in sporadic case of MS. This deletion causes
a frameshift of amino acids and results in a truncated protein(p.1719Cys>Alafs*174).
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed two novel frameshift muta-
tions in FBN1. To our knowledge, these mutations have notbeen reported before in patients with MS.
A. Gusina: None. S. Miasnikov: None. N.
Gusina: None.
E-P04.11
Exon deletions in FBN1 resulting in Marfan syndrome
A. Gusina, S. Miasnikov, N. Gusina
National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and
Child ”, Minsk, Belarus
Introduction: Mutations in the ﬁbrillin-1 gene (FBN1)
cause Marfan syndrome (MS), an autosomal dominant
connective tissue disorder. At present, more than 3000mutations have been identi ﬁed in FBN1, with the vast
majority being single-nucleotide substitutions, small914 J. del Picchiadeletions, and insertions. Here we report about two single-
exon deletions found in patients with MS.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA samples from
62 patients with suspected MS or MS-like phenotypes were
screened using multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁ-
cation (MLPA). MLPA analysis was carried out usingSALSA kits P065 (MRC-Holland, lot 0506, 0305, 0205)
and P066-2 lot (MRC-Holland, lot 0508). Ampli ﬁcation
products were run on ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer.
Results: Two gross heterozygous deletions were identi-
ﬁed in FBN1. Exon 3 deletion which was previously
reported was found in 17-year old male patient with tallstature, dolichostenomelia, arachnodactyly and mitral valve
prolapse. Novel exon 49 deletion was detected in 25-year
old female patient with classic MS manifested aortic rootdilatation, lens dislocation, high myopia, abnormalities of
the skeletal system including tall stature, arachnodactyly
and pectus carinatum.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed two single-exon deletions in
patients with MS. To our knowledge, 49 exon deletion has
not been reported before in patients with MS.
A. Gusina: None. S. Miasnikov: None. N.
Gusina: None.
E-P04.13
Searching for osteoporosis genes: The use of WGS in an
extended Maltese family with osteoporosis
C. Cilia1, J. Vassallo2, A. Xuereb-Anastasi1, M. M. Formosa1
1Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Malta, Msida, Malta,2Neuroendocrine
Clinic, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta
Introduction: Osteoporosis is a complex metabolic and
skeletal disease having a strong genetic background.Indeed, heritability of bone mineral density (BMD) in twin
and family studies ranges from 50 to 85%. The aim of the
study was to identify known and/or novel genes and genevariants that play a role in the susceptibility of primary
osteoporosis in an extended Maltese family.
Materials and Methods: A 2-generation family having
multiple relatives with osteoporosis (T-score: <-2.5 or Z-
score: <-2.0) at the spine or hip were recruited. Biochemical
analysis was performed to exclude other bone diseases.Whole genome sequencing was performed on 12 members
and comprehensive ﬁltering strategies were carried out on
the single nucleotide variant and indel ﬁles. In silico
modelling and prediction tools were used to determine
potential causality of the variants.
Results: Eleven shortlisted variants segregating in a
dominant inheritance pattern were identi ﬁed in the affected
relatives having a minor allele frequency of ≤2%. Variantsincluded missense variants within ADAMTS20
(rs138035327), ARSD (rs78034736), BMP1
(rs368615556), CLDN18 (rs114998965), SELP
(rs754086574), TGF β2 (rs773943154), TRIM45
(rs146244405), PCDHGA11 (rs138408376), PLEC
(rs138924815) and SPARC (rs41290587), and one stopgain variant within WDR89 (rs944955056).
Conclusions: Future studies will evaluate the shortlisted
variants by replicating in the Malta Osteoporotic FractureStudy - a case-control collection of more than 1000 Maltese
postmenopausal women and other extended Maltese
pedigrees so as to determine association with osteoporosisand low-trauma fracture risk at different anatomical sites.
Top candidates will in turn be assessed using functional
studies.
C. Cilia: None. J. Vassallo: None. A. Xuereb-Anastasi:
None. M.M. Formosa: None.
E-P04.14
Identi ﬁcation of a new FGRF2 mutation using NGS
coupled gene panel testing in Pfeiffer syndrome
B. Kocsis-Deák1, K. Árvai2, V. Klujber2, B. Balla1,2, B. Tóbiás1,2,
J. Kósa1,2, P. Lakatos1,2
11st Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary,2PentaCore Laboratory, Budapest,
Hungary
Introduction: The skeletal dysplasias are an extremely
heterogeneous group of conditions that affect bone devel-
opment. They encompass over 400 disorders and most are
the result of genetic defects. Pfeiffer syndrome is inheritedin an autosomal dominant pattern. It is characterized by the
premature fusion of certain skull bones. This early fusion
prevents the skull from growing normally and concerns theshape of the head and face. Here we are presenting a case of
a 5 months old girl, with healthy parents and with a skeletal
phenotype.
Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was
extracted from her salive sample and analyzed with a
comprehensive skeletal dysplasias and disorders gene paneltest, that contains the most relevant genes for a skeletal
phenotype. We have targeted all of the coding excons with
exon-intron boundaries of 186 genes using PCR-basedlibrary preparation method. Sequencing reads were mapped
to the reference genome (hg19) and after variant calling the
variants were classi ﬁed based on ESP, ExAc, ClinVar and
HGMD information.
Results: Gene panel test identi ﬁed a likely pathogenic
heterozygous mutation in the FGFR2 gene (c.940-4_945delCTAGGCCGCC) which encompass the splice site
and two codons of exon 8. Currently, this mutation is notAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 915present in the databases, but it overlaps with other
mutations, which are connected to Pfeiffer syndrome.
Conclusions: Multi gene panel tests could be very helpful
tool in cases, when the patients phenotype overlap with
different syndromes. We concluded that, the FGFR2 c.940-
4_945delCTAGGCCGCC heterozygous mutation is thecause of the Pfeiffer syndome.
B. Kocsis-Deák: None. K. Árvai: None. V. Klujber:
None. B. Balla: None. B. Tóbiás: None. J. Kósa: None. P.
Lakatos: None.
E-P04.15
yPsychomotor delay in a child with Achondroplasia
M. C. Ergoren1, L. Aliyeva2, E. Eren2, E. Manara3, S. Paolacci3,
G. Mocan1, S. G. Temel2, M. Bertelli3
1Near East University Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,
2Uludag University Faculty of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey,
3MAGI Euregio, Bolzano, Italy
This rare autosomal-dominant disorder achondroplasia
(ACh) is caused by a gain-of-function mutation in the
gene encoding the type 3 receptor for ﬁbroblast growth
factor ( FGFR3 ); in more than 95% of cases, the mutation
is G380R. Hydrocephalus, a narrow foramen magnum,
spinal deformity, and spinal canal stenosis can causepsychomotor delay problems, leading to disabilities in
locomotion, communication, and learning. The current
study presents the case of a two-year-old male withclinical manifestations suggestive of ACh including,
relative macrocephaly, mild narrow thorax, long body,
frontal blossing, ﬂatted nose, simian line on the left hand,
shortness on the tips of the ﬁngers, and shortness of rhi-
zome in the limbs. Hypotonicity also was presented, he
could control his head control, however, he could not sit,turning back without support. He could successfully pick
up and hold the objects with his thumb and index ﬁngers.
He speaks with words instead of making full sentences.Although a clinical and radiologic ACh has been con-
sidered since the admission, there was no cervico
medullary compression or hydrocephalus, therefore
sequencing analysis carried out to understand the cause of
observed skeletal dysplasia due to the predominance of
neurological ﬁndings. Sequencing analysis has revealed
that a heterozygous G1138A mutation within the FGFR3
gene was detected, con ﬁrming the diagnosis of ACh. Here
we report the ﬁrst achondroplasia patient with common
FGFR3 gene G1138A mutation with psychomotor delay
while cervicomedullary compression and hydrocephalus
are not presented. We concluded that the neurologicalmanifestations of pediatric patients with Achondroplasia
are frequent and very important.M.C. Ergoren: None. L. Aliyeva: None. E. Eren: None.
E. Manara: None. S. Paolacci: None. G. Mocan: None. S.
G. Temel: None. M. Bertelli: None.
E-P04.16
Two patients with isolated segmental overgrowth -candidates for PIK3CA gene mutation testing
V. Curtisova
Department of Human Genetics, Fakultní nemocnice Olomouc,Olomouc, Czech Republic
We report two unrelated boys with normal karyotype and an
isolated segmental overgrowth. This is present together witha 2-3 syndactyly in the 1st-3rd digit of the hand of patient 1
and in the 2-4
thdigit of the foot in patient 2. In both cases
the malformation was present at birth and is progressive.There are no vascular lesions, no dysmorphic features and
no delay in psychomotor development. There are no areas
of lipoatrophy. The growth parameters (height, weight andhead circumference) are between the 75
thand 90thcentile at
the age of 3 years in patient 1 and on the 50thcentile at the
age of 21 months in patient 2. MRI scan of the affected footin patient 2 revealed widening of the distal segment of digits
2-4 and a hypertrophy of the adipose tissue. Segmental
overgrowth has been shown to result from somatic muta-tions of the PIK3CA gene and is a feature of CLOVES
syndrome and Fibroadipose Hyperplasia. In our patients,
Fibroadipose Hyperplasia seems a more likely diagnosis.We plan to perform PIK3CA gene mutation testing on the
tissue of the affected foot in patient 2 following a planned
operation.
V. Curtisova: None.
E-P04.17
Ischiospinal Dysostosis in a boy with a novel homozygous
missense mutation in the BMPER gene
A. Kablan1, B. Mat2, S. G. Temel3, Y. Alanay4
1University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey,2Medical Student, School of
Medicine, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Ayd ınlar University, Istanbul,
Turkey,3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey,4Pediatric Genetics Unit,
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Acibadem
Mehmet Ali Ayd ınlar University, İstanbul, Turkey
Ischiospinal dysostosis (ISD) is a polytopic dysostosis
characterized by minor facial dysmorphism, ischial hypo-plasia, short stature with a short spine caused by vertebral
anomalies including hypoplasia of the lumbosacral spine,916 J. del Picchiascoliosis and segmental defects of the cervicothoracic spine
and occasionaly associated with nephroblastomatosis. ISD
is similar to, but milder than the lethal/semilethal condition
termed diaphanospondylodysostosis (DSD), which is asso-
ciated with homozygous or compound heterozygous muta-
tions of bone morphogenetic protein-binding endothelialregulator protein (BMPER) gene. Here we report on a 3-
year and 7 month-old boy with ISD a third child born to a
consanguineous couple. He was born at 36 weeks with abirth weight of 1600 gr and delivered via cesarian section.
The main clinical ﬁndings, high forehead, micrognathia,
broad bi ﬁd nose, long philtrum, bilateral ezotropia, stra-
bismus, hyperlordosis, short trunk and short stature.
ExtremitIes were normal. He is ambulatory, walks with
severe hyperlordosis and neck hyperextension balancing hisposture. He prefers to bend his body forward when he eat,
lookis at objects. He has mild stridor and a hoarse voice, yet
nas no tracheostomy. Spinal computerized tomography(CT) showed sacrum agenesis, thoracolumbar lordosis,
vertebral cleft formation and posterior fusion defects in low
lumbar vertebrates. Kidney CT was normal . Sequencing ofBMPER gene in the proband revealed the presence of one
pathogenic homozygous missense variant c.1166T>G, this
variant leads to a p. Val389Gly change in BMPER . Despite
severe skeletal ﬁndings, this ambulatory patient extends the
phenotypic spectrum of BMPER-related skeletal disorders.
A. Kablan: None. B. Mat: None. S.G. Temel: None. Y.
Alanay: None.
E-P04.18
When short stature leaves you speechless: Floating-Harbor
syndrome
A. M. Spinelli1, M. La Bianca2, E. Rubinato3, A. Morgan3,A .
D'Eustacchio2, V. Guastalla3, F. Guidolin3, G. Parmeggiani4,F .
Faletra2, I. Bruno2
1University of Padova, Padova, Italy,2Institute for Maternal
and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,
3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,4U.O. Genetica Medica,
AUSL Romagna, Cesena, Italy
Introduction: Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS) is a rare
cause of syndromic short stature and expressive language
delay. To the best of our knowledge 74 molecularly de ﬁned
cases have been published to date.
Case report : We recently re-evaluated a 10-year-old boy,
born at term to healthy unrelated Indian parents. Weight atbirth was unknown. Paternal and maternal ages at
conception were 33 and 19 years respectively. Main
ﬁndings in his past medical history were proportionate
short stature (-4 to -4.5 SD) with microcephaly (-3.5 to -4
SD) and poor response to GH, nearly absent speechdevelopment (2-3 words in Hindi) with normal receptive
language and gestures, markedly delayed bone age, delayed
motor milestones, bilateral mild-moderate conductive hear-
ing impairment (previous chronic otitis media?), umbilical
hernia, surgery for bilateral zonular cataract (at 8 ys),
normal echocardiography and brain MRI. On physicalexamination triangular facies, low anterior hairline, pro-
truding ears, wide nasal base, low hanging columella, short
philtrum, wide mouth, thin and straight upper lip vermilion,mandibular prognathia, short neck, brachydactyly, broad
ﬁngertips, clinodactyly of the 5th ﬁnger of both hands,
relatively broad thumbs and halluces were noted. Directsequencing of the two 3'-terminal exons of SRCAP
identi ﬁed the recurrent de novo mutation p.(Arg2444Ter)
(NM_006662.2:c.7330C>T).
Conclusion: We report the second SRCAP-mutated FHS
patient of Indian descent. While FHS seems to be very rare
based on current literature data, we believe that a lowthreshold for molecular testing might uncover a signi ﬁcant
rate of underdiagnosis worldwide among referrals to
tertiary-level centres for short stature.
A.M. Spinelli: None. M. La Bianca: None. E.
Rubinato: None. A. Morgan: None. A. D'Eustacchio:
None. V. Guastalla: None. F. Guidolin: None. G.
Parmeggiani: None. F. Faletra: None. I. Bruno: None.
E-P05 Cardiovascular disorders
E-P05.01
Andersen-Tawil syndrome revealed by next generation
sequencing in a patient with Long QT syndrome
S. Josifovska1,2,3, R. Vazharova4,2, L. Balabanski2, M. Malinov2,
A. Kaneva5, S. Panov1, D. Toncheva3
1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences
and Mathematics, “Ss.Cyril and Methodius ”University,
Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,
2Genome Centre, GARH “Malinov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of So ﬁa,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Biology, Medical Genetics and
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, So ﬁa University “St.
Kliment Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,5Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, National Heart Hospital, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is characterized
by prolonged QT interval because of longer repolarizationof the heart after a heartbeat leading to increased risk of
tachyarrhythmias that trigger fainting, cardiac arrest or
sudden death. Andersen-Tawil syndrome (LQTS7), a formof LQTS, is an autosomal-dominant multisystem channe-
lopathy, characterized by a highly variable triad: periodicAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 917paralysis, ventricular arrhythmias and distinctive physical
features. It is incredibly rare, only more than 100 cases have
been reported worldwide, about 60% caused by mutations
in the gene KCNJ2 (Type 1) and the rest being unexplained
(Type 2).
Materials and Methods: The index patient is a 14 years
old boy with LQTS, life-threatening ventricular tachycardia
and implanted cardioverter de ﬁbrillator. Patient ’s DNA was
analysed by targeted NGS of 176 genes using TruSightCardio gene panel (Illumina). Variants were validated by
Sanger sequencing.
Results: Rare, pathogenic variant was detected in gene
KCNJ2 (Potassium channel, inwardly rectifying, subfamily
J, member 2) in chromosome 17: g.68171832C>T,
NM_000891.2:c.652C>T, NP_000882.1:p.Arg218Trp.The KCNJ2 protein product forms a inwardly rectifying
potassium channel of crucial signi ﬁcance that regulates cell
excitability of cardiac and skeletal muscles. Arg218Trpsubstitution is within the C-terminal domain of the protein
and in heterozygous patients, as in our case, leads to loss of
function and dominant-negative effect as previously con-cluded by functional tests.
Conclusions: Deﬁning the genetic diagnosis may help to
distinguish Andersen-Tawil syndrome from other forms ofperiodic paralysis and prolonged QT interval and further-
more provide appropriate treatment and genetic counselling
in affected families.
S. Josifovska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Bala-
banski: None. M. Malinov: None. A. Kaneva: None. S.
Panov: None. D. Toncheva: None.
E-P05.02
A novel missense KCNJ2 gene mutation associated with
Andersen Tawil Syndrome
M. D. Sozuguzel, F. B. Isik, N. Genc, E. F. Caralan, Z. Dogru,
C. Akdeniz, H. Cangul
Medipol University, İstanbul, Turkey
Andersen Tawil Syndrome (ATS) is a rare genetic disorder
which is characterized by muscle weakness, ventriculararrhythmias and prolonged QT interval. Among clinical
ﬁndings are physical abnormalities such as low set ears,
short stature, scaliolis, widely spaced eyes and neurocog-nitive abnormalities such as mild learning disabilities and
abstract reasoning. KCNJ2 gene mutations cause the 60
percent of ATS cases. The protein encoded by KCNJ2 gene
is an integral membrane protein and inward-recti ﬁer type
potassium channel. This channel allows potassium to ﬂow
into a cell which participates in establishing action potentialwaveform and excitability of neuronal and muscle tissues.
Mutations in the KCNJ2 gene alter the structure andfunction of potassium channels changing the regular ﬂow of
potassium ions in skeletal and cardiac muscle that can cause
periodic paralysis and irregular heart rhythm.In this study,
we have performed the cardiac gene-panel sequencing for a
patient who has atypical face and limb abnormalities. The
patient also has bidirectional ventricular tachycardia andclinically pre-diagnosed with ATS. We identi ﬁed a novel
homozygous missense mutation in KCNJ2 (NM_000891.2)
gene p.V200M (c.598G>A) which is not found in clinicaldatabases such as ClinVar or Human Genome Database
(HGMD). In silico analysis of this mutation indicated
damaging functional effects. Further in vivo and in vitroanalyses will help to establish the causality of this mutation
for ATS.
M.D. Sozuguzel: None. F.B. Isik: None. N. Genc: None.
E.F. Caralan: None. Z. Dogru: None. C. Akdeniz: None.
H. Cangul: None.
E-P05.03
Deﬁnitive diagnosis of a family with Andersen-Tawil
Syndrome (ATS) using targeted clinical exome sequencing
N. Marinakis1, R. Pons2, K. Kosma1, E. Drakou2, J. Arditi2,P .
Constantoulakis3, A. Oikonomaki4, G. Christopoulou4,H .
Fryssira1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1
1Department of Medical Genetics, National & Kapodistrian
University of Athens, St. Sophia ’s Children ’s Hospital, Athens,
Greece,21st Department of Pediatrics, National &
Kapodistrian University of Athens, St. Sophia ’s Children ’s
Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece,3BioAnalytica-
Genotypos S.A., Athens, Greece,4Science Labs M.S.A., Athens,
Greece
Introduction : We present a family in whom targeted clin-
ical exome sequencing supported de ﬁnitive diagnosis of a
rare hereditary multisystem disorder, Andersen-Tawil
Syndrome (ATS).
Materials and Methods: A boy and his mother were
referred to the Department of Medical Genetics, Athens
University. Both had similar clinical ﬁndings with short
stature, dysmorphic features and arrhythmias. Laboratorygenetic investigation involved classical karyotype analysis
(negative), followed by semi-targeted Exome Sequencing in
the proband, using Sophia Genetics Clinical ExomeSolution (CES) and Nextera Rapid Capture Exome
(Illumina), run on a NextSeq-500 (Illumina). The CES
panel includes 4900 genes (114.405 exons). Data wasevaluated with two bioinformatics pipelines: SOPHiA
DDM
®(Sophia Genetics) and VarAFT 2.11 ( http://varaft.
eu).
Results: A known pathogenic mutation p.Arg218Trp was
identi ﬁed in the KCNJ2 gene, previously reported in ATS.918 J. del PicchiaThe variant in both the proband and his mother was
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing (Chr 17 (GRCh37):
c.652C>T, NM_000891).
Discussion: The protein product of KCNJ2 , Kir2.1,
belongs to a potassium-channel family, expressed at high
levels in heart, skeletal muscle and neural tissue. Mutationsinterfere with the function of Kir2.1 in cell excitability, and
p.Arg218Trp is located in the domain critical for binding
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP
2), an activator
of Kir2.1, whereby weaker channel-PIP 2interactions reduce
current. ATS is characterized by a triad of clinical ﬁndings,
including muscle weakness (periodic paralysis), arrhyth-mias and dysmorphic features, although expression is
variable. CES can support de ﬁnitive diagnosis in patients
with cardiopathy of unknown etiology, contributing toprecise prognosis, systematic monitoring, and when appro-
priate, identi ﬁcation of other family members.
N. Marinakis: None. R. Pons: None. K. Kosma: None.
E. Drakou: None. J. Arditi: None. P. Constantoulakis:
None. A. Oikonomaki: None. G. Christopoulou: None.
H. Fryssira: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None.
E-P05.04
Autosomal dominant inherited DSP mutation in an Italian
family
B. Boschi1, L. Candita1, E. Contini1, F. Girolami1, U. Ricci1,S .
Frusconi1, F. Cutinelli1, A. Marzullo1, M. Targetti2, I. Olivotto2,
E. Pelo1
1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy,
2Unit Cardiomiopatie, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy
We report the case of a 43 year old woman with an earliest
diagnosis of miocarditis. Cardiac MRI detected edema
and ephicardic anteroseptal late gadolinium enhancement.
Clinical evalution con ﬁrmed palmoplantar keratoderma
(PPK) referred since childhood. PPK were also present in
her sister died at the age of 40 for sudden death duringphysical activity. In order to make a differential diagnosis
between miocarditis and desmin-related cardiomyopathy,
we performed NGS analysis of a panel of inherited heart-disease genes which identi ﬁed the pathogenic variant
c.6850C>T p.(Arg2284*) in heterozygosis in DSP gene.
The variant c.6850C>T was previously reported in oneindividual with ARVD (Arrhyth mogenic right ventricular
dysplasia) (Fressart et al., 2010) a n da l s oi nac h i l dw i t h
Carvajal/Naxos syndromes (CNS) in compound hetero-zygosis with a pathogenetic variant in DSP gene (Antonov
et al., 2015) . CNS is characterized by woolly hair, pal-
moplantar keratoderma and cardiomyopathy usually withautosomal recessive and rarel y dominant hereditary pat-
tern (I Keller et al., 2012) .P r o b a n d ’s son shows PPK andwoolly hair. Despite the absence of signs of ARVD in
him, our multidisciplinary team agreed to perform a pre-
dictive test, especially sinc e he practises athletics at
competitive level. Sanger sequencing detected the familial
c.6850C>T variant in him. In conclusion, in this family
variant c.6850C>T is responsible for ARVD suggestingan autosomal hereditary patt ern, excluding miocarditis.
We stress the importance of predictive test in
young people, even in the absence of cardiac signs,according to the risk that frequent exercise accelerates the
development of age-related penetrance and progression to
heart failure.
B. Boschi: None. L. Candita: None. E. Contini: None.
F. Girolami: None. U. Ricci: None. S. Frusconi: None. F.
Cutinelli: None. A. Marzullo: None. M. Targetti: None.
I. Olivotto: None. E. Pelo: None.
E-P05.06
CTNNA3 gene mutation in a patient withcongenital
pulmonary valve stenosis
H. Elghezal1, I. Ben abdallah1, B. Melaiki1, T. Momenah2,S .
Johansson2, A. Alhashem1, A. Abdulmoogaith1, M. Al amro1
1Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2Prince Sultan Cardiac Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
ALPHA-T-CATENIN is a cell adhesion molecule coded by
the human CTNNA3 gene located on chromosome 10q
21.3. Mutations in this gene are reported in one family witharrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, familial, 13
(ARVD13) also known as dilated cadiomyopathy 13. Its
main clinical features are structural and functionalabnormalities of the right ventricle with progressive ﬁbro-
fatty myocardial replacement and electrocardiographic
changes, causing arrhythmias and sudden death. We reporthere a case of 192 Kb deletion involving the totality of exon
10 of CTNNA3 gene detected by Array-based Comparative
Genomic Hybridization using 180 k microarray (Agilenttechnologies, Santa clara, CA) in one year old male patient
presenting a congenital pulmonary valve stenosis (PVS)
with mild right ventricular dilation but without arrhythmiaor any other malformation. The patient was the result of the
third conception of a healthy non-consanguineous spouse.
The 1st and 2ed born were a 4 and 2-year-old normalfemales. PVS is one of the most common types of con-
genital heart disease (CHD) after cardiac septal defects. The
genetic contributors to PVS are not as well de ﬁned even if
familial forms of non-syndromic PVS have been reported in
the literature. Only PTPN11 gene mutations were reported
in 50% of cases of PVS associated with Noonan syndromebut never reported in isolated PVS. We suggest here that
CTNNA3 gene mutation can be associated with largeAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 919phenotype spectrum of CHD including non syndromic
congenital PVS.
H. Elghezal: None. I. Ben abdallah: None. B. Melaiki:
None. T. Momenah: None. S. Johansson: None. A.
Alhashem: None. A. Abdulmoogaith: None. M. Al
amro: None.
E-P05.08
Case report of familial dilated cardiomyopathy caused byLMNA mutation
D. P. Yermakovich1, L. N. Sivitskaya1, T. G. Vaikhanskaya2,A .
D. Liaudanski1, T. V. Kurushka2, N. G. Danilenko1,O .G .
Davydenko1
1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus,
2Republican Scienti ﬁc and Practical Center of Cardiology,
Minsk, Belarus
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is an autosomal dominant
inherited disease caused by mutations of several genes,among them LMNA. It encodes lamins A/C necessary for
functioning and structural integrity of the nucleus. The
LMNA mutation carriers have a poor prognosis of life dueto rapidly progressive hearth involvement.
We describe a male who developed dyspnea, weakness
and abnormal heart rhythm at age of 35. During the next6 months, heart failure symptoms progressed rapidly.
Negative myocardial remodeling and progressive heart
failure were observed despite the biventricular resynchro-nization therapy with optimal medical management, so
heart transplantation was accomplished.
We performed NGS using TruSight Cardiomyopathy
Sequencing panel (Illumina Inc.) and identi ﬁed LMNA
variant c.565C>T(rs267607626), leading to amino acidic
change p.R189W. The variant was indicated as pathoge-netic in several predictor programs.
The analysis of pedigrees has been conducted by the
Sanger sequencing. The proband and two elder brothersinherited p.R189W from a father who was died suddenly
due to DCM at the age of 65. The brothers also passed away
abruptly at the age of 28 and 31. Investigation of 25 years-old nephew, who is a p.R189W carrier as well, didn ’t reveal
any cardiac pathology.
We suggest the identi ﬁed LMNA variant is associated
with DCM. The family history reconstruction showed a
high prevalence of sudden cardiac death and a wide age
range of heart involvement for p.R189W.
D.P. Yermakovich: None. L.N. Sivitskaya: None. T.G.
Vaikhanskaya: None. A.D. Liaudanski: None. T.V.
Kurushka: None. N.G. Danilenko: None. O.G.
Davydenko: None.E-P05.10
The spectrum of associated congenital malformations in
Down syndrome: a retrospective Lithuanian cohort study
E. M. Blayt ė1, V. G. Samson ė1, A. Matulevi čienė2,3,B .
Aleksi ūnienė2,3, B. Burnyt ė2,3, E. Dagyt ė2,3, B. Tumien ė2,3,A .
Utkus2
1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
Vilnius, Lithuania,2Department of Human and Medical
Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius,Lithuania,
3Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University
Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius,
Lithuania
Introduction: Down Syndrome (DS), affecting approxi-
mately 1 in 800 live births worldwide, is commonly asso-ciated with congenital heart disease (CHD). However, there
is no consensus which anomalies are predominant in DS.
We investigated DS cohort focusing on congenital heartdefects and their associations with extracardiac
malformations.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective study enrolled
patients diagnosed with DS from 2015 to 2017 at the
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius
University. Data of 65 patients (58.5% males, 41.5%females) was analysed and the major congenital anomalies
in infants with DS were examined. Statistical analysis was
performed with SPSS Version 17.0 statistic softwarepackage.
Results: Trisomy created through meiotic nondisjunction
event was the most common cause (93.8%), with theunbalanced translocations and mosaic variants accounting
for the remaining cases. The most common associated
anomalies were CHD, 42 cases (64.6%), followed by visiondisorders (13.8%) and digestive system anomalies (12.3%).
The most common cardiac anomaly was patent ductus
arteriosus (38.5%), followed by atrial septal defect (35.4%),atrioventricular septal defect (15.4%) and ventricular septal
defect (7.7%). 14 children (21.5%) with CHD underwent
cardiac surgery within the ﬁrst year of life. The other
common ﬁndings were muscle hypotonia, congenital
infections and typical dysmorphic features.
Conclusion: We observed a particularly high prevalence
of congenital heart defects, vision disorders and digestive
system anomalies. The results were similar to ﬁndings from
other studies. Thus, investigation during the neonatal periodand appropriate interventions are essential to improve
quality of life and to decrease mortality rates.
E.M. Blayt ė:None. V.G. Samson ė:None. A. Matule-
vičienė:None. B. Aleksi ūnienė:None. B. Burnyt ė:None.
E. Dagyt ė:None. B. Tumien ė:None. A. Utkus: None.920 J. del PicchiaE-P05.11
Hploinsuf ﬁciency as a mechanism of DSP related diseases
O. Freireich, O. Weiss, S. Zeligson, O. Lobel, M. Ben Uziyahu,
E. Levy-Lahad, R. Segel
Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel
Introduction: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardio-
myopathy (ARVC) can lead to sudden death in otherwise
healthy young individuals. ARVC is characterized byvariable expressivity even within families. 45 –50% of
ARVC cases are caused by mutations in genes encoding
desmosomes, intercellular junctions that anchor inter-mediate ﬁlaments to the plasma membrane, and have both
structural and signaling functions.
A broad spectrum of point mutations in DSP (desmopla-
kin), a desmosome component, cause ARVC8 (MIM#
607450) or other OMIM phenotypes (MIM# 605676,
615821, 609638, 612908, 607655) that include at least oneof the following: ARVC, cardiomyopathy, tooth agenesis,
skin disease (keratoderma, keratosis palmoplantaris, epider-
molysis bullosa) or hair defects. Both autosomal recessive andautosomal dominant inheritance has been reported, so it is
unclear whether loss of DSP function is the underlying defect.
Materials and Methods: Chromosomal Microarray
Analysis (CMA), (Affymetrix CytoScan750K array,
Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, Santa Clara, Ca.) was performed
in an amniocentesis sample obtained because of advancedmaternal age.
Results: We identi ﬁed a 286kbp deletion, fully encom-
passing DSP. Family history was found to include a
cardiomyopathy-related death, as well as wooly hair in
several relatives. The DSP deletion segregated with wooly
hair in family members. Cardiovascular examination isundergoing to determine its segregation.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst evidence for whole gene
deletion of DSP causing an ARVC-related disorder. Ourresults implicate haploinsuf ﬁciency as a mechanism of
DSP-related diseases, and coupled with previous reports,
suggest dosage sensitivity with more severe manifestationsin cases with biallelic mutations. Furthermore we recom-
mend CMA testing for unresolved ARVC cases.
O. Freireich: None. O. Weiss: None. S. Zeligson: None.
O. Lobel: None. M. Ben Uziyahu: None. E. Levy-Lahad:
None. R. Segel: None.
E-P05.12
Novel a-Actin Gene Mutation p.(Ala21Val) Causing
Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, MyocardialNoncompaction, and Transmural Crypts. Clinical-
Pathologic CorrelationA. De Luca1, V. Guida1, T. Biagini2, T. Mazza2, H. Hozhabri1,F .
Piceci Sparascio1, C. Gaudio3, C. Letizia4, M. A. Russo5,N .
Galea6, C. Chimenti7, A. Frustaci7
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza
Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,
2Bioinformatics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital,
IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,3Department of
Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Nephrologic, Anesthesiologicand Geriatric Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy,
4Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Secondary
Hypertension, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy,5IRCCS San
Raffaele Pisana, and MEBIC Consortium, San Raffaele Rome
Open University, Rome, Italy,6Department of Radiological,
Oncological and Pathological Sciences, Sapienza University,Rome, Italy,
7Department of Cardiovascular, Respiratory,
Nephrologic, Anesthesiologic and GeriatricSciences, Sapienza
University, Rome, Italy
Normal 0 14 false false false IT JA X-NONE /* Style
Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"-
Tabella normale"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-
colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-prior-
ity:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bot-
tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-
size:12.0pt; font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-
font-family:Cambria; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;} A
novel a-actin gene ( ACTC1 ) mutation is reported as cose-
gregating for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (fHCM)
and left ventricular (LV) myocardial noncompaction with
transmural crypts (TC). In an Italian family of nine indivi-duals, four subjects, aged 10, 14, 43 and 46 years, three
presenting abnormal ECG changes, dyspnea and palpita-
tion, and one with recurrent cerebral ischemic attack,underwent 2-dimensional echo, cardiac magnetic resonance,
Holter monitoring, and next-generation sequencing (NGS)
analysis. Two patients with ventricular tachycardia under-went a cardiac invasive study, including coronary with LV
angiography and endomyocardial biopsy. In all the affected
members, ECG showed right bundle branch block and leftanterior hemiblock with age-related prolongation of QRS
duration. Two-dimensional echo and cardiac magnetic
resonance documented LV myocardial noncompaction inall, and in three a progressive LV hypertrophy up to 22-mm
maximal wall thickness. Coronary arteries were normal. LV
angiography showed transmural crypts progressing tospongeous myocardial transformation with LV dilatation
and dysfunction in the oldest subject. At histology and
electron microscopy, detachment of myocardiocytes wereassociated with cell and myo ﬁbrillar disarray and degrada-
tion of intercalated discs causing disanchorage ofAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 921myoﬁlaments to cell membrane. NGS showed in affected
members an unreported p.(Ala21Val) mutation of ACTC1 .
Novel p.(Ala21Val) mutation of ACTC1 causes myo ﬁbrillar
and intercalated disc alteration leading to fHCM and LV
myocardial noncompaction with TC.<!--EndFragment-->
A. De Luca: None. V. Guida: None. T. Biagini: None.
T. Mazza: None. H. Hozhabri: None. F. Piceci Spar-
ascio: None. C. Gaudio: None. C. Letizia: None. M.A.
Russo: None. N. Galea: None. C. Chimenti: None. A.
Frustaci: None.
E-P05.15
Genetic damage and lipid peroxidation in patients with
Hypercholesterolemia
M. Monu, G. Gandhi
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India
Introduction: Genetic and environmental factors are
important contenders for predisposition to hypercholester-olemia . High levels of low density lipoproteins(LDL-C)
may induce an in ﬂammatory response and its atherogenic
effects may produce signi ﬁcant quantities of reactive oxy-
gen species,resulting in oxidative stress. This oxidative
stress alongwith prolonged medication can induce genetic
damage and lipid peroxidation by oxidising thebiomolecules.
Materials and Methods: To investigate the state of
genetic damage and lipid peroxidation in patients withhypercholesterolemia, a case-control study was carried out.
Patients (n =50; 20-40y) from local hospitals and age-, sex-
and socioeconomic status- matched healthy controls fromgeneral population (n =50; 20-40y) formed the study group
under Informed Consent after approval of the study by the
Institutional Ethical Clearance Committee. Venous bloodsamples were used for serum separation and MDA levels
(Malondialdehyde:by-product of lipid peroxidation) were
determined. DNA damage was investigated in peripheralblood leukocytes of the subjects using comet assay.
Results: Statistical analyses revealed that MDA levels
were signi ﬁcantly higher (p =0.000) in patients (2.76
±0.16 μmol/l) as compared to that in controls (1.45
±0.08 μmol/l). A signi ﬁcant increase in damage frequency
(94.75±4.89;p =0.050), damage index(144.22±107.86;p =
0.001) and per cent DNA in tail(44.85±0.89;p =0.000)
were observed in patients. Correlation analysis revealed a
signiﬁcant positive association of LDL-C with damage
index(p =0.050) and MDA(p =0.000)and negative asso-
ciation of HDL-C with MDA(p =0.001).
Conclusion: High LDL-C levels induces oxidative stress
and genetic damage in the patients and thus requires
management so as to reduce the risk for cardiovascular andhepatocellular diseases.Financial grant from University for
Potential for Excellence is highly acknowledged.
M. Monu: None. G. Gandhi: None.
E-P05.16
Hypertension among Italian high school students: geneticand environmental factors. Results from HYGEF project
L. Zagato1, C. Lanzani1, E. Messaggio1, L. Citterio1, S. Delli
Carpini1, E. Brioni1, M. Simonini1, S. Fontana1, C. Magnaghi1,
F. Nistri2, G. Santini2, S. Bianchi3, S. Lenti4, V. Campese5,R .
Bigazzi2, P. Manunta1
1IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy,2ASL Nord-
Ovest, Livorno, Italy,3Ospedale San Donato, Arezzo, Italy,
4Ospedale San Donato, Grottaglie (TA), Italy,5Keck Hospital
of USC, Los Angeles, CA, United States
Background: Obesity has increased among Italian teen-
agers predisposing them to hypertension (HT) and cardio-
vascular diseases. Environmental and genetic factors mayaccount differently in different regions of Italy.
Aims - Enrol 3,000 high school students in 3 regions of
Italy (Lombardy, Tuscany and Apulia) in order to:
- determine the prevalence of HT and obesity;
- perform the genetic characterization of some HT
candidate loci;
- search for new urinary markers useful for an early renal
damage detection.
Materials and Methods: Blood pressure (BP), anthro-
pometric values, a survey on dietary habits of 2960 students
and their parents have been collected. Genomic DNAs,
extracted from saliva (by OrageneG500, DNAGenotek),have been genotyped by OpenArray Technology (Thermo-
Fisher Scienti ﬁc) for Adducin and Endogenous Ouabain
(ADD-EO) pathway genes.
Results: Regional differences both for estimated sodiuria
(p<0.001) and SBP values (p<0.005) have been observed.
BP in the whole sample signi ﬁcantly correlated both with
BMI (p <0.0001) and sodiuria (p <0.0001). Children of
hypertensive parents (34%) showed higher SBP values than
their peers with negative familiarity (p =0.019).
Subjects carrying mutated variants of ADD1 and ADD2
genes showed greater excretion of urinary Na compared to
wild-type ones (p =0.015). LSS gene variants associate to
BP. Salt excretion is signi ﬁcantly reduced in subjects
carrying a variant of HSD3 β2 gene (p =0.004).
Conclusions: The results obtained con ﬁrm the role of the
genetic network ADD-EO and allow to identify interactions
between environmental factors (eating habits) and genetic
polymorphisms linked to HT.
Funded study: PE-2011-02346988922 J. del PicchiaL. Zagato: None. C. Lanzani: None. E. Messaggio:
None. L. Citterio: None. S. Delli Carpini: None. E.
Brioni: None. M. Simonini: None. S. Fontana: None. C.
Magnaghi: None. F. Nistri: None. G. Santini: None. S.
Bianchi: None. S. Lenti: None. V. Campese: None. R.
Bigazzi: None. P. Manunta: None.
E-P05.17
BIUXX
L. Joong Gyo
The catholic medical center, Uijeongbu, Korea, Republic of
The Korean government approved 46 gene and related 12
phenotypes for direct to consumer (DTC) service in 2016.
Each of the gene markers is already well known in many
previous studies. In this study, we tried to identify the riskprediction of hypertension by the blood pressure marker
used in the DTC service based on the DTC service results.
We analyzed 647 Koreans for eight blood pressure markers(NPR3, ATP2B1, NT5C2, CSK, HECTD4, GUCY1A3,
CYP17A1, FGF5). We took a DNA sample with buccal
swap kit and collected the customer questionnaire. Weanalyzed the results of eight blood pressure markers and
age, gender, smoking, drinking, and family history of
hypertension in questionnaire. Among the eight markers,
NT5C2 and CYP17A1 showed association tendency with
hypertension . Then, we combined the eight gene marker
genotypes and calculated the genetic risk scores based onthe number of risk allele and the multiple regression effects
size to the hypertension . As a result, the combined index
of the genetic risk score was signi ﬁcantly associated with
the questionnaire hypertension history (Odds ratio =
2.72 (95% CI : 1.52 ~ 4.86), P =0.001). Using this
genetic risk score, we estimated the risk predictionaccuracy by ROC curve, and the area under cover was
57.4% . Although there are some limitations, we con ﬁrmed
that the blood pressure markers based on our DTC service(GeneStyle
TM) were well selected.
Keywords: Hypertension, genetic polymorphism, DTC
L. Joong Gyo: None.
E-P05.18
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome in a male fetus with 45,X/46,X,i(Y)(p10)/47,X,i(Y)(p10), +i(Y)(p10)/46,XY mosaicism:
Do we still need karyotyping?
A. Zagorac1, A. Golub1, B. Zagradi šnik1, A. Erjavec Škerget1,F .
Mujezinovi ć1, R. Kavalar1, N. Kokalj Voka č1,21University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,
2Medical Faculty Maribor, University Maribor, Maribor,
Slovenia
Introduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis has sig-
niﬁcantly increased the ability to diagnose medical condi-
tions caused by copy-number variations. However
mosaicism can confound the interpretation of chromosomal
microarray results. We describe a case of sex chromosomesmosaic fetus with four cell lines. At the 22
thweek of
pregnancy the hypoplastic left heart syndrome: presence of
endocardial ﬁbroelastosis of the left ventricle with aortic
valve stenosis, was detected. Because of poor prognosis the
pregnancy was terminated. Autopsy of the male fetus con-
ﬁrmed the presence of hypoplasia of the left ventricle and
ascending aorta with VSD and mitral valve atresia.
Materials and Methods: QF-PCR test, aCGH analysis
using 8x60K array and metaphase chromosome analysisafter amniocenteses were performed.
Results: QF-PCR result was normal. Array CGH
revealed additional copy of the whole short arm ofchromosome Y in approximately 40% of cells and a loss
of the whole long arm of chromosome Y: arr(Yp)x2[40],
(Yq)x0. Metaphase analysis demonstrated mosaic karyo-type: 45,X[82]/46,X,i(Y)(p10)[11]/47,X,i(Y)(p10), +i(Y)
(p10)[7]/46,XY[2].
Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that although aCGH
should be the ﬁrst-tier test for clinical diagnosis of
chromosome abnormalities, chromosome analysis remain
valuable in the detection of mosaicism and delineation ofchromosomal structural rearrangements. Phenotype of
mosaic subject is primarily dependent on the dominant cell
line in a speci ﬁc tissue. Because our fetus was male we
speculated that in gonads the cell lines i(Yp) and XY
predominated. The high incidence of hypolastic left heart
syndrome is seen in Turner syndrome girls, so the presenceof 45,X cell line in our case could explain the heart
malformation.
A. Zagorac: None. A. Golub: None. B. Zagradinik:
None. A. Erjavec kerget: None. F. Mujezinovi ć:None. R.
Kavalar: None. N. Kokalj Voka č:None.
E-P05.19
A new phenotype of severe Dilated Cardiomyopathy
associated with a mutation in the LAMP2 gene previously
known to cause Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in the
context of Danon Disease
P. Gourzi1, M. P. Pantou1, A. Gkouziouta1, L. Kaklamanis1,D .
Tsiapras1, C. Zygouri2, P. Constantoulakis2, A. Chaidaroglou1,
S. Adamopoulos1, D. Degiannis1Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9231Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Athens, Greece,
2BioAnalytica-Genotypes SA, Athens, Greece
Introduction: Danon disease is a rare X-linked cardioske-
letal myopathy with multisystem clinical manifestations.
Genetic defects at the Lysosome-Associated Membrane 2Protein (LAMP2) are the cause of the disorder. Due to the
rarity of the disease, there is limited progress in under-
standing the correlation between genotype and phenotype,and explaining the large variability observed in the clinical
features of this disorder.
Materials & Methods: The index case and her relatives
underwent full cardiological assessment. DNA libraries
were prepared using Illumina ’s Trusight Cardio sequencing
panel, covering 174 clinically relevant genes to cardiacdiseases. VariantStudio v2.1 software and Sophia Genetics
DDM platform were used for annotation, classi ﬁcation and
ﬁltering of genomic variants.
Results: In this study we report two twin sisters,
presented in our hospital with end stage heart failure due
to dilated cardiomyopathy, requiring heart transplantationevaluation. Genetic analysis showed that they both carried a
LAMP2 missense variant, c.928G>A. The mutation was not
detected in their mother. Their father died at 38 years of age,suffering from end stage heart failure of unknown reason.
This variant has already been reported by others and was
correlated with the clinical triad of Danon disease i.e.hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mental retardation and per-
ipheral myopathy, as well as autism in one case. In this
study, we present dilated cardiomyopathy as a newphenotype for this particular mutation.
Conclusions: The new phenotype of dilated cardiomyo-
pathy associated to the LAMP2 c.928G>A mutation,
presented in this study, con ﬁrms the phenotypic hetero-
geneity of Danon disease.
P. Gourzi: None. M.P. Pantou: None. A. Gkouziouta:
None. L. Kaklamanis: None. D. Tsiapras: None. C.
Zygouri: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. A. Chaidar-
oglou: None. S. Adamopoulos: None. D.
Degiannis: None.
E-P05.20
Intra- and interfamiliar variability in 4 novel pedigrees
with cardiac and neuromuscular phenotypes associated to
G382G variant in the LMNA gene
L. Camerota1, S. Lanciotti1, S. Benedetti2, M. D'Apice1,A .
Puca3,4, A. Martino5, M. Ciavatti6, C. Rodolico7, F. Brancati8,9
1Section of Genetics, Department of Biomedicine and
Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy,2Laboratory
of Clinical Molecular Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc
Institute, Milan, Italy,3Department of Medicine, Surgery andDentistry, Salerno University, Baronissi, Italy,
4Cardiovascular Research Unit, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan,
Italy,5Division of Cardiology, Policlinico Casilino Hospital,
ASL Roma B, Rome, Italy,6Cardiology Unit, Sandro Pertini
Hospital, Rome, Italy,7Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Messina University, Messina, Italy,
8Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, IRCCS Istituto
Dermopatico dell'Immacolata (IDI), Rome, Italy,9Department
of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, L ’Aquila
University, L'Aquila, Italy
Introduction: Variants in the LMNA gene encoding lamin
A/C cause a broad range of different diseases (lamino-
pathies). While clinical features partly overlap, major phe-
notypic groups include dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM),limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), premature aging
and lipodystrophy disorders. Genotype-phenotype correla-
tions are tricky but correlations exist between a speci ﬁc
LMNA variant and a distinct condition. Less is known about
different phenotypes resulting from the same mutation.
Materials and Methods: Four families with multiple
members carrying the c.1146C>T (p.G382G) variant in
LMNA (causing abnormal splicing) were identi ﬁed. Cardi-
ologic and neurological assessment were performed.
Result: In one family, ﬁve individuals carrying the p.
G382G variant were affected by a cardiac-only phenotype
with DCM and cardiac conduction defects (CCD). Neitherthe 67-year-old proband had muscular involvement. In three
additional families, the index cases (one male and two
females) were ascertained for LGMD, with ages at onsetvarying 2nd-5th decade. Only in the male proband, LGMD
was associated to DCM and arrhythmias, while the females
aged >60 years, manifested LGMD and CCD. In theirfamilies a variable combination of LGMD, DCM, arrhyth-
mias was observed.
Conclusion: We report the same p.G382G variant in
LMNA associated to different phenotypes within the same
and between different families. This unique variant may
associate to cardiac-only phenotype, or manifest withneuromuscular involvement. These observations are rele-
vant for genetic counseling and preventive medicine in p.
G382G carriers. The mechanisms underlying such varia-bility are currently unknown and their identi ﬁcation would
represent an important target in medical genetics.
L. Camerota: None. S. Lanciotti: None. S. Benedetti:
None. M. D'Apice: None. A. Puca: None. A. Martino:
None. M. Ciavatti: None. C. Rodolico: None. F.
Brancati: None.
E-P05.21
Genetic screening of 3 major genes (KCNQ1, KCNH2,SCN5A) in 72 Turkish patients with long QT syndrome:
single cardiac center experience924 J. del PicchiaA. GEZDIRICI1, E. Y. GULEC1, A. AYAZ1, H. KAFALI2,I .
TANIDIR2, Y. ERGUL2, A. GUZELTAS2
1Kanuni Sultan Süleyman Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,2Mehmet
Akif Ersoy Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Training andResearch Hospital, Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Istanbul, Turkey
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetic disorder char-
acterized by prolongation of the QT interval on electro-
cardiograms, which may lead to syncope, cardiac arrest orsudden death. LQTS is usually diagnosed after a cardiac
event (eg, syncope, cardiac arrest). In some situations, this
condition is diagnosed after a family member suddenly dies.Some individuals are asymptomatic; the diagnosis is made
incidentally when an ECG shows prolongation of the QT
interval. Genetic diagnosis of LQTS is very important forpatients and their families because most of the patients are
asymptomatic and the clinical follow-up is very dif ﬁcult.
Up to date, mutations in more than 15 genes have beenidenti ﬁed in LQTS. Three of these (KCNQ1, KCNH2 and
SCN5A) were detected at approximately 75% of cases.
Here we investigated for mutations in three major genesresponsible for this disease in 72 Turkish patients with
LQTS. We detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic muta-
tions in 34 patients. In 28 of our patients, we detected amutation in the KCNQ1 similar to the literature. We
detected a mutation in the KCNH2 in 2 patients and a
mutation in the SCN5A in 4 patients. In 7 of our patients,we identi ﬁed mutations that have not yet been identi ﬁed in
the literature. Although these three gene mutations were
reported to be detected at approximately %75 of the LQTS,this rate was %46 in our cases. This suggests that mutations
may occur in other rare genes, perhaps even new genes, in
our cohort.
A. Gezdirici: None. E.Y. Gulec: None. A. Ayaz: None.
H. Kafali: None. I. Tanidir: None. Y. Ergul: None. A.
Guzeltas: None.
E-P05.22
Targeted resequencing of genes associated with long QTsyndrome in Czech patients: two newly identi ﬁed likely
pathogenic variants in previously investigated patient with
negative results
I. Synková1,2, E. Ostadalova1, I. Valaskova1,2, R. Gaillyova1,2,T .
Novotny3,2, I. Andrsova3,2, A. Florianova3, P. Vit4
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno,
Czech Republic,2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University,
Brno, Czech Republic,3Department of Internal Medicine and
Cardiology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic,4Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Brno, Brno,
Czech Republic
Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary
arrhythmic syndrome characterized by abnormal prolonga-
tion of QT interval, increased risk of malignant ventriculararrhythmias and sudden death. With the prevalence 1:2000
it is the most often diagnosed arrhythmogenic disorder. At
least 15 LQTS-related genes have been identi ﬁed so far,
nevertheless 75% of mutations are found in 3 major genes
(KCNQ1 ,KCNH2 andSCN5A ). Here we report identi ﬁca-
tion of likely pathogenic variants in patient previouslyinvestigated with negative results.
Materials and Methods: A sequencing panel including
15 genes for LQTS was designed. Genomic DNA wasobtained from peripheral blood of LQTS patients or frozen
tissue samples for molecular biopsy in cases of sudden
unexplained death. Sequencing library was prepared byTruSeq Custom Amplicon kit (Illumina), sequencing was
performed on MiSeq (Illumina). Variants in coding and
promoter regions were extracted.
Results: We identi ﬁed 2 variants, Arg562Ser in KCNQ1
and Phe68Cys in KCNH2 , in patient where single strand
polymorphism analysis (SSCP) was previously performedwith negative results. Variant Arg562Ser was previously
reported as pathogenic; variant Phe68Cys has not been
described yet. Using the ACMG-AMP guidelines both ofthese two variants are evaluated as likely pathogenic.
Conclusions: Molecular con ﬁrmation of diagnosis is
important in LQTS cases. It improves the diagnosticaccuracy and risk strati ﬁcation in patients and their
relatives. Thus, it is necessary to reanalyze also previously
negative patients as new techniques with higher capacityand detection limit are becoming available.
Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic: grant nr 16-30571A.
I. Synková: None. E. Ostadalova: None. I. Valaskova:
None. R. Gaillyova: None. T. Novotny: None. I.
Andrsova: None. A. Florianova: None. P. Vit: None.
E-P05.24
Polymorphism rs822396 in ADIPOQ is associated to
anthropometric, clinic and biochemist alterations related to
metabolic syndrome in Mexican population
L. A. Rubio- Chavez1, K. L. Rubio-Chávez1, R. C. Rosales-
Gómez2, J. L. Ramos-Núñez1, G. Camargo-Hernández1,T .A .
Garcia-Cobian1, J. Sánchez-Corona3, S. A. Gutiérrez-Rubio1
1Laboratorio del Instituto de Terapéutica Experimental y
Clínica, Departamento de Fisiología, Guadalajara, Mexico,
2Departamento de Ciencias Biomédicas, Centro Universitario
de Tonalá, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 925Mexico,3División de Medicina Molecular, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica del Occidente, IMSS Instituto
Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico
Introduction: Adiponectin, encode by ADIPOQ gene, is
produced mainly by adipose tissue, works as metabolic andimmunological regulator. Polymorphism rs822396 in ADI-
POQ gene was associated with diabetes mellitus II, hyper-
tension and components of metabolic syndrome inCaucasian and Asiatic populations.
Our aim was to evaluate the association of polymorphism
rs822396 with anthropometric, clinic and biochemicalparameters related to metabolic syndrome in Mexican
population.
Materials and Methods: the DNA from peripheral blood
of 250 participants was genotyped for polymorphism
rs822396 by PCR-RFLP. We obtained clinic, anthropo-
metric and biochemical measures from participants andstatistical analysis was made with IBM-SPSSv20.
Results: the analysis was made according polymorphism
rs822396 genotype carriers frequency of rs822396G allelein Mexican population was 22%. The rs822396GG carriers
(GG/GA) had an increased risk to metabolic syndrome
components as body index mass >25 (OR =1.989), glucose
>100mg/dL (OR =2.127), cholesterol >200 (OR =1.725),
waist circumference (OR =1.995), and triglyceride/glucose
index (OR =2.279).
Conclusion: The rs822396 polymorphism of ADIPOQ
gene could be a molecular marker to alterations related to
metabolic diseases in Mexican population.
L.A. Rubio- Chavez: None. K.L. Rubio-Chávez: None.
R.C. Rosales-Gómez: None. J.L. Ramos-Núñez: None.
G. Camargo-Hernández: None. T.A. Garcia-Cobian:
None. J. Sánchez-Corona: None. S.A. Gutiérrez-
Rubio: None.
E-P05.25
Identi ﬁcation of mutation in EPHA2 in a family with
premature myocardial infarction (MI)
I. Ahmad1,2, J. Erdmann1,2, P. Diemert3
1Institute of Cardiogenetics, Luebeck, Germany,2DZHK
(German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Luebeck,
Germany,3Westküstenkliniken, Medizinische Klinik 2, Heide,
Germany
Coronary artery disease (CAD) and its sequelae myocardial
infarction (MI) are the leading cause of death in the Western
world. Genome wide association studies have reported
many common variants and risk loci that affect cardiacdiseases, but they are limited to liking these variants with
phenotypic consequences. The importance of geneticpredisposition to CAD and MI is best documented by the
predictive value of a positive family history. The genetic
causes for familial clustering of MI are less clear. Next-
Generation Sequencing in families with several affected
individuals has revolutionized mutation identi ﬁcation in
Mendelian diseases, but can also successfully be applied tomore complex phenotypes such as CAD and MI. In this
study, we applied whole-exome sequencing and co-
segregation analysis in one MI-family and identi ﬁed a
heterozygous c.1324G>T alteration resulting in a substitu-
tion of p. V442L in exon 6 of EPHA2 , a gene located at the
1p36 locus in humans, which is associated with MI. Themissense variant, rs772857919 (p. V442L), was predicted
as deleterious based on PolyPhe2, deep neural network and
MutationTaster. The same mutation was detected in anunrelated patient presenting with MI while absent in the
exomes of 2,000 controls. EphA2 receptor plays important
role in regulating the cellular events after permanent cor-onary occlusion and its entanglement in the progression of
ischemic cardiomyopathy. Further functional studies are
ongoing to understand the underlying pathomechanism. Theidenti ﬁcation of a mutation in EPHA2 may give us new
information about the involvement of ephrin receptor in the
mechanics of coronary artery disease.
I. Ahmad: None. J. Erdmann: None. P. Diemert: None.
E-P05.26
Phenotypic heterogeneity within a family amongst carriers
of the same RBM20 mutation
M. P. Pantou1, P. Gourzi1, A. Gkouziouta1, C. Zygouri2,P .
Constantoulakis2, S. Adamopoulos1, D. Degiannis1
1Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Kallithea-Athens, Greece,
2BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A., Athens, Greece
Introduction: RBM20 regulates alternative splicing of
crucial cardiac genes associated with sarcomere assembly,
diastolic function and ion transport. Mutations in RBM20
have been associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
with conduction defects.
Materials & Methods: The index case and his relatives
underwent full cardiological assessment. Genetic analysis
were performed using Illumina's Trusight Cardio
sequencing panel.
Results: In this study we present six members of a family
carrying the RBM20 mutation NM_001134363.2:
c.1900C>T. The index case was initially diagnosed withDCM at the age of 17 and received an ICD due to
ventricular arrhythmias. His brother, carrier of the mutation,
is now 28 years old and has been diagnosed withhypertensive cardiomyopathy. The mutation was shown to
be of paternal origin, but their father at 54 years old remains926 J. del Picchiaasymptomatic with a mild DCM. The mutation was also
detected in index case's aunt who was resuscitated from
sudden cardiac death at the age of 48. She had no history of
coronary artery disease and echocardiography revealed the
initial stages of DCM and a bicuspid aortic valve. Her
children were both carriers of the mutation. Her daughter, atthe age of 30, was healthy, but her son was implanted with
an ICD due to sustained ventricular tachycardia at the age of
21 and presents initial signs of Left Ventricular NonCompaction.
Conclusion: Six carriers of a single mutation in RBM20
belonging to the same family presented different pheno-types supporting the pleiotropic functional effect of
the gene.
M.P. Pantou: None. P. Gourzi: None. A. Gkouziouta:
None. C. Zygouri: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A. P. Constantoula-
kis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A.. S. Adamopoulos: None.
D. Degiannis: None.
E-P05.27
VDR,VDBP mutations and vitamin D de ﬁciency may cause
restenosis in coronary artery disease patients after stentimplantation
D. K ıraç1, A. Yaman2, H. Gezmis1, K. Yesilcimen2, T. Avcilar3,A .
I. Guney3, E. C. Altunok4, R. Akkanat3, T. Isbir1, S. Turkmen5,6
1Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,2Dr. Siyami Ersek Thoracic
and Cardiovascular Surgery Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey,3Marmara
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,4Yeditepe University, Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey,
5Labor Berlin Charite Vivantes, Berlin, Germany,6Charite
Institut für medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany
Aim: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a complex and
multifactorial disease, can be in ﬂuenced by pathophysio-
logic conditions as well as by genetic and environmentalfactors. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) by bal-
loon angioplasty and stenting have participated in the
treatment of CAD. Unfortunately, after surgical interven-tion, the vascular injury often causes restenosis that can be
reduced the luminal diameter of more than 50%. Vitamin D
deﬁciency is a notable risk factor for CAD. Vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and vitamin D binding protein (VDBP)
gene mutations which play role in vitamin D metabolism
may also have role in the progression of the disease as wellas restenosis after stent implantation. Therefore, it was
aimed to detect VDR and VDBP mutations and toinvestigate the relation between other risk factors which
may cause restenosis.
Patients and Methods: Ninety three stent implanted
CAD patients were enrolled to the study. rs2228570,
rs1544410 mutations in VDR ; rs4588, rs7041 mutations in
VDBP were investigated by RT-PCR. Other risk factors
were also investigated. Results were evaluated statistically.
Results: rs4588 and rs2228570 mutations were found
statistically high in patients. Vitamin D de ﬁciency was
found statistically signi ﬁcant in patients. Also it was found
that there is a relation between myocard infarction and
rs7041 mutation. Additionally, rs2228570 mutation wasfound to be related with vitamin D de ﬁciency.
Conclusion: According to these ﬁndings, it was con-
sidered that the presence of both vitamin D de ﬁciency and
gene mutations which are related with vitamin D metabo-
lism may increase restenosis in CAD patients.
D. K ıraç: None. A. Yaman: None. H. Gezmis: None. K.
Yesilcimen: None. T. Avcilar: None. A.I. Guney: None.
E.C. Altunok: None. R. Akkanat: None. T. Isbir: None.
S. Turkmen: None.
E-P05.28
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) in the young - value ofpostmortem genetic analysis in unclear autopsy cases
S. Scheiper1,2, E. Ramos-Luis3,4, A. Blanco-Verea3,4, C. Niess1,
C. Geisen2, M. Kettner1, M. Verhoff1, M. Brion3,4,S .
Kauferstein1
1Institute of Legal Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany,2German Red Cross, Institute of
Transfusion Medicine and Immunohaematology, UniversityHospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany,
3Xenética de
enfermedades cardiovasculares e oftalmolóxicas, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, ComplexoHospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela (A Coruña), Spain,
4Medicina
Xenómica, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago deCompostela-Universidade de Santiago de Compostela,
Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago
de Compostela (A Coruña), Spain
Introduction: Cases of sudden unexpected death in young
and apparently healthy individuals represent a tragic eventfor those left behind. A signi ﬁcant number of these cases
remain unexplained, even after complete postmortem
investigation. Abnormalities in cardiac expressed geneshave been associated with arrhythmogenic disorders, which
may cause sudden cardiac death. Due to the fact that those
diseases are inherited, close relatives of deceased may alsobe at risk.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 927Materials and Methods: Postmortem genetic analysis
was performed in sudden death cases under the age of 45.
DNA was extracted from blood and the samples were
sequenced by means of a de ﬁned gene panel using Next-
generation sequencing (NGS). The sequencing data were
subjected to bioinformatics analysis and detected sequencevariants were assessed using common databases and
applying in silico prediction tools.
Results: In this study, several sequence variants could be
identi ﬁed in the genes analyzed. Due to the detection of
numerous unknown and unclassi ﬁed variants, the inter-
pretation of the results proved to be challenging. However,by means of an appropriate evaluation of the ﬁndings, NGS
may represent an essential part for the forensic investigation
in unclear autopsy cases.
Conclusion: Molecular autopsy is an important tool to
support forensic investigation in order to clarify the cause of
death and implies great progress for relatives of young SCDvictims facilitating adequate risk strati ﬁcation and genetic
counselling. Still, internationally accepted guidelines pre-
senting a standardized course of action need to beestablished.
S. Scheiper: None. E. Ramos-Luis: None. A. Blanco-
Verea: None. C. Niess: None. C. Geisen: None. M.
Kettner: None. M. Verhoff: None. M. Brion: None. S.
Kauferstein: None.
E-P05.29
Evaluation of reports of thrombophilia panel test in women
with early pregnancy loss
G. Nacarkahya, F. Tusgul, S. Eroglu, Y. K ılıc, S. Oguzkan Balc ı
Gaziantep University/Medical Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey
Objective: Coagulation disorders are de ﬁned as one of the
reasons for susceptibility to infertility. Gene mutations that
cause coagulation disorders are analyzed with thrombo-
philia panel test. The aim of the study is to investigate thefrequency of gene mutations within the thrombophilia panel
test in individuals with early pregnancy loss Materials-
Methods: A total of 1538 female patients with early preg-nancy loss, aged between 17-54 years who were admitted to
the Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinic between 2014 and
2017 and whom mutations were screened in MolecularGenetics Diagnostic Laboratory of Gaziantep University
were included in the study. Factor II (G20210A), Factor V
(Leiden), MTHFR (C677T and A1298C), Factor XIII(V34L) and PAI-1 (4G/5G) genetic alterations within the
thrombophilia panel test were studied by ASO-PCR
method.
Results: Homozygous mutation distributions in indivi-
duals with early pregnancy loss are; 2%, 0,13%, 11%,12,8% 0,32% and 23,3% for Factor II (G20210A), Factor V
(Leiden), MTHFR (C677T and A1298C), Factor XIII
(V34L) and PAI-1 (4G/5G) respectively, and heterozygous
mutation distributions are 25,3%, 3,5%, 41,5%, 45,1%,
7,4%, 50,1%.
Conclusion: In conclusion, thrombophilia panel test
reports of patients with early pregnancy loss showed that
the most frequent homozygous mutation is found as PAI-1
(4G/5G) change and the most frequent heterozygousmutation is also found as PAI-1 (4G/5G) change. Hetero-
zygous mutations were found to be more frequent than
homozygous mutations. Assessment of heterozygous muta-tions in PAI-1 (4G/5G), MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) and
Factor II (G20210A) genes in ﬁrst pregnancy losses will be
beneﬁcial for diagnosis and treatment.
G. Nacarkahya: None. F. Tusgul: None. S. Eroglu:
None. Y. K ılıc:None. S. Oguzkan Balc ı:None.
E-P05.30
Serum urate correlates with multiple previously-
unexplored cardiovascular proteomic markers
J. Marten1, T. S. Boutin1, A. Richmond1, J. F. Wilson1,2,C .
Hayward1, V. Vitart1
1MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom,2Usher Institute of Population
Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Introduction: Serum uric acid (SUA) levels are associated
with a variety of common diseases, but it is less clear
whether it plays a role in the aetiology of these conditions.This project aims to identify correlations between SUA and
protein biomarkers for disease.
Materials and Methods: OLINK Proseek panels were
used to measure serum levels of biomarkers for in ﬂamma-
tion and cardiovascular disease in the CROATIA-Vis and
ORCADES cohorts (combined n =1,470). 266 proteins
were included in the analysis. Spearman correlations were
calculated between SUA and protein biomarkers, along with
20 additional phenotypes. Measurements were corrected forkinship, age and sex. To account for confounding between
phenotypes, partial correlations were calculated between
SUA and each phenotype. Additionally, multiple lassoregressions were run and each phenotype scored on how
often it was retained in a predictive model for SUA.
Results: Signi ﬁcant partial correlations were detected
between SUA and Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 (FGF23),
Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM) and Insulin
Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 2 (IGFBP2). Partialcorrelations were calculated for these three proteins,
creating a network model of correlations that provides928 J. del Picchiacontext for their relation to uric acid. These associations
have persisted in sensitivity analyses, and have also been
detected using lasso regression. Replication of the results in
independent cohorts is in progress.
Conclusions: Uric acid correlates with multiple cardio-
vascular disease and in ﬂammation biomarkers. Investiga-
tion into the genetic basis of these associations may help
better understand the debated role of SUA in cardiovascular
disorders.
J. Marten: None. T.S. Boutin: None. A. Richmond:
None. J.F. Wilson: None. C. Hayward: None. V.
Vitart: None.
E-P05.31
Expression of angiogenic factors VEGFA/VEGFR2 andchemokines SDF-1/CXCR4 in spontaneous abortions
M. Rizov1, D. Kachakova2, K. Belemezova1, E. Nikolova1,M .
Hristova-Savova1, T. Milachich3, T. Timeva4, P. Andreeva4,R .
Kaneva2, A. Shterev4, I. Dimova1
1Genetics laboratory, SAGBAL “Dr Shterev ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,2Laboratory of Genomic Diagnostics,
Molecular Medicine Center (MMC), Medical University So ﬁa,
Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3IVF laboratory, SAGBAL “Dr
Shterev ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4SAGBAL “Dr
Shterev ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
A series of studies have reported that increased concentra-
tions of pro-in ﬂammatory or T helper cell cytokines or
increased frequencies of natural killer (NK) cells in the
blood can be found during euploid sporadic miscarriage.
There is some evidence that uterine NK cells regulateangiogenesis in the endometrium and therefore may also
play a role for implantation and early pregnancy. NK cell
density was positively correlated with the formation ofblood and lymphatic vessels, spiral arteriole smooth muscle
differentiation and oedema in endometrium of women with
recurrent pregnancy loss. In our study, by using real timePCR technique, we measured the expression levels for the
most important angiogenic factors VEGFA and its receptor
VEGFR2, as well as for chemokine SDF-1 and its receptorCXCR4, in decidua samples from spontaneous abortions
compared to decidua from matched controls of elective
abortions. Six endometrial samples from euploid sporadicmiscarriages and 4 samples from matched controls were
investigated for mRNA levels of these angiogenic factors
and chemokines. The results showed increased expressionof all studied molecules: about 3 times average increase in
the expression levels of VEGFA and CXCR4, as well as
higher increase in the expression of SDF-1 (by 7 times onaverage) and VEGFR2 (by 9.8 times on average). Our
results suggest dysregulation of VEGFA/VEGFR2angiogenesis in the endometrium of miscarriages, along
with the higher expression of CXCR4 (chemokine receptor,
expressed by NK cells) and its chemokine-ligand SDF-1
(most probably expressed by endothelial cells).
Acknowledgment: Grant NoD-63/2017 of MU So ﬁa.
M. Rizov: None. D. Kachakova: None. K. Belemezova:
None. E. Nikolova: None. M. Hristova-Savova: None. T.
Milachich: None. T. Timeva: None. P. Andreeva: None.
R. Kaneva: None. A. Shterev: None. I. Dimova: None.
E-P05.32
Patient with recurrent ventricular ﬁbrillation and
polymorphic nonsustained ventricular tachycardia with
mutation in MYLK2 gene
D. Voka č1, . Stangler Herode2, D. Krgovi ć2, N. Kokalj Voka č2,3
1Department of Cardiology and Angiology, University Medical
Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor,
Slovenia,3Maribor University, Medical Faculty, Maribor,
Slovenia
Introduction: Ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular
ﬁbrillation (VF) are frequent clinical arrhythmias in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). We are report-
ing a case of young patient after VF without familiar historyof sudden cardiac death (SCD) or structural heart disease,
with still undescribed variant in MYLK2 gene detected by
NGS. Material and Methods: Patient was 37 years old
women after SCD and CPR procedure due to VF. On
admission patient was stable and conscious. Blood tests and
echocardiography were normal, on ECG a sinus rhythm waspresent. Coronary angiography and electrophysiologic
testing were both normal, only pair of ventricular premature
complexes (VPC) from septal region were observed. Sev-eral polymorphic VPC triplets were present on Holter.
Patient was declared idiopathic VF and an ICD was
implanted. Up to now two episodes of VF and severalepisodes of polimorphic VT were treated with ICD.
Results: NGS genetic testing using TruSight Cardio
(Illumina) was performed, mutation NM-033118.3: c.4G>Ain MYLK2 gene was detected.
Conclusion: MYLK2 gene mutations are present in
some familial HCM. Since our patient presents no signs ofcardiomyopathy or structural heart disease, it is possible
that clinical form of HCM will evolve later. Detected
variant of c.4G>A in MYLK2 gene is currently classi ﬁed
as a variant of unknown signi ﬁcance but due to highly
arritmogenic and malignant c linical course of disease in
present case it is wort to describe it. The work was done inthe framework of an internal research project of UKC-
MB: IRP-2015/01-07.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 929D. Voka č:None. . Stangler Herode: None. D. Krgovi ć:
None. N. Kokalj Voka č:C. Other Research Support
(supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind
support); Modest; Kemomed, Slovenia.
E-P06 Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders
E-P06.01
NGLY1 mutation in three siblings; a case report and
literature review
M. Shams, P. Namiranian, H. Najmabadi, A. Kariminejad
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Congenital Disorder of Deglycosylation is a group of dis-
orders with defect in glycosylation¹. It is an autosomal
recessive disorder with low or absent tear production, low
muscle tone, unusual muscular jerks and psychomotorretardation. Additional features are microcephaly, intract-
able seizures, and evidence of liver dysfunction.
We describe a family with three affected offspring. The
thirty-year- old male suffered from hypotonia, bent posture,
muscle contractures, muscle atrophy, abnormal muscle
movements during sleep. His 34-year old brother had thesame symptoms plus more signi ﬁcant abnormal muscle
movements, constipation and right-sided scoliosis. The 35-
year old sister had the same symptoms in addition tostrabismus. All three cases had normal tear production,
normal head circumference,and no seizure. Isoelectric
focusing was normal in all three siblings. Liver enzymesand ultra-sound examination of liver was performed in one
and was normal. Parents are ﬁrst cousin and there is no
similar case in family. Next Generation Sequencing forIntellectual Disability was performed identifying a homo-
zygote pathogenic variant de ﬁned as c.708G>T (p.
Trp236Cys) in exon 5 of NGLY1 gene. Both parents andsiblings were also checked by Sanger Sequencing and were
heterozygout. The clinical ﬁndings are not similar to what
has been reported to previous patients with NGLY1mutations and present new clinical features such as
contractures and muscle atrophy. Here we expand the
clinical phenotype associated with NGLY1variants.
1.Ennns, G. M., Shashi, V., Bainbridge, M., and 31others.
Mutations in NGLY1cause an inherited disorder of the
endoplasmic reticulum-assosiated degradation pathway.Genet. Med. 16:751-758,2014.Note:Erratum:Genet Med.
16:568 only, 2014.[pubmed:24651605]
M. Shams: None. P. Namiranian: None. H. Najma-
badi: None. A. Kariminejad: None.E-P06.02
Menkes disease: a case report of patient with de novo novel
variant in ATP7A gene
O. Miljanovic1, J. Jovanovi ć1, S. Teo ﬁlov1, T. Ostojic1,M .
Bulatovic1, D. Likic2, F. Stellmer3
1Center for Medical Genetic and Immunology, Podgorica,
Montenegro,2Institute for Public Health of Montenegro,
Podgorica, Montenegro,3Labor Lademannbogen,
Medizinische Expertise, Hamburg, Germany
Menkes`s disease (MD) is an rare X-linked recessive dis-
order with systemic copper de ﬁciency caused by pathogenic
variants in ATP7A gene, encoding a copper transporter P-type ATPase. MD is characterized by an extensive clinical
heterogeneity, as a direct consequence of dysfunction of
several copper-dependent enzymes. Severe progressiveneurodegeneration, seazures, developmental regresion and
„kinky “hair are typical characteristic of clasical MD. Over
200 different mutations, affecting ATP7A, gene have beenreported with one-third of cases arise from de novo
mutations.
We present a 13 months old boy with MS, who appeared
healthy until age of six months, when loss of developmental
milestones, hypotonia, seizures, and failure to thrive
occurred. Clinical synopsis comprised microcephaly, tem-poral bossing, poor facial and body movements, “kinky ”,
“steely ”hair, pale, eczema skin, pectus excavatum, trunk
hypotonia, spasticity of extremitas and severe mentalretardation. Decreseed levels of serum copper and cerulo-
plasmin, metaphyseal ﬂaring in the long bones, bladder
diverticula, focal cortical reduction and defective myalini-zation and pili torti were revealed. Molecular genetic
analysis (DNA sequencing, MLPA) of the ATP7A gene
revealed the hemizygous ATP7A mutation c.3226delA (p.Ile1076Leufs*13), not detected in the mother of the patient.
This„de novo “alteration in ATP7A gene has neither been
described in the literature ( www.hgmd.org ), but the nature
of the alteration (frameshift with premature stop codon)
indicates the mutation is with very high probability
pathogenic.
A typical clinical picture of the MD in the reported patient
with the novel variant c.3226delA in ATP7A gene could
contribute to better understanding of genotype-phenotypecorrelation in MD.
O. Miljanovic: None. J. Jovanovi ć:None. S. Teo ﬁlov:
None. T. Ostojic: None. M. Bulatovic: None. D. Likic:
None. F. Stellmer: None.
E-P06.03
When mitochondria hide among the tiger stripes930 J. del PicchiaR. S. Tincheva, T. N. Delchev, H. M. Kathom, D. M. Avdjieva-
Tzavella
Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: COXPD12 (LTBL –leukoencephalopathy
with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate)
is an autosomal recessive mitochondrial neurologic dis-
order, caused by mutations in the EARS2 gene. The con-
dition is characterized by early onset hypotonia and delayed
psychomotor development, a speci ﬁc MRI ﬁnding –leu-
koencephalopathy affecting primarily the deep white matter,brainstem and cerebellum. Serum lactate levels are typically
elevated due to defects in mitochondrial oxidative
processes.
Clinical case: We present a 4 year old girl with severe
psychomotor de ﬁciency, mild dysmorphic features, a
number of seizures with different clinical repertoire andnormal serum lactate. A brain MRI was performed, showing
a„tigroid pattern “in the deep white brain matter. The
following potential explanations were eliminated during thediagnostic investigation: metachromatic leukodistrophy,
saposin B de ﬁciency, Pezilaeus-Merzbacher disease, auto-
somal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay andKrabbe disease. Finally, molecular-genetic testing revealed
a pathogenic mutation in the EARS2 gene which established
the correct diagnosis –COXDP12.
Results:
Gene
sequenceVariant Variant ID Primary
transcript
changesAminoacid
sequence changesVariant type Zygosity
EARS2 Chr.16:
g.23555998G>ARs376103091 NM_
001083614.1:
c.322C>TArg108Trp Missense class 5 -
PathogenicHomozygous
Conclusions: A pathogenic variant of this missense
mutation causes replacement of arginine with triptophan at
108thposition in the aminoacid sequence encoded by
EARS2 gene. This explains the majority of clinical
manifestations, however the lack of increased lactate levels,
as well as the tigroid brain pattern make this case intriguing
in matter of widening the phenotypic spectrum of thedisease.
Key words: COXDP12 , LTBL, leukoencephalopathy,
EARS2 gene, psychomotor de ﬁciency
R.S. Tincheva: None. T.N. Delchev: None. H.M.
Kathom: None. D.M. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None.
E-P06.04
Novel compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
CPS1 gene in a newborn with Carbamoyl Phosphate
Synthetase 1 De ﬁciencyN. W. Y. Fong, S. S. Jamuar
KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) de ﬁciency is a
disorder of the proximal urea cycle. It is an autosomalrecessive disorder which presents with severe hyper-
ammonemia, typically in the newborn period. We report a
case of a boy with CPS1 de ﬁciency who presented at day 3
of life with decreased consciousness and shallow breathing.
Diagnosis: He had severe metabolic acidosis with
hyperammonemia(813umol/L). Biochemical investigationsshowed raised glutamine (3984umol/L), low citrulline
(<5umol/L) and normal urine orotic acid(4.0umol/L),
suggesting a diagnosis of a proximal urea cycle defect(UCD). Targeted DNA sequencing of CPS1 and NAGS
genes revealed that patient was a compound heterozygote
with 2 novel pathogenic mutations in the CPS1 gene:
c.3241del, p.(Leu1081fs) in exon 26 and c.3966C>A, p.
(Asp1322Glu) in exon 33, con ﬁrming the diagnosis of
CPS1 de ﬁciency.
Interventions: High dextrosity drip with intravenous
lipids to promote anabolism and prevent catabolism,
ammonia scavangers such as sodium benzoate and sodiumphenylbutyrate, supplementation of essential amino acids
with arginine, citrulline, and empirical trial of n-
carbamylglutamic acid. Removal of ammonia was alsofacilitated by hemodialysis.
Outcomes: Despite optimization of above therapy,
ammonia levels remained high and decision was madewith parents for a one-way trial off dialysis. Ammonia
levels continued to rise and the child was discharged home
for palliative care at 20 days of life. He passed away at22 days of life.
Lessons: Measurements of biochemical intermediary
metabolites are insuf ﬁcient to differentiate between CPS1
deﬁciency and N-acetylglutamate synthetase de ﬁciency, but
these results should guide targeted DNA sequencing of
UCD to facilitate management and genetic counseling.
N.W.Y. Fong: None. S.S. Jamuar: None.
E-P06.06
Gene therapy - a practical approach: cloning the LDLr
gene in an attempt to treat hypercholesterolemia
T. T. Grozescu1, T. G. Jensen2, L. C. Bohiltea3
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania,
2University of Aarhus, Department of Anatomy and Human
Genetics, Aarhus, Denmark,3UMF Carol Davila Bucharest,
Bucuresti, RomaniaAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 931Gene therapy has been a great promise in modern medicine
for many years. The current presentation is focused on a
personal research in the ﬁeld, which took place at Aarhus
University, in Denmark, under the supervision of Professor
Thomas G. Jensen. In an attempt to cure and/or contribute
to the treatment of hypercholesterolemia cases, the experi-ment started having a speci ﬁc target: obtaining gene
expression of the cloned LDLr gene within keratinocytes.
All steps were perfomed within this experiment, startingfrom cutting off the gene sequence from human DNA
(previously isolated from hepatocytes) using Eco RI,
obtaining a construct of the gene fragment and lambdaphage (called GCSam-LDLr) as a vector that also included a
plasmidic sequence of resistance to neomicin, followed by
ligation and transformation into a circular, single-strandedchromosome of E.Coli. Many control points were set and
used during all these steps (using several restriction
enzymes: Bam HI, Hind III, Eco RI, Xho I, Xba I, Not-1and Sal-1). The E.Coli colonies were developed and
selected using the new bacteria's resistance to neomicin.
The last step was the "infection" of keratinocytes with thetransformed bacteria. Gene expression was obtained in a
spectacular proportion.
T.T. Grozescu: None. T.G. Jensen: None. L.C.
Bohiltea: None.
E-P06.08
Characterization of a novel GPIHBP1 large deletion in an
infant patient with hypertriglyceridemia
E. Del Nuevo Martinez1, R. B. Fisher2, J. Puente-Prieto1,A .
Sesto Yague1
1LabGenetics, San Sebastian de los Reyes, Spain,2The James
Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom
Characterization of a novel GPIHBP1 large deletion in an
infant patient with hypertriglyceridemia
Type 1 hyperlipoproteinemia is an autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by severe hypertriglyceridemia,
recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis, lipemia retinalis,
and cutaneous eruptive xanthomas. Loss-of-function muta-tions of GPIHBP1 have been reported as the cause of type I
hyperlipoproteinemia in several patients. In this case report,
we characterize a novel 3,8 Kb homozygous deletioncomprising exons 3 and 4 of GPIHBP1.
A newborn male of Pakistani origin who presented
congenital hypertriglyceridemia in a consanguineous familywas tested for germline mutation in APOA5, APOC2,
GPIHBP1, LIPI, LMF1 and LPL genes by Sanger
sequencing. No mutations were detected in any of thesesix genes, but no PCR products were obtained for exons 3
and 4 of GPIHBP1, so this patient could be homozygousfor a deletion comprising exons 3 and 4 of the
GPIHBP1 gene.
To verify and characterize the deletion harbouring exons
3 and 4 in GPIHBP1, several long-range PCRs were carried
out by combining a forward oligo in exon 2 and different
reverse oligos in 3 ’UTR, and the deletion breakpoints were
ﬁnally characterized. Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed the
presence of a 3,8 Kb homozygous novel deletion in
GPIHBP1: NM_178172.5:c.181 +509_*2768del3828 –
Chr8(GRCh37):g.144296334_144300161del.
E. Del Nuevo Martinez: Other; Signi ﬁcant; LabGenetics.
R.B. Fisher: None. J. Puente-Prieto: Other; Signi ﬁcant;
LabGenetics. A. Sesto Yague: Other; Signi ﬁcant;
LabGenetics.
E-P06.09
Two Different Genetic Diseases in the Same Patient
L. ÖZER1, E. Unsal1, S. Aktuna1, V. Baltac ı2
1MİKROGEN GENETIC DIAGNOSIS CENTER, ANKARA,
Turkey,2Yüksek İhtisas University Medical School,
Department of Genetics, ANKARA, Turkey
Introduction: Rare disease is de ﬁned as a condition that
affects fewer than 200,000 people. The consanguinity
increases the risk of cooccurence of two etiologically dif-ferent recessive Mendelian diseases in a single family.
Materials and Methods: Here we represent a Turkish
family with two affected children who had different clinicalﬁndings. The affected boy was born as the ﬁrst child of
consanguineous family and died at 8 years old. The affected
girl was born as the third child of the family and is 5years old.
Case 1: He was diagnosed as Leigh syndrome clinically.
He had hypotonia,mental and growth retardation, move-ment poblems
MRI ﬁndings: hyperintensity compatible with Leigh
disease
Case 2; She has hypotonia, nystagmus, strabismus,
growth retardation, delayed language development
Biochemical tests: Elevated plasma concentrations of
branched-chain amino acids, ketonuria
Cranial MRI: hyperintensity in basal ganglia
Results: WES analysis revealed homozygous likely
pathogenic variant in the DUBT gene and homozygous
VUS variant in the NDUFS7 gene, in case2. Both parents
are heterozygous carriers of the each detected variants.DUBT mutations cause Mapple Syrup Urine Disease and
NDUFS7 mutations cause Leigh syndrome.
Conclusions: In some families different clinical ﬁndings
may due to existence of more than 1 gene defect. Our report
demonstrated that such coexistence of different diseases in932 J. del Picchiasame family should be expected when analyzing rare
diseases in consanguineous families. Our report emphasize
that the presence of two rare diseases in one family should
be taken into account when the presence of broad spectrum
of phenotype and consanguinity..
L. Özer: None. E. Unsal: None. S. Aktuna: None. V.
Baltac ı:None.
E-P06.10
claudiajurca70@yahoo.com
A. D. Jurca, M. Bembea, K. Kozma, C. Petchesi, A. Szilaghy, A.
Balmos, D. Dubau, C. Jurca
University from Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Oradea, Romania
Introduction : Neonatal mitochondrial encephalocardio-
myopathy (OMIM, 614052) is due to a mutation of trans-
membrane protein 70 gene (TMEM70). TMEM70 encodes
a mitochondrial membrane protein that plays a role in thebiogenesis of mitochondrial ATP synthase.
Materials and Methods : The authors report a boy aged 1
year and 9 months who presented immediately after birthwith signs of encephalopathy associated with lactic
acidosis, severe hypotonia, hyperammonemia, and 3-
methylglutaconic aciduria. The infant was also found tohave hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial septal defect,
pulmonary hypertension, hypospadias, moderate psycho-
motor developmental delay. It is the ﬁfth child in the family,
born prematurely, low birth weight (1900 g); consangui-
neous family of Roma (Gypsy) ethnic origin.
Results: Genetic testing revealed a homozygous mutation
(c.317-2A>G) in the TMEM70 gene. This mutation is
prevalent, particularly in the Roma population. The
inheritance is autosomal recessive. The prevalence of thesyndrome is unknown.
Conclusion : To date fewer than 100 cases have been
reported in the literature (Orphanet). This is the only casereported in Romania.
Keywords : mitochondrial encephalocardiomyopathy,
TMEM70, ATP synthase
A.D. Jurca: None. M. Bembea: None. K. Kozma:
None. C. Petchesi: None. A. Szilaghy: None. A. Balmos:
None. D. Dubau: None. C. Jurca: None.
E-P06.11
A novel MYT1L mutation in a patient with severe early-
onset obesity and intellectual disability
P. Loid1, R. Mäkitie2, A. Costantini3, H. Viljakainen1,M .
Pekkinen2, O. Mäkitie21University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2University of
Helsinki, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland,
3Karolinska Institut, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: The genetic and molecular mechanisms
underlying severe early-onset obesity are still incompletelyunderstood. Deletions at 2p25.3 have been reported in
several patients with obesity and intellectual disability.
Myelin-transcriptor-factor-1-like (MYT1L) gene in this
locus has been proposed a candidate gene for obesity.
MYT1L is expressed in the developing brain and has been
recognized as part of the leptin-melanocortin-SIM1pathway.
Materials and Methods: We report a 13-year-old boy
presenting with overweight already at 1 year of age (bodymass index (BMI) Z-score +2.3) and obesity at 2 years of
age (BMI Z-score +3.8). The patient had hyperphagia,
delayed neurological, cognitive and motor development. Healso had speech delay, strabismus, hyperactivity and
intellectual disability. Brain MRI was normal. The parents
and sister had normal BMI.
Results: Whole-genome sequencing, including DNA
samples for the index and his parents and sibling, identi ﬁed
in the index a novel heterozygous de novo frameshift
deletion that introduces a premature termination of transla-
tion NM_015025.2(MYT1L):
c.2215_2224delACGCCTGCC, p.(Thr739Alafs*7) inMYT1L . The frameshift variant was con ﬁrmed by Sanger
sequencing.
Conclusion: Our ﬁnding supports the association of
MYT1L mutations with early-onset syndromic obesity. The
identi ﬁcation of novel monogenic forms of childhood-onset
obesity will provide insights to the involved geneticpathways. Further studies on MYT1L will increase our
understanding of its biological function, role in appetite
regulation and development of syndromic features, and mayidentify potential targets for therapy.
Grant references: Academy of Finland, Sigrid Jusélius
Foundation, Foundation for Pediatric Research, FolkhälsanResearch Foundation, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital research funds.
P. Loid: None. R. Mäkitie: None. A. Costantini: None.
H. Viljakainen: None. M. Pekkinen: None. O.
Mäkitie: None.
E-P06.12
New NDUFS6 variants are associated with Leigh syndrome
and cause multiple de ﬁciency of OXPHOS complexes and
complex I assembly defect
C. Rouzier1,2, A. Chaussenot1, K. Fragaki1,2, V. Serre3, S. Saadi
Ait-El-Mkadem1,2, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2, S. Bannwarth1,2Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9331Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de référence des
maladies mitochondriales, CHU, NICE, France,2IRCAN UMR
CNRS 7284/INSERM U1081, Faculté de Medicine, Université
Côte d ’Azur, Nice, France,3Institut Jacques Monod,
Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France
The genetic causes of Leigh syndrome are heterogeneous,
with a poor correlation between the phenotype and geno-
type. To date, more than 50 nuclear genes can cause nucleargene-encoded Leigh syndrome. NDUFS6 encodes a 13KDa
subunit of complex I, which is part of the peripheral arm
and is localized in the iron-sulfur fraction of the complex.Mutations in the NDUFS6 gene were previously reported in
only 8 patients from 5 families and all presented with severe
neonatal lactic acidemia with complex I de ﬁciency leading
to death in the ﬁrst days of life.
Here, we present a patient with two novel NDUFS6
mutations to expand the clinical and biochemical spectrumof the disease. Compare to previous reports, this child had a
milder phenotype compatible with a Leigh syndrome
associated with multiple de ﬁciencies of OXPHOS com-
plexes. Sequencing of a panel of 300 genes involved in
mitochondrial disorders allowed the identi ﬁcation of two
NDUFS6 pathogenic variants resulting in almost complete
absence of the protein. The ﬁrst variant c.309 +5G>A
results in the translation of an unstable protein missing exon
3. The second variant c.343T>C results in a substitution of acystein located in the Zn- ﬁnger domain needed for correct
assembly of complex I and a major assembly defect of
complex I was revealed by BN-PAGE. These data con ﬁrm
that the presence of NDUFS6 and the integrity of the Zn-
ﬁnger domain are essential for correct assembling of
complex I.
C. Rouzier: None. A. Chaussenot: None. K. Fragaki:
None. V. Serre: None. S. Saadi Ait-El-Mkadem: None. V.
Paquis-Flucklinger: None. S. Bannwarth: None.
E-P06.15
Exome sequencing reveals a novel homozygous mutation intheRNASEH1 gene in a Polish family with progressive
external ophthalmoplegia and ptosis with mitochondrial
DNA deletions
J. M. Rusecka1, B. Kierdaszuk2, M. Rydzanicz3, P. Stawi ński3,A .
Kostera-Pruszczyk2, A. Kami ńska2, E. Bartnik1,4,R .P łoski3,K .
Tońska1
1Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of Neurology, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Department of
Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw,Poland,
4Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, PolandIntroduction: Exome sequencing has the power to render
molecular diagnostic procedures in an individual patient in
the setting of a novel disease, after all standard diagnoses
have been exhausted.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing
(WES) was performed for an adult patient with clinicallydiagnosed mitochondrial encephalopathy with progressive
external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis and mitochondrial DNA
deletions
The proband was from a consanguineous Polish family
with two affected siblings in the pedigree suggesting
autosomal recessive inheritance.
Results: Bioinformatics analysis showed a new variant in
theRNASEH1 gene c.493G>C, p.Gly165Arg and predict
the damaging potential of the variant.
The RNASEH1 gene encodes a ribonuclease H1 that
speciﬁcally degrades the RNA of RNA-DNA hybrids and
plays a key role in DNA replication and repair. Mutations inthis gene lead to progressive external ophthalmoplegia with
mitochondrial DNA deletions (MIM: 616479).
The family studies con ﬁrmed biallelic inheritance in two
affected siblings. The homozygous variant was not
observed in healthy siblings and offspring. The novel
variant was not detected in 360 chromosomes from healthyPolish subjects.
Conclusion: This novel variant in the catalytic domain of
theRNASEH1 gene with high probability causes autosomal
recessive progressive external ophthalmoplegia with mito-
chondrial DNA deletions in this Polish family.
J.M. Rusecka: None. B. Kierdaszuk: None. M.
Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawi ński: None. A. Kostera-
Pruszczyk: None. A. Kami ńska: None. E. Bartnik: None.
R. P łoski: None. K. To ńska: None.
E-P06.16
A novel mutation indenti ﬁed in ATP7B gene by direct
sequence of hotspot exons in Moldovan patients with
Wilson disease
V. A. Hlistun, K. R. Boiciuc, I. I. Coliban, D. G. Turcan, D.
Blanita, V. C. Sacara
Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of
Wilson disease(WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder
(ATP7B; EC3.6.3.54; OMIM606882) caused by a de ﬁ-
ciency of copper transporting P-type ATPase, characterized
by accumulation of free-copper(Cu) in liver, brain, kidneysand corneas. The aim of our study was to analyze mutations
of hotspot exons of the ATP7B gene in Moldovan patients
with WD.
Materials and Methods: We report on 10 WD patients
showing unexplained liver disease and/or neurological or934 J. del Picchianeuropsychiatric disorders, presenting or not of Kayser-
Fleischer ring. The tests for serum ceruloplasmin, Cu and
free Cu level were used for diagnosis and evaluation of
WD. Genetic analysis was performed by “Sanger ”genomic
DNA sequencing (3500dx Genetic Analyzer, Applied
Biosystems Inc.) for hotspot exons 4, 8, 12, 13, 15, 17and 20 in ATP7B gene.
Results: Diagnosis was based on phenotypic manifesta-
tion and laboratory results that reveal decrease ofceruloplasmin level[4,3-24mg/dl] and high free Cu[21-
91.1 μg/dl]. Con ﬁrmation of diagnosis was based on
molecular DNA analysis that revealed a mutation detectionrate around 50% of cases, allowing identi ﬁcation of
complete genotype in 40%. There was identi ﬁed 1 novel
missense mutation in exone 17 of ATP7B gene (p.A1227T-5%), 2 reported missense mutations (p.H1069Q-30%, p.
G1341D-15%) and 1 polymorphism (p.R952K-71,4%).
Although p.A1227T mutation was not yet described,different prediction tools were used to reveal its pathogeni-
city (SIFT-0.001; Polyphen2-0,999) being forti ﬁed by
biochemical results (ceruloplasmin-4,3mg/dl; free Cu-78μg/dl).
Conclusions: The most common mutation was p.
H1069Q in Moldovan WD patients. One novel missensemutation, potential pathogenic, has been found in exone 17
of ATP7B gene(p.A1227T).
V.A. Hlistun: None. K.R. Boiciuc: None. I.I. Coliban:
None. D.G. Turcan: None. D. Blanita: None. V.C.
Sacara: None.
E-P06.17
Identi ﬁcation of a mutation in ABCB4 gene involved in
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) inbedouin families
L. Aspit1,2, M. Arafat1,2, B. Yerushalmi3, E. Hubara3,R .
Parvari1,2
1The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology,Immunology
& Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University
of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, beer sheva, Israel,2National
Institute of Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion Universityof the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer Sheva, Israel,
3Division
of Peditrics, Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Soroka Medical
Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion Universityof the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, beer sheva, Israel
Introduction: Progressive familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis
(PFIC) is a group of autosomal recessive disorders char-
acterized by malfunctioning secretion of bile acids or other
components of bile. These disorders usually present duringinfancy or childhood period as progressive conjugated
hyperbillirubinemia and liver dysfunction, without propertreatment can lead to death at the ﬁrst decade of life. PFIC3
is caused by mutations in the ABCB4 or MDR3 gene. This
protein is a phospholipid translocator involved in biliary
phospholipid excretion. Phospholipids, cholesterol and bile
salt form micelles that are essential for the inactivation
process of bile salt toxicity and prevent epithelium injury
Study group: Ten members of a Bedouin family with 3
affected children were genetically analyzed. All the patients
had cholestasis. Another infant from a different family wasalso diagnosed based on genetic analysis.
Genetic analysis: DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood. Genotyping was done on parents and two affectedchildren using Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping
250K Sty arrays. Dedicated software (KinSNP) was used
to search the microarray results for homozygous regionsconsistent with linkage. Homozygosity was detected for
chromosome 7 that includes ABCB4, each of the 28 coding
exons and their splice junctions of ABCB4 was PCRampli ﬁed and sequenced.
Results: A novel mutation c.C433T, causing Gln145Stop
was identi ﬁed in exon 6. It segregated as expected in the
family showing homozygosity only in the patients. The
truncation of the transporter in the cytoplasmic domain is
expected to result in an inactive transporter, thus to be thecause the disease in the family.
L. Aspit: None. M. Arafat: None. B. Yerushalmi:
None. E. Hubara: None. R. Parvari: None.
E-P07 Immunology and hematopoietic system
E-P07.01
Compound haplotypes in CFH andCD46 genes, as well as
the C3 variants, determine clinical outcome of atypical
hemolytic-uremic syndrome- a family-based study
A. Kubiak1, A. Furma ńczyk-Zawiska2, E. Uzarowska1,M .
Kotlarek1, K. Falana3, M. Kolanowska1, M. Swierniak3, P. Gaj1,
J. Starega-Roslan1, B. Leszczynska4, J. Przychodzien4,M .
Panczyk-Tomaszewska4, K. Jazdzewski3, M. Durlik2,A .
Wojcicka3,5
1Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw,
Poland,2Department of Transplantation Medicine,
Nephrology, and Internal Diseases, Transplantation Institute,Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,
3Genomic
Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,
4Department of Pediatrics Nephrology, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,5Warsaw Genomics, INC, Warsaw,
Poland
Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare dis-
ease consisting of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 935thrombocytopenia and acute kidney injury, resulting from
the alternative complement pathway dysregulation. Clinical
presentation and severity of the disease depend on the
common (MAF>5%) germline variants in the complement
system genes, including haplotypes in the CD46 andCFH ,
associated with the low ( CD46 GGAAC ) or high ( CFH-H3 )
risk of unfavorable disease outcome.
Here we describe a family with a clinical follow-up of 11
years. Among 8 siblings, three brothers were affected byaHUS at 22, 27 and 27 yoa, and their niece developed a
severe disease at the age of 10 months. We employed next
generation-sequencing to analyze the complete sequences of13 aHUS related genes in all the 11 family members. We
also analyzed risk genotypes in 412 unrelated healthy
volunteers to verify their population frequency.
The analysis revealed a complex genetic background and
familial aggregation of the disease. The 10-month patient
was heterozygous for both the MC
GGAAC and CFH-H3
haplotypes, while the adult patients were heterozygous for
the CFH and homozygous for the MCP haplotype,
suggesting its protective role. We also identi ﬁed a potential
novel risk genotype in the C3gene (AA in rs11569511),
present only in the kindred patient, with a population
frequency at 1.3%. The analysis also revealed a populationfrequency of the homozygous CFH-H3 risk haplotype at
2.6%, underlining the complex pathogenesis of the disease.
This work was supported by Warsaw Genomics and the
Foundation for the Development of Diagnostics and
Treatment.
A. Kubiak: None. A. Furma ńczyk-Zawiska: None. E.
Uzarowska: None. M. Kotlarek: None. K. Falana: None.
M. Kolanowska: None. M. Swierniak: None. P. Gaj:
None. J. Starega-Roslan: None. B. Leszczynska: None. J.
Przychodzien: None. M. Panczyk-Tomaszewska: None.
K. Jazdzewski: None. M. Durlik: None. A. Wojcicka: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; WarsawGenomics.
E-P07.03
Candidate Gene Search For Autosomal Dominant Behçet ’s
Disease Through Whole Exome Sequencing
S. Ugurlu1, G. Turan2, I. Karacan3, S. Dasdemir1, M. Seven1,M .
B. Düz1, H. Ozdogan1, A. Tolun4, E. Tahir Turanli2
1Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey,2Istanbul
Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey,3Department of
Molecular Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,4Bogazici University,
Istanbul, Turkey
Normal 0 false false false TR JA X-NONE /* Style De ﬁ-
nitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"Table
Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; mso-
style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt; mso-
para-margin-top:0cm; mso-para-margin-right:0cm; mso-
para-margin-bottom:8.0pt; mso-para-margin-left:0cm; line-
height:107%; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-
size:11.0pt; font-family:Calibri; mso-ascii-font-family:Calibri; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font-
family:Calibri; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-
ansi-language:TR;}
Introduction: Behçet ’s disease (BD) is a chronic multi-
system in ﬂammatory disorder with uncertain aetiology.
inheritance pattern is multifactorial, and most cases aresporadic. A family with four affected members and
presenting autosomal dominant inheritance, was studied to
search for the putative genetic defect.
Materials and Methods: All affected patients met the
International Study Group criteria for BD.. Father and three
sibs are affected, and three sibs were unaffected. Exomesequencing was performed in all four affected individuals.
Candidate causative variant search in accordance with
autosomal dominant inheritance was performed. Hetero-zygous rare (MAF <0.005), exonic/splicing variants which
were present only in affected individuals were prioritized.
Result: Patients did not carry any rare variants in the
TNFAIP3 gene, which is the only known BD related gene.
Further, seven rare variants shared by the patients only were
chosen as candidates. These are heterozygous c.1756C>T(p.P586S) in PRG4 (rs757882876), c.35A>T (p.D12V) in
NAGK (rs150821125), c.1490C>G (p.A497G) in SLC9A2 ,
c.3128G>T (p.G1043V) in PIK3R4 (rs56160735), c.11T>G
(p.L4R) in IL1RAP (rs200782803), c.379T>C (p.S127P) in
ULBP3 (rs200023001) and c.3581A>G (p.K1194R) in
AHNAK .
Conclusion: Seven candidate variants in genes involved
in immunological and in ﬂammatory pathways were
detected. Among the candidates, IL1RAP appeared to be
the most relevant to the disease. This is the ﬁrst report
suggesting possible IL1RAP gene in Mendelian BD.
<!--EndFragment-->
S. Ugurlu: None. G. Turan: None. I. Karacan: None. S.
Dasdemir: None. M. Seven: None. M.B. Düz: None. H.
Ozdogan: None. A. Tolun: None. E. Tahir
Turanli: None.
E-P07.04
Beta thalassemia mutations in patients from Dobrogea,
Romania
A. Mitroi1,2, G. Cozaru1,2, M. Aschie2,3, C. Brinzan1, A. Apostol1,
A. Mitroi4
1Emergency Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Constanta,
Romania,2Ovidius University, CEDMOG Center, Constanta,936 J. del PicchiaRomania,3Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Constanta,
Romania,4Ovidius University, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta,
Romania
Introduction: Beta-thalassemia is a group of hemoglobin
diseases caused by a reduction ( β+thalassemia) or absence
(β0thalassemia) in the synthesis of beta-globin chains that
results in microcytic hypochromic anemia, an abnormal
peripheral blood smear with nucleated red blood cells, andreduced amounts of hemoglobin A (HbA) on hemoglobin
analysis
Matherial and methods : 26 patients were studied for
characterization as either heterozygous or homozygous for
beta-thalassemia. Molecular analysis was done by PCR and
reverse-hybridization in order to detect 22 of mutationsmost commonly associated with beta-thalassemia
(Mediterranean type).
Results : Of the 22 heterozygous patients 4 (22%) had the
β
+IVS1.6[T>C] mutation, 4 (22%) had the β+IVS2.745
[T>C], 4 patients (22%) had β0codon 8[-AA] mutation, 4
patients (22%) had β0codon 39[C>T] mutation and 2 (12%)
patients had β+IVS1.110 [G>A]. Three patients were
homozygouse for IVS1.6[T>C] mutation and one patient
was compound heterozygouse for IVS1.6[T>C] andIVS2.745.
Conclusions: In our study the most frequent mutation
was β
+IVS1.6[T>C], contrary to another study who
investigate population from Romania and ﬁnd that β
+IVS1.110[G>A] are the most frequent for our country.
This is due because of great ethnic heterogenity ofpopulation from Dobrogea. The mutation β
0codon 8
[-AA] is not identi ﬁed in the former study.
Acknowledgment : The research was made possible
following completion of the project POS CCE 2.21., ID
1844, SMIS 48750, CEDMOG
A. Mitroi: None. G. Cozaru: None. M. Aschie: None.
C. Brinzan: None. A. Apostol: None. A. Mitroi: None.
E-P07.05
Implementation of a Custom-Designed Targeted Next-
Generation Sequencing Panel for the Diagnostics of
Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes
A. V. Pavlova, M. A. Kurnikova, I. V. Mersiyanova, S. G. Mann,
R. H. Abasov, E. V. Raykina, N. S. Smetanina, O. V. Goronkova,E. V. Suntsova, M. A. Maschan, A. A. Maschan
Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) com-
posed of great number of clinically similar but geneticallyheterogeneous diseases with reduction of one or multiple
hematopoietic cell lines in bone marrow as a main feature.
Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) facilitated the dis-
covery of novel germline mutations that are the cause of
IBMFS.The aim of this study was the elaboration and
implementation of a custom-designed 173-genes NGS-panel into routine diagnostics. We performed NGS-
sequencing for 49 patients with different referral diag-
nosis: Diamond-Blackfan anemia (17); aplastic anemia(16); Fanconi anemia (3), myelodysplastic syndrome (5);
bone marrow failure (3), idiopathic thrombocytopenia (3),
dyskeratosis congenita (1), severe congenital neutropenia(1). Sample preparation was carried out with KAPA HTP
Library Preparation Kit Illumina (Roche, Switzerland) and
tagret hybridization enrichment technique via custom probepanel SeqCap EZ Choice Library (Roche, Switzerland).
Obtained libraries were sequenced on MiSeq platform
(Illumina, USA).We revealed 27 rare genetic variants thatcould relate to the cause of the disease (10 - pathogenic, 6 -
likely pathogenic and 11 variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance).
Among 49 patients the diagnosis was con ﬁrmed in 12 and
likely con ﬁrmed in 7 cases. Thus, total ef ﬁciency of
revealing causative variants is 38.8%. The use of NGS for
diagnostic of IBMFS signi ﬁcantly expands the search range
while results can in ﬂuence the patient ’s clinical manage-
ment. Furthermore, identi ﬁcation of IBMFS genetic reason
plays important role in genetic counseling of patient ’s
family members. Obtained results show high diagnostic
yield and allow to apply this custom gene panel in clinical
practice.
A.V. Pavlova: None. M.A. Kurnikova: None. I.V.
Mersiyanova: None. S.G. Mann: None. R.H. Abasov:
None. E.V. Raykina: None. N.S. Smetanina: None. O.V.
Goronkova: None. E.V. Suntsova: None. M.A. Maschan:
None. A.A. Maschan: None.
E-P07.06
CBL syndrome as a cause of JMML: new case in a
premature neonate with cleft palate, brain anomalies andsplenomegaly and review of the literature
R. Villa1, M. Iascone2, L. Pezzoli2, F. Lalatta1, V. Fergnani1,G .
A. Cagnoli1, L. Pugni3, C. Pietrasanta3, F. Mosca3,M .F .
Bedeschi1
1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda,
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,2Laboratorio di
Genetica Medica, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy,
3NICU, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community
Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, ItalyAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 937Introduction: CBL syndrome is a rare disease belonging to
the group of RASopathies caused by heterozygous muta-
tions of the CBL gene. It has overlapping features to
Noonan syndrome such as developmental anomalies, heart
defects, bleeding problems, lymphatic dysplasias and
hyperextensive joints. Patients with CBL syndrome alsohave an increased risk to develop juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia (JMML) an aggressive haematopoetic malignancy
of early childhood characterized by anemia, thrombocyto-penia and hepato-splenomegaly.
Case report: A girl, born at 27 weeks, was referred for
genetic evaluation at 3 weeks (corrected age) with cleftpalate, brain abnormalities, severe thrombocytopenia and
splenomegaly. Dysmorphology assessment highlighted only
subtle facial anomalies. 180K CGH-array was normal.Clinical exome sequencing revealed de novo heterozygous
point mutation p.(Gln367Pro) in the CBL gene. Because of
this result, a bone marrow examination was performed and adiagnosis of JMML was made.
Discussion: Fifty-four cases of CBL syndrome had been
described before, four of them had the p.(Gln367Pro) pointmutation. The phenotype was quite variable among these
patients, usually more subtle than in the NS with heart
defects being less common. Cleft palate is not a typicalfeature and could represent either an expansion of the
phenotype or an occasional association. Brain malforma-
tions and the development of splenomegaly (and JMML aswell) are reported, respectively, in 26% and >70% of
patients with the CBL syndrome (including our case),
demonstrating how these two features are actually the majorones that allow one to distinguish the CBL syndrome in the
RASopathies spectrum.
R. Villa: None. M. Iascone: None. L. Pezzoli: None. F.
Lalatta: None. V. Fergnani: None. G.A. Cagnoli: None.
L. Pugni: None. C. Pietrasanta: None. F. Mosca: None.
M.F. Bedeschi: None.
E-P07.08
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis caused by a raremutation in CTLA4
M. M. Lejman1, M. Cienkusz1, K. Drabko1, K. Wojciechowska2,
M. Choma1, I. Jaszczuk2,K .B ąbol-Pokora3, M. Bielska3,D .
Winnicka1, M. Babicz1, B. Styka1, J. R. Kowalczyk1
1Medical University of Lublin, Children's University Hospital,
Lublin, Poland,2Children's University Hospital, Lublin,
Poland,3Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology
and Diabetology, Central Clinical Hospital, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
Introduction: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
is a rare disorder in children, that is characterized bypersistent fever, splenomegaly with cytopenia, hyper-
triglyceridemia and hypo ﬁbrinogenemia. Some of genetic
defects ( PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, STXBP2 ) in primary
HLH have been identi ﬁed but above 10% have unknown
genetic defects.
Materials and Methods: We present two individuals
from a previously unreported family identi ﬁed to have a
novel CTLA4 variant. Proband is a 6-year-old boy, who had
a birth weight of 3054 grams and length 56cm. He hadnormal growth and health until the age of 4. Then, the
patient was admitted to the hospital with primary immune
thrombocytopenia. The mother of the child was diagnosedwith type 1 diabetes and Hashimoto ’disease. Physical
examination revealed atopic skin in ﬂammation, ulcers of
the mucous membrane of the oral cavity and one café-au-lait spot 3x5cm. Immunomodulatory therapy with IvIgG
was performed with good but short effect. Chest x-ray
showed tumour in mediastinum, CT scan revealed that wasfungal. The patient had intensi ﬁed immunosuppression -
initially with cyclosporine and ATG, then started treatment
according to the HLH 2004 protocol. Next GenerationSequencing of CTLA4 detected in a proband and then
conﬁrmed in mother a novel, variant CTLA4
(NM_005214.4): c.356T>C (p.Leu119Pro). The pathogenicvariant revealed in a CTLA4 gene was con ﬁrmed by direct
Sanger sequencing.
Conclusion: The gene CLA4 codes a protein being
inhibitory receptor acting as major negative regulator of T-
cell responses. We expand the mutational spectrum of
CTLA4 -related point out to clinical variability in rare
familial cases
M.M. Lejman: None. M. Cienkusz: None. K. Drabko:
None. K. Wojciechowska: None. M. Choma: None. I.
Jaszczuk: None. K. B ąbol-Pokora: None. M. Bielska:
None. D. Winnicka: None. M. Babicz: None. B. Styka:
None. J.R. Kowalczyk: None.
E-P07.09
Case report of primary immunode ﬁciency in Moldova
A. Dorif1,2, L. Andriesh2, V. Petrovici1, L. Sinitina1, D. Turcan1,
V. Sacara1,2
1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic
of,2Nicolae Testemitsanu State University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Chisinau, the Republic of Moldova, Chisinau,
Moldova, Republic of
A 4 months and 15 days male infant died in intensive care
department, he had bilateral antibiotic resistant pneumonia.
Before death he was tested of IgM and IgG for TORCHinfections with all negative results. IgM and IgG levels were
as low as 0,3 and 2,00 g/l correspondently. Was performed938 J. del PicchiaTREC and KREC concentration measurement through
qPCR. KREC level was at 468 copies at 100000 cells, no
TREC was detected. According to this data have been
assumed diagnosis of primary immunode ﬁciency (isolated
IgM de ﬁciency). Autopsy revealed thymal displasia and
hypoplasia with lobulation abnormalities, nodular-glandularreticulo-epithelial stromal reconstruction, Hasall corpuscles
agenesis and only unique lymphocytes. It also revealed
signiﬁcant ligament lymphocytic depletion and agenesis of
follicular-nodular structures of the organ systems, combined
viro-myco-bacterial infection (CMV +Pn. jirovecii +A.
baumani) with latent evolution: viral lesions by CMV in
generalized form with involvement of lungs, liver, cere-
bellum, thymus, pancreas, spleen and adrenal glands with
development of CMV encephalitis and meningitis, bothfocal and diffusal necrotico-leucocital pneumocystico-bac-
terial polysegmented pneumonia with involvement of upper
and lower lobes with retractive ﬁbroplastic displazic process
in S
1-S2of right lobe, erosive-ulcerative leucocytal-necrotic
tracheobronchitis. As was mentioned before, tests for
TORCH infections were negative, but CMV lesions weredetected. It could be due to very low IgM and IgG levels,
making their detection impossible. Taking in account
patomorphological changes a Nezelof immunode ﬁciency
diagnosis was presupposed. But in difference from Nezelof
syndrome, child had low levels of IgM and IgG. This
condition makes us doubt if it was especially Nezelofsyndrome.
A. Dorif: None. L. Andriesh: None. V. Petrovici: None.
L. Sinitina: None. D. Turcan: None. V. Sacara: None.
E-P07.10
KIR genes analysis of four patient ’s relatives in
aploidentical bone marrow transplantation
A. Lari, S. Palchetti, S. Iozzi, B. Rigatti, C. Ceccarelli, G.
Rombolà, E. Pelo
Immunogenetics Laboratory AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy
Hematopoietic transplantation from human leukocyte anti-
gen (HLA) haplotype-mismatched (haploidentical) donorsis an established treatment of patients with high-risk acute
leukemia who do not have a matched donor. In haploi-
dentical, T cell-depleted peripheral blood stem cell trans-plants without posttransplant graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD) prophylaxis, donor natural killer (NK) cells play a
beneﬁcial role in outcomes. NK cells express, as their only
inhibitory receptor for self, a KIR for an HLA-class I group
that is absent on allogeneic targets, sense the missing
expression of the self-HLA-class I KIR ligand and mediatealloreactions. Donor-vs-recipient NK-cell alloreactivity
controls high-risk leukemia relapse. Here we reportpreliminary data about KIR genes analysis of four patient ’s
relatives in aploidentical bone marrow transplantation to
identify the best donor candidate. Donors were analyzed for
both the presence/absence of NK alloreactive cells and KIR
repertoire characteristics (B content).
Results: Family 1: 2/3 alloreactive, there was no further
selection for KIR repertoire; Family2: 3/3 alloreactive,
donor selection was based on the KIR repertoire; Family3:
donor selection was based on the alloreactivity; Family 4:there was neither alloreactivity nor B content. In this study
we purposed to select the best donor candidate in
haploidentical, T cell-depleted peripheral blood stem celltransplantations, basing on donor-vs-recipient NK-cell
alloreactivity; further more families will be enrolled and
will be perform follow up studies monitoringtransplantation.
A. Lari: None. S. Palchetti: None. S. Iozzi: None. B.
Rigatti: None. C. Ceccarelli: None. G. Rombolà: None.
E. Pelo: None.
E-P07.12
NGS of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes
repertoire for minimal residual disease diagnostics in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia
A. Miroshnichenkova1, A. Komkov1,2, E. Zerkalenkova1,A .
Popov1, G. Nugmanov2, I. Mamedov2, Y. Olshanskaya1,M .
Maschan1
1Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic
Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,Russian Federation
Introduction: Minimal residual disease (MRD) is the
major cause of relapse in leukemia and the strongest
prognostic factor, allowing to evaluate the ef ﬁciency of
treatment, and to make a decision on the subsequenttherapy. Ef ﬁcient and sensitive detection of clonal rear-
rangements of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptor
(TCR) genes by NGS is applicable in most cases of acutelymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and used for MRD mon-
itoring along with RT-PCR of fusion transcripts and ﬂow
cytometry.
Materials and Methods: Our cohort consisted of
pediatric ALL patients aged 4 to 13. Initial detection of
patient-speci ﬁc clonal rearrangements, performed on DNA
samples extracted from bone marrow prior to treatment, was
carried out by 8 multiplex PCRs of Ig/TCR followed by
NGS. MRD detection included targeted NGS of previouslydetected rearrangements. Quantitative analysis was based
on digital PCR-like statistical approach.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 939Results: We identi ﬁed over 500 leukemic rearrangements
in 87 patients. To evaluate the accuracy of the technique we
compared MRD levels of 31 follow-up samples: 16 samples
with RT-PCR-measured MRD and 15 samples measured by
ﬂow cytometry. In both series both negative and positive
results were con ﬁrmed by NGS.
Conclusions: MRD detection by NGS is a sensitive and
speciﬁc method allowing for clonality evaluation and MRD
quanti ﬁcation. Given that RT-PCR of fusion genes and ﬂow
cytometry in some cases are not applicable for MRD
detection, NGS-based detection of Ig rearrangements is
likely to become routine procedure for MRD measurement.
The study was funded by RFBR grant №17-29-06052,
RSF grant №17-75-10113, Russian President's Fellowship
SP-671.2018.4
A. Miroshnichenkova: None. A. Komkov: None. E.
Zerkalenkova: None. A. Popov: None. G. Nugmanov:
None. I. Mamedov: None. Y. Olshanskaya: None. M.
Maschan: None.
E-P07.13
G6PC3 De ﬁciency: Mind the Gap between Mild and Severe
Neutropenia
G. Zanella1, D. Vozzi2, A. M. Spinelli3, F. Faletra1,V .
Manfredini1, O. Palumbo1, A. Tommasini1, A. P. D'Adamo4,F .
Verzegnassi1
1I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,2Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Genova, Italy,3University of Padova - I.R.C.C.S.
Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,4University of Trieste - I.R.C.C.
S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Introduction: G6PC3 de ﬁciency is a recently characterized
cause of congenital neutropenia variably associated with
multisystem involvement. To date, less than 100 patientshave been described. Case report. A 5-year-old girl, born
preterm to healthy consanguineous Italian parents, was
referred to our hospital for proportionate prenatal-onsetgrowth failure (height and HC -2 SD; weight -4 SD) and
mild to moderate neutropenia. Review of records and fur-
ther investigation highlighted: stomatitis, persistent in ﬂam-
mation of unknown cause (normal faecal calprotectin) but
no amyloid deposition, mild global developmental delay,
neonatal pulmonary hypertension, congenital heart disease(atrial septal defect, mild tricuspid insuf ﬁciency, vascular
ring), low serum HDL-cholesterol, renal dysplasia with sub-
nephrotic proteinuria, treated bilateral inguinal hernia,effusive otitis media. Previous ﬁndings and appearance on
physical examination (prominent super ﬁcial veins, trian-
gular facies, unilateral congenital ptosis, epicanthus, bluishsclera, bilateral abnormal palmar creases, proximally placed
thumbs, mild clitoromegaly) led to a clinical diagnosis ofG6PC3 de ﬁciency. In agreement, combined whole-exome
sequencing and autozygosity mapping found the causative
genotype NM_138387.3(G6PC3):c.[84_107del];
[84_107del]. At follow-up visits neutrophils ranged
approximately from 500 to 1400/μL. Conclusion. The novel
homozygous 24-bp indel in exon 1 of G6PC3 we reporthere is associated with a syndromic phenotype towards the
severe end of the clinical spectrum. We also show that
G6PC3 de ﬁciency should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of congenital neutropenia even when absolute
neutrophil count is not below 500.
G. Zanella: None. D. Vozzi: None. A.M. Spinelli: None.
F. Faletra: None. V. Manfredini: None. O. Palumbo:
None. A. Tommasini: None. A.P. D'Adamo: None. F.
Verzegnassi: None.
E-P07.14
NOVEL VARIANTS IN ADAMTS13 DETECTED BY
NEXT GENERATION SEQUENCING (NGS) IN A
PATIENT WITH ATYPICAL THROMBOTIC
THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA
V. Zakharova, I. Mersiyanova, M. Kurnikova, E. Raykina, A.
Laberko, E. Deripapa, M. Maschan, A. Shcherbina
Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, RussianFederation
Introduction : NGS is a useful tool to diagnose genetic
defects in patients with atypical course of congenital
disorders.
Matherials and methods : We report a boy who
presented at the age of 7 months with hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia and no neurological and renal dysfunc-
tion or evidence of thrombosis. He initially responded tosteroids and rituximab treatment. Subsequently the relapse
of the disease was accompanied by hypogammaglobuline-
mia. Various primary immunode ﬁciencies were excluded
via Sanger sequencing. Eventually the boy died of
intracranial bleeding and sepsis. The clinical exome
sequencing (TruSightOne, Illumina) was performed(MiSeq, Illumina) in the patient. Detected variants were
ﬁltered, their signi ﬁcance was assessed according to the
ACMG recommendations. Candidate variants were con-ﬁrmed in the patient and his healthy parents by Sanger
sequencing, their pathogenicity was tested by in silico
analysis.
Results : In the patient we detected two novel complex
heterozygous variants in ADAMTS13(NM_139025) gene :
c.947_948delinsTT, p.G316V (exon 8) andc.1143_1144delinsC, p.A381fs (exon 10). Each was
inherited from respective parent. Both variants have not940 J. del Picchiabeen previously reported in the literature and mutations
databases. Substitution p.G316V was predicted to be
pathogenic by in silico analysis.
Conclusion : Familial thrombotic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura(TTP) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by
mutation in the ADAMTS13 gene, encoding the von
Willebrand factor-cleaving protease and characterized by
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
neurologic and renal complications due to microthrombiformation. TTP was not suspected in the patient who died
before the correct diagnosis was made. Quick access to
NGS is crucial in severe congenital disorders.
V. Zakharova: None. I. Mersiyanova: None. M.
Kurnikova: None. E. Raykina: None. A. Laberko: None.
E. Deripapa: None. M. Maschan: None. A.
Shcherbina: None.
E-P07.16
A case report of Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome with a splicing
mutation in WAS gene
D. G. Turcan1, L. Andriesh2, O. Schitco2, V. Hlistun1,I .
Coliban1, A. Dorif1, V. Sacara1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic
of,2Nicolae Testemitsanu State University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of
Introduction: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-
linked recessive disorder characterized by thrombocytope-nia, eczema, and recurrent infections. The incidence of this
rare disorder is approximately one to four cases per
1.000.000 live male births.
Material and Methods: We report a six month old boy
who had presented with pulmonary septicemia of mixed
etiology, secondary thrombocytopenia, eczema and pete-chial haemorrhagic rash. Immunological investigations have
demonstrated essential humoral and cellular changes: low
serum level of IgM (0.3mg/L) and IgA (0.2mg/L), elevatedIgE (767.6kU/L), low level of CD4( +) T cells (9%) and
elevated CD8( +) T cells (59%). Genetic analysis for the
detection of a mutation of WAS gene was performed bypolymerase chain reaction-single strand conformational
polymorphism analysis (PCR-SSCP) and direct sequencing
of the PCR product. The primers was taken from ArigaTadashi et.al., 1997.
Results: In PCR-SSCP analysis, the patient had an
abnormal shift band, which was not found in normalcontrols. In direct sequencing analysis, the patient with
WAS showed A-to-G transition at complementary nucleo-
tide 274 (c.274-2 A>G), located in intron 2. A review offamily history did not reveal the presence of relatives
clinically diagnosed as having WAS and since DNAanalysis of the patient's mother revealed no mutation, we
can assume that the mutation found in the patient must have
occurred spontaneously.
Conclusions: The present study identi ﬁed a splicing
mutation of the WAS gene responsible for WAS in a
Moldavian family. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report
on the splicing mutation of WAS gene in Republic of
Moldova.
D.G. Turcan: None. L. Andriesh: None. O. Schitco:
None. V. Hlistun: None. I. Coliban: None. A. Dorif:
None. V. Sacara: None.
E-P08 Intellectual Disability
E-P08.01
Different phenotype with 22q13.3 deletion syndrome in two
patients
H. Gurkan1, E. Atl ı1, E. Atl ı1, S. Demir1, Y. Özen1, H. Tozk ır1,D .
Eker1, C. Akurut1, Y. Karal2, I. Gorker3
1Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical
Genetics, Edirne, Turkey,2Trakya University, Medical Faculty,
Department of Pediatric Neurology, Edirne, Turkey,3Trakya
University, Medical Faculty, Department of Child and
Adolescent Mental Health and Diseases, Edirne, Turkey
The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome, also known as Phelan-
McDermid syndrome (PHMDS) (OMIM #606232), is acontiguous gene disorder resulting from deletion of the
distal long arm of chromosome 22. The deletion occurs near
the end of the chromosome at a location designated q13.3.In addition to normal growth and a constellation of minor
dysmorphic features, this syndrome is characterized by
neurological de ﬁcits which include global developmental
delay, moderate to severe intellectual impairment, absent or
severely delayed speech, and decreased muscle tone
(hypotonia). Some people with this condition have autismor autistic-like behavior that affects communication and
social interaction, such as poor eye contact, sensitivity to
touch, and aggressive behaviors. They may also chew onnon-food items such as clothing. Less frequently, people
with this condition have seizures.
Patient 1: 9-year-old girl patient Genetic Diseases
Diagnosis referred to our center with autism-like behaviors.
The chromosome structure was determined as 46,XX. In the
constructed arrayCGH analysis, 4315 kb deletion wasdetected in 22q13.31-q13.33 and 5057 kb duplication was
detected in 8p23.3-p22.2 (Agilent 4x180K ISCA CGH
+SNP).
Patient 2: A 16-month-old girl was admitted to our
Genetic Diagnosis Diagnosis Center with ﬁndings ofAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 941hypotonia. The chromosome structure was determined as
46,XX. 5205 kb deletion was detected in the arrayCGH
analysis 22q13.31-q13.33. In 22q13.3 deletion syndrome,
changes in the phenotype of the patient can be seen
according to the size of the deletion. Both patients
underwent SHANK3 deletion. However, patient 1 included4315 kb deletions 45 genes, while patient 2 included 5205
kb deletions 63 genes.
H. Gurkan: None. E. Atl ı:None. E. Atl ı:None. S.
Demir: None. Y. Özen: None. H. Tozk ır:None. D. Eker:
None. C. Akurut: None. Y. Karal: None. I.
Gorker: None.
E-P08.02
A case report of a patient with an interstitial deletion inregion 2q31.2q32.1
S. Huljev Frkovic1, K. Francic1, K. Crkvenac Gornik2,I .
Tonkovic Durisevic2, M. Salamon Janecic1, A. Pokupec Bilic2
1University Hospital Center Zagreb, Department of Pediatrics,
Division for genetics and metabolism, Zagreb, Croatia,
2University Hospital Center Zagreb, Department of Laboratory
Diagnostics, Division for Cytogenetics, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: 2q31.2q32.3 deletion syndrome is a rare
genetic disorder reported in more than 30 cases up to date.These deletions are responsible for developmental delay,
facial dysmorphism, mental retardation and behavioral
disturbances. We present a patient with interstitial2q31.2q32.1 microdeletion and compare his features with
those reported previously.
Results: Our patient is a second child of a healthy and
unrelated parents. He was born at term, BW 3100 g, BL 50
cm, Apgar scores were 10/10. Cytogenetic prenatal
diagnosis due to advanced maternal age was performedand revealed a normal karyotype. During early childhood
developmental delay was observed. At ﬁrst visit, he was 10
years old, with severe intellectual disability, speechdevelopmental delay, mild facial dysmorphism, aggressive
behavioral problems worsening with age and occasional
episodes of hyperactivity. Array-CGH analysis showed a de
novo 9563 kb deletion in 2q31.2q32.1 between 179 to 188
Mb. The deletion involves 54 genes, including CERKL,
FRZB, ZNF804A, ITG4A genes, which, according to
literature, may be responsible for speci ﬁc cognitive and
behavioral phenotype and craniofacial abnormalities. We
have compered the speci ﬁc phenotype of our patient with
patients diagnosed with 2q31.2q32.3 deletion syndrome
reported in literature and we have noticed similarities.
Conclusion: This case of interstitial deletion revealed by
array-CGH suggest that 2q31.2q32.1 could be the critical
region in 2q31.2q2q32.3 deletion syndrome. The similarreports in the future will be important to de ﬁnitely de ﬁne
the critical region of this deletion syndrome.
S. Huljev Frkovic: None. K. Francic: None. K.
Crkvenac Gornik: None. I. Tonkovic Durisevic: None.
M. Salamon Janecic: None. A. Pokupec Bilic: None.
E-P08.048
p23.3 deletion and 16q23.2-q24.3 duplication detected by
arrayCGH in a patient with intellectuel disability
Y. Özen, H. Gürkan, E. Atl ı, E. I. Atli, Ç. Akurut, N. Moustafa,
S. Demir, H. Tozk ır
TRAKYA UNIVERSITY, DEPARTMENT OF GENETIS, Turkey
Balanced chromosome translocations in either parent
increases the risk of recurrent miscarriage, unbalanced
chromosome rearrangements, congenital malformations,and mental retardation in liveborn offspring. The avail-
ability and use of CGH with high-resolution microarrays
has greatly improved the detection of micro-deletion andduplications in patients with developmental delay and
congenital anomalies. An eleven years old girl referred us
with speech delay and intellectual disability. She is the ﬁrst
child of healthy nonconsanguineous parents. She was born
at 38th gestation weeks with a weight of 3400 gr. and
hospitalized 52 days in the neonatal intensive care unit withsepsis, jaundice and milk allergy. The patient had dys-
morphic features including micrognathia, broad forehead,
broad nose wings, low-set columella. Cytogenetic analysiswas performed and karyotype was 46,XX,der(8)add(8p23).
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were
applied in order to con ﬁrm the chromosomal region and
detected 46,XX.ish dup(16)(q24). High-resolution aCGH
+SNP 4x180K platform (Agilent Technologies) revealed
567 kb deletion on chromosome 8 arr[hg19]8p23.3(191.530,264-770.060)x1 and a 8657 kb duplication on
chromosome 16 arr[hg19]16q23.2-q24.3(81.491.655-
90.148.393)x3. Parental karyotyping con ﬁrmed the chro-
mosomal abnormalities resulted from a paternal balanced
translocation involving chromosomes 8 and 16 [46,XY, t
(8;16)(p21;q22)]. We described molecular cytogeneticcharacterization of deletion 8p23.3 and duplication of
16q23.2-q24.3. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case
reported in the literature.
Y. Özen: None. H. Gürkan: None. E. Atl ı:None. E.I.
Atli: None. Ç. Akurut: None. N. Moustafa: None. S.
Demir: None. H. Tozk ır:None.
E-P08.0516
p11.2 CNVs detected by Array-CGH in a cohort of patientswith intellectual disability, autism spectrum and obesity942 J. del PicchiaI. M. Carreira1,2,3, J. Rosmaninho-Salgado4, L. M. Pires1,J .M .
Saraiva4,5, S. B. Sousa4,6, J. B. Melo1,2,3
1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
2iCBR-CIMAGO –Centro de Investigaç ão em Meio Ambiente,
Genética e Oncobiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,3CNC-IBILI,
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,4Serviço de
Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,5Clínica
Universitária de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina daUniversidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
6Instituto de
Genética Médica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
T h ep r e s e n c eo fal a r g en u m b e ro f ﬂanking segmental dupli-
cations/low-copy repeat sequences with a high degree ofsequence identity in the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p)
leads to recurrent deletions and duplications as a consequence
of non-allelic homologous rec ombination (NAHR) during
meiosis. A recurrent ̴600 kb microdeletion is one of the most
frequent genomic imbalances in 16p11.2 (BP4-BP5) associated
with abnormal phenotypes incl uding neurodevelopmental dis-
orders, autism spectrum dis order (ASD) and obesity. In a
cohort of 26 patients studied by Agilent 180K oligonucleotide
array-Comparative Genomic Hybr idization (array-CGH) and/or
multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA)
carrying a 16p11.2 rearrangement (deletion or duplication), 19
(73%) showed a deletion in the classical region of 16p11.2(29,562-30,192 bp)[hg19]. Although the phenotype of indivi-
duals with the deletion can be variable, all patients showed at
least one clinical ﬁnding typical of 16p11.2 deletion: cognitive
impairment, language delay, autism or obesity. Other features
less frequent include: neurological issues (epilepsy, neuroima-
ging ﬁndings), behavioural problem s, cardiac malformations,
vertebral anomalies, macrocephaly, hearing loss. Although the
phenotype of 16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome shows a high
variability, it represents the sec ond most frequent genetic cause
of obesity. The obesity observed in this population may be
explained by the haploinsu ﬁciency of one or more of the 30
genes present in this region. On the other hand, it is known thatindividuals with intellectual disability or autism have a higher
predisposition for obesity, pos sibly due the involvement of one
or more pathways.
I.M. Carreira: None. J. Rosmaninho-Salgado: None.
L.M. Pires: None. J.M. Saraiva: None. S.B. Sousa: None.
J.B. Melo: None.
E-P08.06
UPF3B gene deletion in a patient with severe intellectual
disability, epilepsy, absent speech: problematic of array-
CGH coverageJ. B. Melo1,2,3, S. I. Ferreira1,2, L. Ramos4, M. Pinto1,A .
Jardim1, I. M. Carreira1,2,3
1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
2iCBR-CIMAGO- Centro de Investigaç ão em Meio Ambiente,
Genética e Oncobiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,3CNC-IBILI,
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,4Serviço de
Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
In the beginning of 2011, we received a 2 year old male
patient with severe global developmental delay, micro-
cephaly, epilepsy and short stature, for array-ComparativeGenomic Hybridization (array-CGH) analysis. The analysis
was performed with Agilent 180K oligonucleotide non-
ISCA slide, used in setting at that time, and showed noclinically relevant Copy Number Variant (CNV). At the end
of 2017, we were contacted by the referring clinician
because a cousin from the maternal side had done arrayabroad and was diagnosed with a 20Kb deletion at Xq24,
involving UPF3B gene. The phenotypes of both cousins
were very similar. Being a maternal X-chromosome dele-tion, we revisited the array-CGH result and check if we
have missed the deletion. We concluded that UPF3B gene
was only covered by 2 probes, both with a log
2ratio
compatible with a deletion, and repeated the array-CGH
hybridization using an ISCA slide, currently the lab pro-
cedure, that contains 36 probes covering the UPF3B gene,
conﬁrming the deletion, that proved to be maternal. UPF3B
gene is associated with intellectual disability, autism and
facial dysmorphisms, justifying both cousins phenotype.This case illustrates that misdiagnosis can result from
technical limitations, namely from inappropriate coverage
and highlight the importance of reevaluation of cases pre-viously analyzed by array-CGH and without signi ﬁcant
CNVs. The use of arrays with ISCA design is of outmost
importance, since they have higher coverage in disease andsyndrome associated genome regions, overcoming the
general agreement that, at least, 3 consecutive probes are
necessary to con ﬁdently identify a true CNV.
J.B. Melo: None. S.I. Ferreira: None. L. Ramos: None.
M. Pinto: None. A. Jardim: None. I.M. Carreira: None.
E-P08.07
A patient with a new CNTNAP2 homozygous variant:
further delineation of the CASPR2 de ﬁciency syndrome
F. Riccardi1,2, J. Urquhart2,3, G. McCullagh4, S. Douzgou2,3
1Medical Genetics Department, La Timone Hospital,
Marseilles Public University Hospital, Marseille, France,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9432Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary ’s
Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Division of Evolution
and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
4Department of Paediatric Neurology, Manchester University
NHS Foundation Trust Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom
The CASPR2 de ﬁciency syndrome is caused by bi-allelic,
loss-of-function variants in the CNTNAP2 gene and is
characterised by intellectual disability and epilepsy onset in
theﬁrst 3 years of life associated with loss of verbal skills.
Exome analysis focused for learning dif ﬁculties and epi-
lepsy, identi ﬁed a novel, homozygous, variant c.985delA, p.
(Ser329Valfs*28) in the CNTNAP2 gene, in a boy with a
clinical presentation overlapping Pitt-Hopkins syndrome.This variant has not been previously reported in the litera-
ture; however it is predicted to disrupt normal translation of
the CNTNAP2 gene. It segregated from heterozygous,
consanguineous, normal parents. The patient was born fol-
lowing a normal pregnancy and delivery. Motor develop-
mental milestones ’acquisition was normal but speech was
delayed. Generalised, tonic-clonic seizures occurred at
30 months of age and were associated with loss of babbling.
At 4 years and 6 months, the patient had a severe, focalepilepsy disorder with varied seizure semiology that
responded well to sodium valproate. EEG ﬁndings were
non-speci ﬁc and brain MRI showed a slightly smaller, left
temporal lobe without cortical dysplasia. The patient had
moderate learning dif ﬁculties, stereotypic movements (side-
to-side, head movements and hand wringing) and episodicpanting respiration. We expand the molecular spectrum of
the CASPR2 de ﬁciency syndrome and we review the lit-
erature to delineate the differential diagnosis of the reces-sive Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-like disorders.
F. Riccardi: None. J. Urquhart: None. G. McCullagh:
None. S. Douzgou: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; FDNA.
E-P08.08
A case of interstitial 6q21-q22.31 deletion with dysmorphic
features
E. Goktas1, S. Eray2, M. S. Yildirim3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Van Research and Training
Hospital, Health Sciences University, Van, Turkey,
2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Van
Research and Training Hospital, Health Sciences University,Van, Turkey,
3Department of Medical Genetics, MeramMedical Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, KONYA,
Turkey
Introduction: Interstitial deletions of the long arm of
chromosome 6 are rarely reported. This condition shows
phenotypic heterogeneity which probably caused by widevariability in size and localization of the deletion. 6q dele-
tions are classi ﬁed according to position of the anomaly;
proximal (6q11q16), medial(6q15q25) and terminal(6q25qter). To date, the medial 6q deletion was observed in
approximately 30 patients. We report a patient with a
medial 6q interstitial deletions.
Material and Methods: The proband, a 3-year-old boy,
was the second child of healthy non-consanguineous
parents. He was referred to our clinic because ofdysmorphic features and learning dif ﬁculty. His physical
examination demonstrated microcephaly, hypertelorism,
epicanthus, down-slanting palpebral ﬁssure, frontal bossing,
large-simple ear, scoliosis. His weight and height were
within normal range.
Results: His cytogenetic evaluation with conventional
GTG banding resulted in 46,XY. Considering the pheno-
typic abnormalities of the patient, array-CGH analysis was
performed. 10000 Kb interstitial deletion at 6q21q22.31bands, arr[hg19] 6q21q22.31(113,754,403-123,754,142)×1,
was observed at analysis. The deleted region includes 55
OMIM genes. His parents had normal constitutionalkaryotype but array analysis not performed yet.
Conclusion: The interstitial deletions of 6q characterized
by heterogeneous phenotypes. Intellectual disability, micro-cephaly, developmental delay and skeletal abnormalities
were common among these patients. We compared the
phenotype of our patient with those reported in theliterature. We hope the clinical features that we present in
our case, would be helpful for full comprehension of
karyotype/phenotype correlation in patients with 6qdeletion.
E. Goktas: None. S. Eray: None. M.S. Yildirim: None.
E-P08.09
Unravelling the Xp22.3 microdeletion/microduplication in a
family with X-linked icthyosis combining aCGH, MLPAand FISH techniques
N. Baena, E. Gabau, C. Aguilera, A. Ruiz, N. Capdevila, L.
Capel, S. Ourani, M. Guitart
Corporació sanitària Parc taulí, SABADELL, Spain
Introduction: X-linked ichthyosis is a genetic disorder
affecting the skin caused by a de ﬁcit in the steroid sulfatase
enzyme (STS), and often is associated with a recurrent
microdeletion at Xp22.31.944 J. del PicchiaPatients and Methods: The proband is a 17-year-old boy
and he was referred to the clinical geneticist because of
icthyosis and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The
molecular analysis consisted on Comparative Genomic
Hybridization array (aCGH) (Agilent 60K), Multiplex
Ligation Dependent Probe Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) self
customized to analyze the CNV ’s inheritance in parents
and siblings and Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH)
using the BAC clone RP11-359O20 to characterizethe CNV.
Results: aCGH analysis of the patient revealed an
interstitial deletion on Xp22.3 involving the Xp22.3 region.The deletion encompasses approximately 1.6 Mb (arr[hg19]
Xp22.31(6,488,721-8,097,511)x0) and contained HDHD1,
STS, VCX, PNPLA4 and MIR651 genes. MLPA analysis
conﬁrmed the deletion in the proband, reported a duplica-
tion in his sister and grand mother and a normal MLPA
dosage was shown in his mother and his maternal uncle.The grandfather has icthyosis too but he did not accept
genetic testing. In order to decipher the normal MLPA
result in the mother we applied FISH that shows amicroduplication in one X chromosome and a microdeletion
in the other one.
Conclusions: The deletion on Xp22.3 gene is consistent
with the principal feature of our patient of X-linked
ichthyosis and probably for the ASD. To identi ﬁcation of
the mother harbouring both microdeletion and microdupli-cation Xp22.31 found thanks to using FISH allowed to offer
a reliable genetic counselling.
N. Baena: None. E. Gabau: None. C. Aguilera: None.
A. Ruiz: None. N. Capdevila: None. L. Capel: None. S.
Ourani: None. M. Guitart: None.
E-P08.11
Novel mosaic CREBBP mutation in a patient with
overlapping clinical features of Rubinstein-Taybi syndromeand Floating-Harbor syndrome
J. Ruml Stojanovic1, M. Mijovic1, A. Miletic1, B. Dimitrijevic1,B .
Peterlin2, A. Maver2, G. Cuturilo1,3
1University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia,2Clinical
Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: We present three-year-old boy with severe
developmental and growth delay, agenesis of corpus cal-losum, toracal scoliosis and craniofacial dysmorphism with
prominent forehead, dolichocephalic head, hypoplasia of
nose, prominent collumela and smooth philtrum. Heunderwent metopic craniosynostosis surgery. He does not
speak. Based on clinical presentation, Floating-Harborsyndrome (FHS) was suspected. FHS and Rubinstein-
Taybi syndrome (RTS) are both rare genetic disorders
characterized by multiple congenital anomalies and intel-
lectual de ﬁcit. They share clinical features since causative
genes belong to the same signaling pathway. FHS is caused
by mutations in the SRCAP that codes for a protein who
activates CREBBP .CREBBP plays a key role in regulation
of cell growth and division and is crucial for normal
development. Pathogenic variants in CREBBP represent a
known cause for RTS.
Materials and Methods: DNA was isolated from
peripheral blood lymphocytes using salting out method.Clinical exome sequencing (Illumina TruSight One) which
targeted genes related to observed clinical presentation was
performed.
Results: Clinical exome sequencing indicated presence of
a novel, likely pathogenic, stopgain variant c.6244C>T
(NM_004380.2) in CREBBP . Variant is present in mosaic
state (18,5%).
Conclusion: Presented boy is the ﬁrst reported patient
with the mosaic variant c.6244C>T in CREBBP . While
mosaic CREBBP variants have been described as a cause of
clinical presentation with traits associated with Rubinstein-
Taybi syndrome, as far as we are aware, a clinical overlapbetween RTS and FHS has not been previously reported.
J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M. Mijovic: None. A.
Miletic: None. B. Dimitrijevic: None. B. Peterlin: None.
A. Maver: None. G. Cuturilo: None.
E-P08.12
A clinical case of early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant in the STXBP1
I. Anisimova, O. Levchenko, N. Semenova, A. Lavrov
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation
STXBP1-encephalopathy is an early-onset epileptic ence-
phalopathy characterized by different types of intractable
seizures, severe intellectual disability, autism-like features,
hypotonia. It ’s caused most frequently by a heterozygous
pathogenic variant in STXBP1 or contiguous gene deletion
that includes STXBP1 gene which codes an essential pro-
tein for presynaptic vesicular release.
We present clinical and genetic characteristics of a 3-
years old boy with early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy.
The boy was born in term from the pregnancy complicatedby gestational diabetes mellitus. Proband ’s birth weight was
4160 g, length 54 cm, Apgar score 7/8 points. Motor
development is delayed –keeps his head from a month, sits
from a year, doesn ’t walk. Speech is absent. From 3 months
there is a periodic tremor of extremities. An EEG isAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 945represented by acute waves, polyphase complexes and slow
wave activity. Typical epileptiform activity was not
detected. A MRI of the brain at 2-years old revealed mild
enlargement of subarachnoid spaces.
Phenotype features include upslanting palpebral ﬁssures.
The patient has impaired communication and limited eyecontact.
Analysis of whole exome sequencing data revealed a
previously described pathogenic variant (rs796053361)c.875G>A (p.Arg292Leu) in heterozygous state in STXBP1
in the proband. This variant was not detected in either
parent and was con ﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing.
Our clinical case describes the phenotype associated with
the mutation in STXBP1 and contributes to the evidence of
its role of this gene in the pathogenesis of the early-infantileepileptic encephalopathy.
I. Anisimova: None. O. Levchenko: None. N. Seme-
nova: None. A. Lavrov: None.
E-P08.13
Clinical And Genetic Evaluation Of Sotos Syndrome CasesWith A Novel Mutation; A Single Center Experience
M. Elmas1,B .G ö ğüş1,B .D e ğirmenci1, A. Gezdirici2, M. Solak1
1Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey,2Kanuni
Sultan Süleyman Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: In the literature review we found few studies
that included Sotos syndrome ﬁndings and clinical mani-
festations.The aim of this study is to evaluate the prenatal,
natal and postnatal clinical ﬁndings associated with sotos
syndrome.
Methods: 16 patients were examined retrospectively in
this study, ranging in age between 3 and 23. Parameters that
we investigated are; birth weight, birth length,Apgar scoreat 5 minutes, NSD1 gene, dysmofological face appearance,
bone age, seizure, learning disability, feeding dif ﬁculties,
surgical operation and other accompanying abnormalities(brain MRI, abnormal echocardiographic ﬁndigs,have
chronic otitis media, etc.).Patients ﬁles and genetic reports
of patients were examined and the hospital registry systemwas screened.
Results: İn this study, we found an increase in the
frequency of the parameters; breech presentation, APGARscore in the 5th minute is between 4-7, large for gestational
age (LGA), atrial septal defect at echocardiography,
consanguinity marriage in the Sotos syndrome individualscompared to the normal population.We also found delay in
developmental steps compared to the normal population.We
determined that all patients had macrocephaly, increasedbone age, chronic otitis media frequency and hernia
operative frequency consistent with the literature.Weidenti ﬁed a new deletion-type mutation in the 19th exon
of the NSD1 gene that was not previously reported In the
literature. Unlike the cases reported in the literature
xyphoidal protrusion was detected at this patient with novel
mutation.
Conclusions : Rapid growth, dif ﬁculty in learning,
macrocephaly, speech delay and skewed personality,it is
absolutely necessary to think about Sotos syndrome.
Especially timid, shy personality was a bulge available inour all patients.
M. Elmas: None. B. Gö ğüş:None. B. De ğirmenci:
None. A. Gezdirici: None. M. Solak: None.
E-P08.14
Nonrecurrent 11q12.1q13.3 gain in a patient with motorand cognitive developmental delay, multiple congenital
anomalies, and short stature
I. P. Pinto1,2, L. B. Minasi2, R. Steckelberg2, D. M. C. Cunha2,C .
L. Ribeiro1,2, C. C. da Silva2,3,1, A. D. da Cruz2,3,1
1Federal University of Goiás, Biotechnology and Biodiversity
PhD Program, Goiânia, Brazil,2Ponti ﬁcal Catholic University
of Goiás, Department of Department of Agricultural andBiological Sciences, Replicon Research Group, Goiânia,
Brazil,
3Human Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, Secretary of Goias State for Public Health,Goiânia, Brazil
Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders are char-
acterized by substantial genetic heterogeneity and clinical
variability. Hereditary cerebellar ataxias, characterized by
clinically variable gait disturbances, are often accompaniedby neurological symptoms. The infantile onsets, common in
patients with congenital variants, typically have
developmental delay.
Material and Methods: Herein, we reported a 10 years
old boy who walked at the age of 6, talked at 7, born to non-
consanguineous parents. His clinical evaluation showedsevere motor, speech and cognitive delays, facial dysmorph-
isms with epicanthal folds, palpebral ﬁssure, hypertelorism,
broad nose, bulbous nasal tip, long philtrum, thin upper lip,high arched palate, irregular teeth, retrognatia, and short
stature. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA) was
done using GeneChip
®CytoScanHDTM array.
Results: CMA revealed a 12.9 Mb duplication in arr
[GRCh37] 11q12.1q13.3(56,928,391-69,867,039)x3,
encompassing 408 genes. The genes related to thephenotype were CLP1, CNTF, STX3, TMEM138,
TMEM216, BEST1, UQCC3, ATL3, COX8A, SCYL1,
NRXN2, SNX15, SLC25A45, RNASEH2C, AP5B1, PACS1,KLC2, BBS1, SPTBN2, NDUFV1 , and NDUFS8 . There is
evidence that autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-21946 J. del Picchia(OMIM616719) is caused by compound heterozygous
mutation in the SCYL1 gene. Furthermore, mutation in
SPTBN2 gene cause spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal
recessive 14 (OMIM615386). In both, are observed patients
with developmental delay.
Conclusions: The CMA is a powerful tool to investigate
children with motor and developmental delays, in order to
clinically relevant genetic diagnosis, such as the genetic
evidence found for our proband. Therefore, CMA wasefﬁcient to help in delineating phenotypic variation and
allowed adequate clinical management and better follow up
for the proband and his family.
I.P. Pinto: None. L.B. Minasi: None. R. Steckelberg:
None. D.M.C. Cunha: None. C.L. Ribeiro: None. C.C. da
Silva: None. A.D. da Cruz: None.
E-P08.15
Duplication of distal part of 7q11.23 region notencompassing the Williams-Beuren critical region in a
patient with moderate intellectual disability and
cardiomyopathy
K. Popovska-Jankovic1, G. Bozhinovski1, E. Sukarova
Stefanovska1, E. Sukarova Angelovska2, O. Jotovska3,D .
Plaseska-Karan ﬁlska1
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Pediatric
Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, Macedonia, The FormerYugoslav Republic of,
3Institute for Mental Health of Children
and Youth “Mladost ”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of
The hemizygous microdeletion of approximatelly 1.5 Mb
region of chromosome 7q11.23, causes the neurodeve-lopmental disorder known as Williams-Beuren syndrome
(WBS). It is a complex multisystemic disorder, with the
prevalence of 1:7,500-1:50,000 newborns. Patients withWBS demonstrate various clinic al disturbances including
cardiovascular manifestations; developmental delay;
behavioral and cognitive abnormalities. Microduplicationof the 7q11.23 region, known as Sommerville-van-derAA
syndrome was also reported, with milder phenotype but
also with facial dysmorphism and de ﬁcits in social inter-
action ability. In addition, a dystal 7q11.23 duplication
was found as a new entity in 5 cases with mild intelectual
disability, agressivnes and a uthistic spectrum disorders.
Inﬂuence of the genes HIP andYWHAG was suggested to
be critical for the manifestati ons of this microduplication
syndrome. Here we report a case with a de novo 7q11.23
microduplication distal from t he Williams-Beuren critical
region with a minimal lenght of 1Mb. The case is a ﬁveyear old boy with cardiomyopathy, but with normal,
hypermobile mitral valve and moderate intellectual dis-
ability. MRI of the brain indicated widened interhemi-
spheric space. Facial dysmo rphism include prominent
cheeks, eyelid ptosis, epica nthus, prominent philtrum,
small teeth, and everted lower lip. Microduplication wasdetermined using microarray technology, Agilent Sure
PrintG3 CGH4x180K oligo micorarray kit, followed by
data analysis on Agilent Genomic Workbench Software.Seventeen genes were determined in the duplicated region
including HIP andYWHAG genes. In conclusion here we
report a new case with distal 7q11.23 microduplication,with additional information of clinical variability,
important for diagnostic purposes, and possibility for
adequate genetic counselling for affected families.
K. Popovska-Jankovic: None. G. Bozhinovski: None.
E. Sukarova Stefanovska: None. E. Sukarova Ange-
lovska: None. O. Jotovska: None. D. Plaseska-
Karan ﬁlska: None.
E-P08.17
Threefold imbalance - duplication 6p22.3, duplication
9p24.2, and duplication 13q33.3- in a boy with
developmental delay/intellectual disabillity
U. Heinrich1, M. Cohen1,2, I. Rost1
1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine,
Martinsried, Germany,2kbo Children's Centre, Munich,
Germany
Case report: We report on a 9 years old boy with mild
intellectual disability, motor delay, severe language delay,and behavioural problems. His body measurements are in
the normal range, and he only shows some mild facial
dysmorphic signs. His mother and one of his brothersattended special schools.
Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping was
performed using standard GTG banding technique. Forarray CGH analysis CytoChip Oligo 180K microarray was
used. Segregation analyses were performed by
quantitative PCR.
Results: Conventional chromosome analysis showed a
normal male karyotype. Array CGH revealed three
imbalances: a) A 388 kb duplication 6p22.3 encompassingthe genes NUP153 ,FAM8A1 ,CAP2 ,a n d KIF13A . b) A 685
kb duplication 9p24.2 encompassing the gene RFX3 .c )A
1,71 Mb duplication 13q13.3 encompassing the genesLIG4 ,TNFSF13B ,ABDH13 , and FAM155A . Segregation
analyses proofed the duplication13q33.3 to be maternally
inherited, the duplication 9p24.2 to be paternally inherited,and the duplication 6p22.3 to be de novo.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 947Conclusion: The present case as another good example
for the complex genetics of children with developmental
delay/intellectual disability and for the problems concerning
the classi ﬁcations of the CNV ’s in these patients. None of
the CNV ’s in our patient is described in the literature, but
for all three some patients are listed in the DECIPHERdatabase. Consequently, all three imbalances were classi ﬁed
as variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS), and presumably
only the combined effect is responsible for the patient ’s full
phenotype.
U. Heinrich: None. M. Cohen: None. I. Rost: None.
E-P08.18
Identi ﬁcation of a novel mutationgt X-linked mental
retardation type 102 by whole exome sequencing
M. Javaheri
Dr. Zeinali Medical Genetics center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of
Introduction: X-linked mental retardation broadly refers to
a group of inherited disorders characterized by varying
degrees of mental retardation. Mental retardation, X-linked102 is a form of mental retardation characterized by sig-
niﬁcantly below average general intellectual functioning
associated with impairments in adaptive behavior .Thisstudy presents a patient with no de ﬁnite clinical diagnosis.
WES (Whole Exome Sequencing) revealed a novel
mutation.
Materials &Method: The case is a 7 years old girl with
mild mental retardation, delayed motor and speech devel-
opment, and talipes equinovarus. Brain MRI showed milddilatation of ventricular system. Karyotype is normal 46XX.
Metabolic screening, urine amino acids chromatography,
plasma amino acids HPLC, and thyroid function werenormal. Age of manifestation was 6 months. Parents are
asymptomatic and non-consanguineous. They have no other
affected child. WES was requested. Sanger sequencing wasused for segregation analysis of the identi ﬁed variant.
Insillico analysis of the newly identi ﬁed variant was done.
Results: WES revealed a previously unreported hetero-
zygous variant in the DDX3X gene, c.894C>A (p.
Cys298*).This is a nonsense substitution which interrupts
the reading frame by a premature stop codon.
Conclusion: As this variant was not detected in either
parent, we conclude that it is de novo in the index patient.
All Insilico analysis supported the pathogenicity of themutation. This mutation is compatible with X-linked mental
retardation type 102. No other phenotypes are known to be
associated with pathogenic variants in DDX3X.
M. Javaheri: None.E-P08.19
A novel MID2 mutation as a cause of X-linked intelectual
disability-101
M. Soeiro e Sá, O. Moldovan, A. Sousa
Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria,Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte,
Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
A mutation in MID2 has recently been associated with X-
linked intellectual disability-101 (IDX101) in a large kin-dred with affected males showing variable degrees of
intellectual disability (ID), global developmental delay
(GDD) and hyperactivity. Other features, present in morethan half of the individuals, were speech disorder and
strabismus. Dysmorphic features were insigni ﬁcant, except
for a long face.
Herein, we describe two maternal half-brothers with ID/
GDD in whom a hemizygous variant, c.668G>A, p.
(Arg223His), was identi ﬁed in MID2 through trio-based
whole exome sequencing (WES), including both boys and
their unaffected maternal grandfather. The older brother (14
years old) has severe ID, along with mild autism spectrumdisorder (ASD), microcephaly, strabismus, atrial septal
defect and dysmorphic features including a long face,
downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, bilateral epicantus, long
and pear-shaped nose, thin upper lip and retrognathia. The
younger brother (6 years old) has moderate GDD with
severe language impairment, severe ASD, astigmatism andless marked dysmorphic features (a similar nose and
retrognathia). The variant, classi ﬁed as of uncertain
signiﬁcance (class 3), is absent in the grandfather and
present at a very low frequency in population databases and
is located in a highly conserved residue of the MID2
protein. Other etiological investigations, including meta-bolic panel, FMR1 PCR and array-CGH were normal.
Taking all into account, we believe this could be the cause
of the boys ’phenotypes, being the second family described
with IDX101. However, more families need to be reported
in order to strengthen this causal relationship.
M. Soeiro e Sá: None. O. Moldovan: None. A.
Sousa: None.
E-P08.20
Genetic testing through multiplex ligation dependent probe
ampli ﬁcation analysis for children with global
developmental delay or intellectual disability
A. Boglis, F. Tripon, V. Moldovan, A. Crauciuc, C. Banescu
University of Medicine anf Farmacy of Tirgu Mures, Tirgu
Mures, Romania948 J. del PicchiaIntroduction: Global developmental delay or intellectual
disability (GDD/ID) are relatively frequent clinical condi-
tions for consultation and diagnosis continues to be a
challenge when the etiology remains elusive in about 25%
to 50% of cases. Identi ﬁcation of microdeletion/micro-
duplication syndromes with DD/ID is currently performedby Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampli ﬁcation
(MLPA) analysis. The aim of this study was to detect the
submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations using MLPA inchildren with GDD/ID.
Materials and Methods: At the Laboratory for Medical
Genetics Tirgu Mures, Romania we investigated a total of56 GDD/ID children with/without congenital anomalies
who had normal results of G-banding karyotype analysis,
using MLPA kits for common microdeletions/microdupli-cations syndromes and X-chromosome.
Results: The detection rate for submicroscopic chromo-
somal aberrations was found to be 12.5%. The microdele-tions/microduplications detected include regions for
DiGeorge syndrome (3 cases), Williams syndrome (1 case),
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (1 case), Cri du Chat syndrome(1 case) and Miller-Dieker syndrome (1 case).
Conclusions: Therefore, the MLPA is a cost-effective
analysis for identi ﬁcation of submicroscopic chromosomal
aberration syndromes, enables a rapid diagnosis of genomic
imbalances in patients with GDD/ID with/without con-
genital anomalies, and the results needed to be con ﬁrmed
using other types of molecular analysis.
A. Boglis: None. F. Tripon: None. V. Moldovan: None.
A. Crauciuc: None. C. Banescu: None.
E-P08.21
Autosomal Recessive Intellectual Disability type 46 causedby homozygous mutation in NDST1 gene (OMIM#616116) :
a case report
A. Serrano Antón1, V. López González1,2, M. Sánchez Soler1,M .
Ballesta Martínez1,2, L. Rodríguez Peña1, M. García-Hoyos3,E .
Guillén Navarro1,2
1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. IMIB-Arrixaca.,Murcia, Spain,
2Grupo Clínico Vinculado al Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII)., Madrid,Spain,
3Departamento Genética Médica-Instituto de Medicina
Genómica, Valencia, Spain
Introduction: Intellectual disability comprises a large
group of genetically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental
disorders with different inheritance patterns. The identi ﬁ-
cation of the underlying genetic cause is a recurrent chal-
lenge in clinical genetics. Missense NDST1 mutations havebeen recently proposed as a cause of autosomal recessive
intellectual disability (ARID) with a distinctive phenotype.
Clinical Report: We report on a 6-year-old girl, born to
healthy and non-consanguineous parents of Roma origin.
Pregnancy and neonatal period were uneventful. Postnatal
growth was within the normal range. She presented withmarked psychomotor delay, expressive language disorder
and hand ﬂapping. She attends a regular school with major
support and speech therapy. Her clinical phenotype includesbroad nose, large mouth with thick lips, large ears,
brachydactyly with tapering ﬁngers, and deep palmar
creases.
Results: Brain MRI, renal ultrasound, metabolic analysis,
Array-CGH, Fragile-X and Angelman methylation analysis
were normal. Angelman-like and BAFopathies targetedexome sequencing yielded normal results. WES revealed a
previously reported homozygous missense variant
c.1831G>A, p.G611S in the NDST1 gene, that segregatedas expected within the family.
Discussion : We report on a new case of ARID type 46
characterized by neurodevelopment delay with impairedexpressive language, stereotypies and dysmorphic features.
Hitherto, only nine patients from ﬁve unrelated families
have been published. Due to the association of ID,stereotypies, happy demeanor and macrostomy, Angelman
syndrome-like syndromes and BAFopathies should be
regarded as differential diagnoses. Our report emphasizesonce again the clinical utility of WES in patients with
undiagnosed ID. References: Reuter M et al, 2014.
Najmabadi H et al, 2011.
A. Serrano Antón: None. V. López González: None.
M. Sánchez Soler: None. M. Ballesta Martínez: None. L.
Rodríguez Peña: None. M. García-Hoyos: None. E.
Guillén Navarro: None.
E-P08.22
Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome due to
NR2F1 gene deletion
A. Repáraz-Andrade, C. Torreira Banzas, O. Blanco Barca, M.
Blanco Pérez, A. Amado Puentes, C. Melcón Crespo, M. A.
Andrade Olivié, J. R. Fernández Lorenzo
Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro., Vigo, Spain
Introduction: Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syn-
drome (BBSOAS, OMIM #615722) is an autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by delayed development,moderate intellectual disability, and optic atrophy and/or
hypoplasia, described in 2014. Dysmorphic facial features
are variable and nonspeci ﬁc. BBSOAS results from muta-
tions in NR2F1 and ﬁndings suggest haploinsuf ﬁciency as
the pathogenetic mechanism, even though ClinGenAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 949Haploinsuf ﬁciency Score for NR2F1 is 0 (being 0 no evi-
dence available and 3 suf ﬁcient evidence for dosage
pathogenicity), requiring that more information is necces-
sary to determine the role of NR2F1 haploinsuf ﬁciency in
BBSOAS.
Material and Methods: We present a 8 years old male
patient with delayed speech and language development,
visual impairment (bilateral optic tract alteration), poor
motor coordination and mild dysmorphic features (leftsingle palmar crease, sacral dimple and left supernumerary
nipple). Automatic DNA extraction was performed follow-
ing blood sample venopuncture (QIAcube, Qiagen) andComparative Genomic Hybridization array (aCGH) was
performed with Agilent SurePrint G3 ISCA V2 CGH
8x60K. Bioinformatic interpretation was done with AgilentCytogenomics 4 and Cartagenia Bench Lab CNV software.
Genome Build GRCh37 and ISCN 2016 recommendations
was used to report.
Results: arr[GRCh37] 5q15(92718667_93430350)x1 dn.
aCGH showed a 711,7 Kb interstitial heterozygote deletion
in 5q15 (chr5:92718667_93430350), encompassing NR2F1gene. Parental studies determined de novo inheritance.
Conclusions: Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syn-
drome is a recent described disorder. Most of the casesreported are due to mutations in NR2F1 and few whole
gene deletions have been described. ClinGen Haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency Score for NR2F1 is 0. This ﬁnding supports the
NR2F1 happloinsuf ﬁciency role in the pathogenic mechan-
ism of BBSOAS.
A. Repáraz-Andrade: None. C. Torreira Banzas:
None. O. Blanco Barca: None. M. Blanco Pérez: None.
A. Amado Puentes: None. C. Melcón Crespo: None. M.
A. Andrade Olivié: None. J.R. Fernández
Lorenzo: None.
E-P08.23
Rare diagnosis of autosomal-recessive Pitt-Hopkins-like
syndrome 2 by microarray-analysis
S. B. Kamphausen, I. Schanze, M. Zenker
Institute of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany
Introduction: Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome 2 (PTHLS2) is
an autosomal-recessive disorder caused by biallelic muta-tions in Neurexin 1 (NRXN1). Only a few cases have been
published in literature. Characteristic features are severe
mental retardation and mild facial dysmorphism. We pre-sent a girl with unspeci ﬁc developmental delay who was
diagnosed PTHLS2 by microarray-analysis.
Patient and Method: The patient was seen at the age of
28 months because of global developmental delay. She was
able to sit at the age of 12 months, but not able to walk yet.Active vocabulary was limited to less than ﬁve words. She
had mild unspeci ﬁc dysmorphism and no major malforma-
tions. Microarray-analysis was performed with Affymetrix
CytoScan HD SNP-Array. Validation of CNVs and
segregation analysis was done by MLPA with self-
designed probes.
Results: By microarray-analysis we identi ﬁed two
intragenic deletions in NRXN1 in 2p16.3 that could be
conﬁrmed by MLPA. Deletion 1 spans 248 kb (arr
[GRCh37] 2p16.3(50373077_50621548)x1) and deletion
2 spans 208 kb (arr[GRCh37] 2p16.3
(51054671_51263065)x1). Segregation analysis revealedcompound-heterozygosity as each deletion was inherited
from one parent, respectively.
Discussion: To our knowledge this is only the second
published case of PTHLS2 with compound-heterozygosity
for two intragenic NRXN1 deletions detected by micro-
array. Harrison et al. described a similar case of two sisterswho presented with severe epileptic encephalopathy
(Harrison et al., Am J Med Genet 2011). Our case broadens
the clinical and molecular spectrum of PTHLS2 butretrospectively also shows that a clinical diagnosis of
PTHLS2 would not have been possible as speci ﬁc
symptoms or dysmorphic features are missing.
S.B. Kamphausen: None. I. Schanze: None. M.
Zenker: None.
E-P08.24
A novel pathogenic variant of PURA in a patient with
severe developmental delay, delayed myelination andempty sella
T. Kaname1, K. Hosoki1, T. Kimura2, K. Yanagi1, M. Iso1,H .
Ogata3, K. Nakabayashi3, K. Hata3, K. Okamura4, T. Shinozaki2,
Y. Matsubara5
1Dept Genome Medicine, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan,2Nihonkai General Hospital,
Yamagata, Japan,3Dept Maternal-Fetal Biology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan,
4Dept System Biomedicine, National Center for Child Health
and Development, Tokyo, Japan,5National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan
There are several reports that patients with severe neuro-
developmental delay, learning disability, neonatal hypoto-
nia, feeding dif ﬁculties, abnormal movements and epilepsy
were caused by pathogenic variants in PURA . Here we repot
a patient with severe developmental delay, neurological and
endocrinological abnormalities associated with a novel
pathogenic variant in PURA identi ﬁed by whole exome
sequencing (WES) analysis. The patient was a 9-year-old
boy. The boy was born at 39 weeks of gestation as the ﬁrst950 J. del Picchiachild of nonconsanguineous healthy parents. His birth-
weight and Apgar score was 2210 g and 8/9, respectively.
The boy showed nystagmus from infancy with delayed
myelination in the brain. He was suspected to Pelizaeus-
Merzbacger syndrome at 7 months of age, which was
excluded. He presented with severe developmental delay,intellectual impairment with no meaningful words, short
stature, empty sella and pseudobulbar palsy. Written
informed consent was obtained from his parents. WESanalysis was performed using Human All Exon V6 kit
(Agilent) and Hiseq 2500 (Illumina). The detected variants
were con ﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing. A novel hetero-
zygous 8-bp insertion in the PURA gene was found in the
patient. The variant was de novo and it causes frameshift
and premature stop codon. The variant is at the N-terminalPUR repeat region I related to severe developmental delay.
PURA is one of the primary responsible genes for 5q31.3
microdeletion syndrome. Thirty-two patients with neuro-developmental disorder and brain abnormality caused by de
novo variants in PURA have been reported. Our ﬁnding and
those reports suggest that loss-of-function of PURA causesthe disease.
T. Kaname: None. K. Hosoki: None. T. Kimura: None.
K. Yanagi: None. M. Iso: None. H. Ogata: None. K.
Nakabayashi: None. K. Hata: None. K. Okamura: None.
T. Shinozaki: None. Y. Matsubara: None.
E-P08.26
PURA syndrome: a case study
J. Lim1, H. Law1, R. Foo2, C. Chow1, S. Jamuar1
1KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore,
2Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
Background: PURA syndrome is a recently described
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by moderate-to-
severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, feeding dif ﬁculties,
hypersomnolence and hypotonia. To date, genotype-phenotype correlation has been observed to have no sig-
niﬁcant differences between mutation classes and disease
severity.
Case presentation: We report a 15 years old Chinese
female, who is the only child of non-consanguineous
parents. Antenatal and birth history were unremarkable. Asa neonate, she required tube feeding for somnolence and
poor suck and also had apnea and desaturation episodes
without need for intubation. She had global developmentaldelay. She walked independently at 3 years old. She had
seizure-like movements at 5 years old with a normal EEG.
However, she developed tonic seizures with an abnormalEEG at 12 years old, in which sodium valproate had been
advised. When she was ﬁrst seen in the Genetics clinic at 12years 10 months old, she remained non-verbal with no
stereotypic hand movements and had regression in gross
motor skills since the onset of seizures. She has short stature
(-2.8 SD), moderate scoliosis, myopathic facies and no
obvious facial dysmorphism.
FISH for Prader-Willi syndrome, chromosomal micro-
array analysis (CMA) and urine glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) were normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES)
performed subsequently detected a novel, de novo hetero-zygous c.154dupG (p.L54fs*) variant in PURA gene,
consistent with the diagnosis.
Conclusion: Even though a novel variant has been
detected, our patient ’s phenotype is consistent with the core
features of PURA syndrome. Further studies are needed to
better understand genotype-phenotype correlation asso-ciated with PURA syndrome.
J. Lim: None. H. Law: None. R. Foo: None. C. Chow:
None. S. Jamuar: None.
E-P08.27
A large deletion of the MECP2 gene in a Japanese patient
with severe phenotype of Rett syndrome
K. Yanagi1, M. Minatogawa1, M. Iso1, K. Satou1, N. Okamoto2,
Y. Matsubara1, T. Kaname1
1National Center for Child Health and Development, Okura,
Setagaya, Japan,2Osaka Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital,
Izumi, Osaka, Japan
Methyl-CpG- binding protein 2 (MECP2) -related disorders
in females include typical Rett syndrome (RTT,
OMIM#312750), variant RTT, and mild learning dis-abilities, which are inherited in an X-linked manner. Typical
RTT is recognizable by arrested development between 6
and 18 months of age, and characterized by regression ofacquired skills, loss of speech, stereotypic movements and
mental retardation. Mutations in MECP2 are identi ﬁable in
80〜90% of individuals with typical Rett syndrome but less
frequently in atypical RTT.
Clinical Report: A patient is 7-year-old girl born to non-
consanguineous parents at 40 weeks with birth weight of2484g (-2.1 SD), height of 47 cm (-1.4 SD) and head
circumstance of 31.5 cm. (-1.5 SD). Amniotic ﬂuid
karyotyping showed 46,XX. She has severe neurodevelop-mental disorder characterized by psychomotor regression
with the development of distinctive hand stereotypies,
seizure, breathing abnormalities, and gait apraxia. Herthrive has decreased; current weight, height and head
circumstance are 15.5 kg (-1.9 SD), 105.5 cm (-2.6 SD),
47.7 cm (-2.4 SD), respectively. Although she wasclinically suspected RTT, no pathogenic variant was
detected in MECP2 by direct-sequencing method.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 951Results and conclusion: Whole exome sequencing
(WES) analysis suggested that there was a heterozygous
large deletion between the exon 4 of MECP2 and the
upstream region of IRAK . Long-range PCR and sequencing
revealed that the deletion was spanning about 9 kb at 3 ’
region of the MECP2 gene. The large deletion might affect
severe phenotype of RTT due to loss of terminal codon and/
or the polyadenylation sites.
K. Yanagi: None. M. Minatogawa: None. M. Iso:
None. K. Satou: None. N. Okamoto: None. Y. Matsu-
bara: None. T. Kaname: None.
E-P08.28
Marfanoid habitus in two patients with a mutation in the
SATB2-gene
M. Sinnema1, J. Nicolai2, R. Dash-Vorstenbosch3, S. Stegmann1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, The
Netherlands, Maastricht, Netherlands,2Department of
Neurology, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands, Maastricht,Netherlands,
3Severinus Stichting, Veldhoven, The
Netherlands, Veldhoven, Netherlands
Background: SATB2 -associated syndrome (SAS) is a
multisystem disorder characterized by developmental delay
/ intellectual disability with limited to absent speech,behavioral issues and craniofacial anomalies. Less common
features include several skeletal anomalies (e.g. pectus
deformities and scoliosis). While dysmorphic features havebeen described in individuals with this condition, these
features are not described as typically distinctive enough to
allow for a clinical diagnosis of SAS.
Patients: We describe two patients with intellectual
disability and a de novo SATB2-mutation. They both show
a remarkable marfanoid habitus, including tall height,slender build, arm span > height, arachnodactyly, high
arched or cleft palate.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings might highlight a recogniz-
able marfanoid phenotype in at least part of the patients
with SATB2 -associated syndrome.
M. Sinnema: None. J. Nicolai: None. R. Dash-
Vorstenbosch: None. S. Stegmann: None.
E-P08.29
TRAPPC9 missense variant may associate with
dysmyelination
V. Topçu1,2, B. Çavdarl ı2, A. Bak ır1,3,A .D e ğerliyurt4
1Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,2Numune Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,3Ankara Training and ResearchHospital, Ankara, Turkey,4Ankara Children ’s Hematology and
Oncology Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: A 17-year-old female patient was referred to
us with complaints of severe intellectual disability, psy-
chomotor retardation, epilepsy, and operated cataract. Par-ents were ﬁrst cousins.
Physical examination: Spelling a few words, short
stature, obesity, hypotonia, mild spasticity of lowerextremities, friendly attitude, forward-leaning posture, and
ataxic gait.
Facial features: Bitemporal narrowing, hypoplastic
suborbital ridges, strabismus, bilateral epicanthus, bullous
nasal tip, strabismus, downturned mouth, deep ﬁltrum, and
maxillar hypoplasia. Brain MRI showed bilateral dysmye-linating areas adjacent to the posterior horn of lateral
ventricles. MR spectroscopy or routine metabolic screening
detected no abnormality.
EEG: Focal paroxysmal activity in right parietooccipital
location.
Materials and Methods: Sequence analysis was per-
formed on DNA from the peripheral blood sample using
TruSight One sequencing panel (4813 genes).
Results: Sequence analysis revealed c.434G>A variant
causing a non-conservative Arg145Gln alteration in amino
acid sequence, classi ﬁed as Variant of Unknown Signi ﬁ-
cance (VUS). ClinVar harbors single missense variant withlikely pathogenic effect (GeneDx, clinical testing). phyloP
and phastCons estimated pretty high scores (3.167 and
0.997, respectively), either SIFT and PolyPhen predictedthis alteration as tolerated.
Conclusions: Loss-of-function variants in TRAPPC9 are
associated with “Mental retardation, autosomal recessive
13”. ACMG classi ﬁcation lets us determine c.434G>A as
VUS, but the similar facial gestalt of the proband with a
previous case reported by Marangi et al. (2013) persuadedus to deduce this variant as likely pathogenic. c.434G>A
might be causal for the neurological outcome and facial
features. Functional validation or statistical evidence isneeded to prove the pathogenicity.
V. Topçu: None. B. Çavdarl ı:None. A. Bak ır:None. A.
Değerliyurt: None.
E-P08.30
TRIO gene deletion due to pericentric inversion on
chromosome 5chromosome 5
N. Dragicevic, Kress Wolfram, Kolokotronis Konstantinos,
KlopockiEva, Nanda Indrajit
Institute of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany952 J. del PicchiaWe present a case study of a 5 year old boy using cytoge-
netic and molecular cytogenetic approaches presenting with
microcephaly, mild intellectual disability and global
developmental delay. He is the ﬁrst child born to non-
consanguineous healthy parents. Following an uncompli-
cated pregnancy, the newborn was delivered at 41 weekswith normal head circumference of 36.5 cm. There was
perinatal acidosis. First words were spoken around
15 months of life, walking without help was at the age of18 months, and he has been clean since the age of three. IQ
value at four years was about 73. Other observed features
were epicanthus of eyelids on both sides, discrete stra-bismus, short ﬁngers, and a shawl scrotum.Fragile X syn-
drome was ruled out at the age of four years. Cytogenetic
analysis revealed a male karyotype with a pericentricinversion of chromosome 5 [46,XY,inv(5)(p15.2q31.1)
mat]. Microarray CGH analysis was initiated to further
characterize the rearrangement and check for imbalances atthe inversion breakpoints. Two microdeletions were detec-
ted: in 5p15.2p15.1 spanning 2.51 Mb encompassing ﬁve
OMIM genes, and in 5q.23.1 spanning 1.9Mb, three OMIMgenes, respectively [arr[hg19] 5p15.2p15.1(13,017,195-
15,528,016)x1, 5q23.1(11,689,3086-118,788,712)x1]. In
the 5p15.2p15.1 region is amongst others the TRIO (MIM
601893) gene. An association between heterozygousloss of
function mutations in the TRIO gene and mild intellectual
disability with microcephaly was reported (autosomaldominant mental retardation-44 –MRD44, MIM 617061).
Karyotyping of both parents revealed that the mother car-
ried an identical inversion on chromosome 5 as well as bothmicrodeletions as shown by array CGH.
N. Dragicevic: None.
E-P08.31
A clinical case of autosomal dominant mental retardation
type 49
O. Levchenko, E. Dadali, A. Lavrov
Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Autosomal dominant mental retardation type
49 was ﬁrst described in February 2017. Аt the moment 17
patients with this syndrome and mutation in the TRIP12gene are described. The patients have a highly variable
phenotype.
Material and Methods: Whole exome library was
prepared from genomic DNA using TruSeq DNA Exome
(Illumina) and sequenced on a NextSeq550 (Illumina). One
pathogenic variant was validated in the proband and herparents by Sanger sequencing.Results: We present clinical and genetic characteristics of
female patient 4-year old undifferentiated mental retarda-
tion. The girl was born from 4
thpregnancy, delivered
physiologically. Proband ’s birth weight was 2750 g, length
50 cm, Apgar score 7/8 points. Motor development is
delayed –keeps her head from a 4 month, sits from
10 month, walks from 1,5 year. Speech is absent. Neatness
skills are not completely formed, self-service –are
gradually being formed. By 20-minutes EEG a typicalepileptiform activity was not detected, but neurophysiolo-
gical immaturity, signs of dysfunction of cortical-
subcortical structures were revealed. Ultrasound of the headrevealed abnormalities of the differentiation of the cortex
structures and myelin.
Objectively phenotype: motor awkwardness, not pro-
nounced dysmorphic facial features including deep set eyes,
macrostomy, long ﬁlter, ear lobules. Focal neurological
symptoms were not revealed. Exome sequencing revealedde novo heterozygous variant in TRIP12 (c.3759_3760del,
NM_004238).
Conclusions: The patient with the rare autosomal
dominant mental retardation type 49 was described to have
a novel mutation c.3759_3760del in TRIP12 gene.
O. Levchenko: None. E. Dadali: None. A.
Lavrov: None.
E-P08.32
X-linked syndromic mental retardation, Nascimento –type
identi ﬁed by Whole Exome Sequencing
O. KENTEROGLOU1, E. TSOUTSOU1, C. SOFOCLEOUS1,D .
VELTRA1, S. PSONI1, S. AMENTA1, P. WILLEMS2,H .
FRYSSIRA1
1CHOREMIO REASEARCH LABORATORY, ATHENS,
Greece,2GENDIA, ANTWERP, Belgium
Introduction: X-linked intellectual disability (ID) type
Nascimento (MIM #300860), also known as ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 A (UBE2A) de ﬁciency syndrome,
is characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability
(ID), speech impairment, dysmorphic facial features, genitaland skin abnormalities. UBE2A gene (Xq24) has a role in
DNA repair, fertility, and memory formation. All patients
carrying UBE2A mutations are males with mothers withnormal IQ.
Materials and Methods: A 14-years old male patient
with moderate mental retardation,obsessive-compulsivedisorder and morphological features such as myxedematous
appearance, almond-shaped eyes, hypertelorism, short neck,
hirsutism, brachydactyly,abnormal dermatoglyphic patternand small penis presented for clinical evaluation.Severe
atopic dermatitis was obvious.As an infant he hadAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 953hypotonia and large fontanels. Standard karyotype was
normal, 46, XY and molecular analysis for Prader-Willi
syndrome was negative. We applied Whole Exome
Sequencing (WES) which analyses 214.405 exons dis-
persed throughout the genome.
Results: A hemizygous pathogenic deletion of 14
nucleotides UBE2A:c.421_434del14 was indenti ﬁed in
exon 6 of the UBE2A gene by WES analysis. The variant
has been con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. This deletion
causes a frameshift predicted to result in a premature stop
codon . This variant was novel but due to its truncating
nature it is classi ﬁed as a pathogenic. Parental DNA
analysis of the same variant proved the de novo origin.
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed a novel mutation associated
with X-linked syndromic mental retardation, Nascimento-type. The use of NGS technologies help to establish the
diagnosis in patients with mental retardation and an atypical
phenotype, who until recently remained undiagnosed.
O. Kenteroglou: None. E. Tsoutsou: None. C. Sofocl-
eous: None. D. Veltra: None. S. Psoni: None. S. Amenta:
None. P. Willems: None. H. Fryssira: None.
E-P08.33
Novel WAC frameshift variant in a boy with DeSanto-
Shinawi syndrome revealed using whole exome sequencing
S. Bendova1, M. Havlovicova1, M. Hancarova1, D. Prchalova1,
V. Stranecky2, Z. Sedlacek1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles
University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,2Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for RareDiseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and
General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
DeSanto-Shinawi syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the
WAC gene. It is characterized by global developmental
delay, hypotonia, behavioral, sleep and feeding problems,
eye abnormalities, constipation and seizures. Facial features
can be mildly dysmorphic but are nonspeci ﬁc. In total, 18
patients have been reported. We describe an 18-year-old
boy who has been examined since preschool age because of
hypotonia, speech disorder and strabism. His facial pheno-type was not remarkable, but with advancing age features
such as broad, prominent forehead, bushy eyebrows, deep-
set eyes, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous nasal tip, low-setposteriorly rotated ears, wide mouth with thin upper lip and
broad chin became more pronounced. He had abnormalities
of extremities, abnormal CNS MRI ﬁndings and recurrent
respiratory infections. He suffered from underweight
affecting fat and muscular components, and showed anxietyand autistic traits. Previous specialized investigations failed
to explain the etiology of his affection. Exome sequencing
revealed a de novo heterozygous WAC frameshift variant
NM_016628.4:c.383del, p.(Pro128Leufs*64) which was
absent from all databases. All other patients with WAC
mutations also carried truncating variants spread across thegene. The long follow-up of our patient allowed delineating
of the WAC -related phenotype and its developmental tra-
jectory. The facial phenotype was consistent with previouscases, but we show that the main features become more
pronounced with age. Nevertheless, the guidance from
phenotype is rather limited and it is likely that additionalcases of this syndrome will continue to be identi ﬁed via the
genotype- ﬁrst approach. Supported by 17-29423A and
00064203.
S. Bendova: None. M. Havlovicova: None. M. Hancar-
ova: None. D. Prchalova: None. V. Stranecky: None. Z.
Sedlacek: None.
E-P08.34
Syndromic intellectual disability and developmental delaycaused by novel de novo truncating variant in AHDC1 gene
L. Diaz-Ordoñez1, D. Ramirez-Montaño1, S. Cruz2, H. Pachajoa1
1Universidad Icesi, Congenital Abnormalities and Rare
Diseases Research Center, Cali, Colombia,2Fundación Valle
del Lili, Cali, Colombia
Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome is a rare genetic dis-
order with autosomal dominant inheritance caused by het-
erozygous mutations in AHDC1 gene. This condition is
characterized by neurological manifestations that includepsychomotor delayed, intellectual disability and corpus
callosum hypoplasia with distinct facial features.
Case report: We present a 13 years-old female from
Colombia, born to non-consanguineous parents. She was
diagnosed at age of 2 years for psychomotor and language
delay, facial dysmorphic features and sleep apnea withplagiocephaly. She has associated behavioral disorders
that include self-harm, poor social interaction with
isolation.
Results: Chromosome analysis was normal (Kariotyping
and CGH-array). WES (Whole Exome Sequencing) was
performed at 12 years and revealed a novel heterozygous de
novo frameshift variant c.1529delG (p.Gly510Alafs*12) in
AHDC1 gene (NM_001029882.3), variant functional pre-
diction software tools Mutation tester, Polyphen-2, andSIFT classi ﬁed it as a deleterious variant.
Discussion: The mutation reported here introduces a stop
codon at the amino acid 522 of AHDC1 protein (1603amino acids). This leads to the loss of one DNA-binding
motif and PDZ carboxyl-terminal domain, which could954 J. del Picchiatruncate its interaction with other proteins and can be related
to the neurobehavioural manifestations in our patient.
Conclusion: The genotype-phenotype correlation in
patients with Xia-Gibbs syndrome is not understood. The
patient reported by us is the second case in Colombia and
differ from previously reported in literature for absence ofcorpus callosum hypoplasia described in 40% of cases and
for her severe neurobehavioral disorder that could be being
modulated for the novel frameshift mutation that truncatedprotein early.
L. Diaz-Ordoñez: None. D. Ramirez-Montaño: None.
S. Cruz: None. H. Pachajoa: None.
E-P08.35
Xp11.22 microduplication including IQSEC2 gene in amale with intellectual disability, epilepsy and dysmorphic
features
P. P. Henrique, C. R. Lincoln-de-Carvalho, M. P. de Mello, A. P.
Marques-de-Faria
University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a group of
genetically highly heterogeneous disorders and one of the
most frequent genetic causes of ID occurring in 5-10% of
all affected male individual s. Around 100 genes have been
considered as determinant of XLID and the role for many
of them remains to be elucidated. Here, we described a
male with ID, epilepsy, severely impaired speech,abnormal behavior with hyperactivity and some aggres-
siveness, optic nerve atrophy and craniofacial dys-
morphisms as brachycephaly, frontal hair upsweep,prominent nose and ears, evert ed lower lip, narrow palate,
dental crowding, among others; hands and feet minor
anomalies were also observed. Array-CGH (Agilenthuman genome G3 SurePrint 8x60K microarray) dis-
closed a 416 kb duplication which extends from ChrX
(hg19): 53,253,932 to 53,670,215. This variation wasconﬁrmed by MLPA technique and Real Time PCR ana-
lysis showed the maternal inheritance. The duplicated
region encompasses the IQ motif-and Sec7 domain-
containing protein 2 gene (IQSEC2 ), which has a sig-
niﬁcant role in the brain main tenance and homeostasis.
Although a consistent phenotype of non-syndromic XLIDwas observed in individuals with IQSEC2 alterations, the
additional features observed in present patient suggest a
syndromic form related to Xp11.22 duplications and alsosupport the hypothesis that IQSEC2 has a role in patho-
genesis of syndromic XLID. In addition, the inclusion of
IQSEC2 variations among the causal factors when eval-
uating ID patients with seizures could be considered.Clinical details of male patients with Xp11.22 submicroscopic duplications involving the IQSEC2 gene
Patient
[Reference]Intellectual
DisabilityEpilepsy Language
developmentVisual
impairmentBehavioural
disturbancesOther clinical
featuresChrX(hg19)
Coordinates and
Duplication size
Present Case Mild-
ModerateNeonatal
seizuresSeverely
impaired speechOptic nerve
atrophy,
enophtalmiaHyperactivity,
aggressive
behaviorCorpus callosum
agenesis and
slight ventricular
system
enlargement,craniofacial
dysmorphic
features,
including
enophtalmia53,253,932-
53,670,215 416 kb
A009
[Froyen
et al., 2008]Mild − Speech delay − Hyperactivity Normal facial
features53,220,275-
53,981,275 761 kb
A057
[Froyen
et al., 2008]Mild − Limited speech
in later life− Hyperactivity Not present 52,987,689-
53,712,958 725 kb
A119
[Froyen
et al., 2008]Mild-
ModerateFebrile
seizuresSpeech delay − Attention
deﬁcit
hyperactivity
disorderNo signi ﬁcant
dysmorphic
features52,825,617-
53,662,768 837 kb
AU88848
[Froyen
et al., 2012]Mild −− − − − 53,169,907-
54,101,252 931 kb
FTD[Froyen
et al., 2012]Mild Cortico-
subcortical
dysfunctionSpeech delay − Attention
deﬁcit
hyperactivity
disorderFunctional heart
murmur, chronic
vomiting and
diarrhea,
urolithiasis,
bilateral inguinal
hernia,
cryptorchidism,
facial
dysmorphicfeatures53,198,95-
54,237,527
1,038 kb
F538
[Froyenet al., 2012]Moderate − Limited speech,
StutterUnequal pupils − Large head
circumference53,216,303-
54,239,6701,023 kb
ON1[Froyen
et al., 2012]Mild-
Moderate− Partial lack
of speechMicrophthalmos Hyperactivity
and attentionproblems, self-
destructing
behaviorFacial
dysmorphicfeatures52,982,784-
53,721,295 730 kb
Patient 1
[Tran Mau-Them
et al., 2014]Severe Generalised
myoclonicseizuresNot aquired Hypermetropia,
strabismusStereotypic
handmovementsNeonatal
hypotonia,postnatal
microcephaly,
hyperkinesia,
normal facial
features53,283,513-
53,325,284 42 kb
Patient 3
[Tran Mau-
Them
et al., 2014]Severe Partial
epilepsyRegression Strabismus Midline
stereotypic
hand
movementsNeonatal
hypotonia,
cerebral atrophy,
nonspeci ﬁc
hypersignal foci
in periventricular
white matter,minor facial
features53,276,030-
53,298,472 22 kb
P611
[Santos-
Rebouças
et al., 2015]Moderate Not present Speech delay Enophtalmia Hyperactivity
and attention
problems,
aggressive
behaviorAbnormal gait,
brachycephaly,
enophtalmia,
dysmorphic
facial features53,316,256-
54,074,258 758 kb
P3272
[Santos-
Rebouças
et al., 2015]Moderate Seizures Speech delay
− Hyperactivity Dysmorphic
facial features53,228,169-
54,133,735 905 kb
Patient 1
[Moey
et al., 2016]Not
determined− Speech delay − Poor
socialization,
behavioral
problemsDownward
corners of
the mouth52,954,520-
53,315,542 361 kb
Patient 2
[Moey
et al., 2016]Mild-
Moderate−− − Autism
spectrum
disorder,
challenging
behavior,
physical
aggression,
avoided eyecontact− 52,911,287-
53,315,010 403 kb
Patient 3
[Moeyet al., 2016]Global delay − Speech delay,
poorpronunciation− Signi ﬁcant
behavioraldifﬁculties
requiring a
special
education class− 52,789,239-
53,368,927 579 kb
Patient 4
[Moey
et al., 2016]Severe Constant
generalized
sharp slow
dischargesNo words, little
receptive
language− Smile and
shaking handsHypotonia,
microcephaly,
hypogonadism,
myoclonus, not
walk, dysmorhic
facial features52,341,517-
53,782,896
1,441kbAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 955P.P. Henrique: None. C.R. Lincoln-de-Carvalho:
None. M.P. de Mello: None. A.P. Marques-de-
Faria: None.
E-P08.36
New case of a de novo mutation at ZYMND11 gene
resembling the 10p15.3 microdeletion syndrome
M. García-Barcina1, M. A. Fernández-Cuesta2, B. Barreña3,E .
Santamaría3, C. Ruiz-Espinoza4, M. I. Tejada5, N. Ibarluzea5,G .
Pérez de Nanclares6, E. Sarasola3
1Genetics Unit, Basurto University Hospital –Osakidetza,
Bilbao, Spain,2Neuropediatrics Unit, Basurto University
Hospital –OSI Bilbao-Basurto –Osakidetza, Bilbao, Spain,
3Genetics Unit, Basurto University Hospital –Osakidetza,
Bilbao, Spain,4Neuropediatrics Unit, Basurto University
Hospital –Osakidetza, Bilbao, Spain,5Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, Genetics Service, BioCruces Health Research
Institute, Cruces University Hospital –Osakidetza, Barakaldo,
Spain,6Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba
National Health Institute, Araba University Hospital –
Osakidetza, Vitoria, Spain
Introduction: In 2012, a new microdeletion syndrome
affecting the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p15.3) was
described. The implication of ZMYND11 , a gene located
within this region, in the phenotype (essentially character-
ized by developmental and motor delay, craniofacial dys-
morphism and hypotonia) was also hypothesized.
Patient and methods: We present the case of a 8 month
male referred to our consult ation due to developmental
delay and facial dysmorphisms. He was the second childof a non-consanguineous couple born after an uneventful
pregnancy with a normal pe rinatal period. His elder
brother presents autism without speci ﬁc phenotypical
features.
At 8 months, he presented hypotonia, growth failure,
bilateral cryptorchidism and hypospadias.
Neurophysiological studies and biochemical analyses
showed normal results.
Nowadays (6y), as major features, he has no verbal
language and presents a peculiar facial phenotype with
hypertelorism and narrow palpebral ﬁssures, low-set ears,
prominent crus and auricular pit, among others.
Informed consent was obtained from his parents for
subsequent studies: conventional karyotype, aCGH, Prader
Willi Syndrome-associated defects and exome variants werestudied.
Results: Karyotype and aCGH analysis revealed no
alterations. Prader-Willi Syndrome was discarded (neithermethylation nor CNV alterations were found at 15q11
region).Exome analysis revealed the presence of a previously
described pathogenic variant on ZMYND11 gene
[c.1798T>C (p.Arg600Trp)]. Family analysis (parents and
brother) con ﬁrmed its de novo origin.
Conclusion: The clinical and molecular ﬁndings in our
patient con ﬁrm the association of this identi ﬁed variant with
the described phenotype and the implication of ZMYND11
gene in 10p15.3 deletion syndrome.
M. García-Barcina: None. M.A. Fernández-Cuesta:
None. B. Barreña: None. E. Santamaría: None. C. Ruiz-
Espinoza: None. M.I. Tejada: None. N. Ibarluzea: None.
G. Pérez de Nanclares: None. E. Sarasola: None.
E-P08.37
A recurrent de novo mutation and a second variant ofunknown signi ﬁcance in ZSWIM6 in a boy with severe
intellectual disability, microcephaly, strabism and
hyperopia
I. Bader1, A. Gamper2, M. Preisel1, W. Sperl1, J. Mayr1
1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK), Salzburg, Austria,
2Department of Pediatrics, Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK),
Salzburg, Austria
Recently, a recurrent de novo nonsense variant (c.2737C>T
[p.Arg913Ter]) in the penultimate exon of ZSWIM6 was
reported to cause intellectual disability and additional cen-
tral and peripheral nervous system symptoms by Palmeret al. (Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Dec 7;101(6):995-1005), but
not frontonasal or limb malformations, which was the
phenotype initially discovered with a recurrent missensemutation (c.3487C>T [p.Arg1163Trp]) by Smith et al. (Am
J Hum Genet. 2014 Aug 7;95(2):235-40.). We present the
phenotype and genotype of a boy with severe intellectualdisability, strabism, hyperopia, microcephaly and undes-
cended testis. The molecular karyotype was normal. Exome
analysis revealed the recurrent de novo nonsense variant
(c.2737C>T [p.Arg913Ter]) in the penultimate exon of
ZSWIM6 and in addition a heterozygous missense variant
(c.3119G>A [p.Arg1040His]) that was predicted by severaltools to be probably pathogenic. This variant is present in
dbSNP (rs192222164) and in gnomAD (f =0.0003779) and
was inherited from the unaffected mother. The phenotype ofour patient as evident until now ﬁts into the spectrum
described with the recurrent de novo nonsense variant. It
remains to be elucidated whether the maternally inheritedmissense variant might be relevant in a possible recessive
mode of inheritance. Anyway, the missense mutation of our
patient complicated the interpretation of the mode ofinheritance in our patient. Our ﬁndings widen the spectrum
of genotypes and phenotypes associated with ZSWIM6 .956 J. del PicchiaI. Bader: None. A. Gamper: None. M. Preisel: None.
W. Sperl: None. J. Mayr: None.
E-P09 Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders
E-P09.01
A microdeletion including the gene NUS1 demonstrating
interpretation problems, expansion of the phenotype andtreatment modi ﬁcation
E. Banne1, S. Josefsberg1, J. Rosensaft1, H. Bassan2
1Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel,2Assaf Harofe
Medical Center, Be'er Ya'akov, Israel
Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is nowadays recognized
as essential in the evaluation of autism and developmentaldelay. CMA interpretation depends on databases as
ClinGen, DECIPHER and others, which lack information,
and original papers are still essential in deciphering thesigniﬁcance of microdeletions/microduplications. We pre-
sent an 8.5 years old boy, with intractable epilepsy, autistic
spectrum disorder (ASD), hypotonia during infancy, stra-bismus and behavioral problems. Multiple EEG examina-
tions revealed frequent generalized interictal and ictal slow
spike & wave discharges. He has various seizure types, andis treated with a combination of valproic acid, clobazam and
ethusuximide with a relative improvement but partial con-
trol. The child exhibited behavioral problems includingaggression and violence, with recurrent rage attacks.
Levetiractam administration escalated the frequency of
these behaviors signi ﬁcantly, and therefore was dis-
continued. Metabolic workup was normal including: lactic,
ammonia, blood amino acids, Carnitine, Acylcarnitine. A
chromosomal microarray performed demonstrated a dele-tion on chromosome 6: arr[hg19]6q22.1(117,431,000-
118,040,939)x1. This 609kb deletion including the NUS1
gene is located within the minimal essential critical regionon chromosome 6q22. The region is known for autism,
seizures, tremor and mild dysmorphic features, but less
known for behavioural problems as in the case presented.The databases mentioned had only scarce information on
the microdeletion, and we found only one paper interpreting
it. This work further delineates this rare genetic disorder.We suggest that behavioral problems are part of this
microdeletion, and suggest caution using Levetiractam in
these patients. We emphasize the importance of earlygenetic evaluation in children with ASD and epilepsy.
E. Banne: None. S. Josefsberg: None. J. Rosensaft:
None. H. Bassan: None.E-P09.02
Adrenoleukodystrophy for the ﬁrst time in Bulgaria: two
genetically veri ﬁed cases, one novel mutation
S. Tincheva1, T. Todorov1, M. Ivanova2,3, I. Sinigerska2,H .
Kathom4, R. Tincheva4, D. Avdjieva4, S. Tsaneva1,5,A .
Todorova1,5
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2National Genetic Laboratory, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,3Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of
Chemistry and Pharmacy, So ﬁa University "St. Kliment
Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Clinical Genetics,
University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,5Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Adrenoleukodystrophy (MIM# 300100) represents an X-
linked recessive disorder and results in accumulation of
saturated very long fatty acids in tissues throughout thebody. The manifestations of the disorder occur primarily in
the adrenal cortex, the myelin of the central nervous system,
and the Leydig cells of the testes. Adrenoleukodystrophy iscaused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene (MIM* 300371)
located on the Xq28. ABCD1 codes a peroxisomal mem-
brane transporter protein (ALDP), member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily. Here we
report three patients with clinical diagnosis of X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy were referred for ABCD1 analysis. In
two of them Sanger sequencing showed the presence of a
molecular genetic variant in the ABCD1 gene thereby
conﬁrming the clinical diagnosis. In the ﬁrst patient an
already reported missense mutation was found -
c.1552C>T, p.Arg518Trp, and in the second - a novel still
unpublished variant c.2002A>G, p.Thr668Ala. Multipleprediction software tools (PolyPhen-2; MutationTaster;
SIFT) de ﬁne p.Thr668Ala as deleterious. Furthermore, it
was not recorded in the population genetic variation data-base dbSNP v138 and was not found in 60 000 control
subjects in the ExAC project af ﬁrming the probable disease
causing character of p.Thr668Ala. Unfortunately, the thirdpatient did not show any pathological variations in the
ABCD1 gene supposing the need for diagnosis revision. To
the best of our knowledge the present study comprises allclinically and genetically diagnosed adrenoleukodystrophy
patients in Bulgaria and enriches the spectrum of reported
ABCD1 mutations.
S. Tincheva: None. T. Todorov: None. M. Ivanova:
None. I. Sinigerska: None. H. Kathom: None. R.
Tincheva: None. D. Avdjieva: None. S. Tsaneva: None.
A. Todorova: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 957E-P09.04
Cholesterol related gene polymorphisms in Alzheimer
Disease
G. Guven1, E. Vurgun1,2, B. Bilgic3, H. Hanagasi3, H. Gurvit3,E .
Lohmann4,5, E. Ozer1, N. Erginel-Unaltuna1
1Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Department
of Medical Biochemistry, Okmeydani Training and Research
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,3Behavioural Neurology and
Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, IstanbulFaculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,
4Department Of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute
for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,Germany,
5DZNE, German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Tübingen, Germany
Introduction: Numerous genetic evidences pointed out that
variations in cholesterol related genes may be associated
with Alzheimer Disease (AD) risk. We aimed to investigatethe association between polymorphisms in cholesterol
related genes and AD in a cohort of Turkish patients.
Therefore we have selected APOA5 _(rs662799), APOC1 _
(rs11568822), APOD _(rs1568565), CH25H _(rs13500),
LDLR _(rs5930) and SORL1_(rs2282649) gene poly-
morphisms that have been previously showed signi ﬁcant
association with AD risk.
Materials-Methods: The study group consisted of 257
AD patients (mean age: 75.9 ± 10.4) and 414 healthycontrols (mean age: 62.2 ± 13.1). Genotyping was
performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction using
hydrolysis probes in Light Cycler 480. Genotypes betweengroups were compared by Pearson x2 test and multivariate
regression analysis was performed to analyse the accumula-
tion effect of APOE ε4 allele.
Results: Our results showed that the “TT”genotype of
CH25H _rs13500 polymorphism was signi ﬁcantly more
frequent in AD group (p =<0.001) and individuals carrying
CH25H “T”allele per se, had increased risk for AD
(OR=3.27, 95%CI =2.0-5.35, p =<0.001). The “ins/ins ”
genotype of APOC1 _rs11568822 was signi ﬁcantly more
frequent in AD group compared to controls (p =<0.001).
However no signi ﬁcant association with AD risk was found
inAPOC1 insertion allele carriers that did not harbor APOE
ε4 allele.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that CH25H _rs13500
polymorphism is associated with AD risk in the Turkishpopulation and CH25H might have a role in pathogenesis of
AD independent of APOE . Association between APOC 1
“ins”allele and AD risk can be explained by linkage
disequilibrium with the APOE locus.G. Guven: None. E. Vurgun: None. B. Bilgic: None.
H.
Hanagasi: None. H. Gurvit: None. E. Lohmann: None.
E. Ozer: None. N. Erginel-Unaltuna: None.
E-P09.06
An Andermann syndrome case of Bulgarian Roma origindue to a new frameshift mutation in the SLC12A6 gene
T. Todorov1, I. Pacheva2,3, Z. Halil4, F. Galabova4,R .
Yordanova2,4, I. Geneva2,4, I. Ivanov2,4, A. Todorova1,5
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics,
Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,3Department of
Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical UniversitySoﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
4University Hospital “St. George",
Plovdiv, Bulgaria,5IMDL Genome Centre Bulgaria, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria
Andermann syndrome [OMIM: # 218000] is an autosomal
recessive disease which is a characterized with motor andsensory neuropathy, mental retardation, facial dysmorph-
ism, developmental delay, muscular hypotonia, seizures etc.
Most cases also present with agenesis or malformation ofthe corpus callosum. Andermann syndrome is caused by
mutations in the SLC12A6 gene [OMIM:*604878]. Here we
report a male infant from Roma origin at the age of8 months. The clinical symptoms include muscle hypotonia,
areﬂexia and agenesis of corpus callosum on brain ultra-
sound. Furthermore, the patient has developmental delay,with the greatest impairment found in his motor functions.
Interestingly, he presented clinically like spinal muscular
atrophy plus syndrome. Based on a previously exercisedSMA genetic test with a negative result, Sanger sequencing
of the SLC12A6 gene was performed. A novel homozygous
deletion was found - c.2604delT, p.(Asp868GlufsTer11)clarifying the patient ’s case as Andermann syndrome. The
variant has not previously been reported in patients with
similar clinical manifestations. Segregation analysis in thefamily showed the same variant in heterozygous state in the
patient ’s parents, sister and brother. Based on the variant
type which implies a functionally inferior protein productthe variant is probably pathogenic. In conclusion, we pre-
sent the ﬁrst clinically diagnosed and genetically veri ﬁed
patient with Andermann syndrome in Bulgaria so far. Weestablished a new mutation in the SLC12A6 gene in a
patient of Roma origin, born to non-consanguineous par-
ents, probably a private variant for the Bulgarian Roma(Gypsy) population?
T. Todorov: None. I. Pacheva: None. Z. Halil: None. F.
Galabova: None. R. Yordanova: None. I. Geneva: None.
I. Ivanov: None. A. Todorova: None.958 J. del PicchiaE-P09.07
Val34Leu polymorphism in Factor XIII is associated with
low risk of Aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage in a
South Indian population
G. K. Chetan, S. Arati, D. I. Bhat
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuroscinces,Bangalore, India
Background: The rupture of brain aneurysm causes
bleeding in the subarachnoid space and is known asaneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage (aSAH). In our
study we evaluated the association of Factor XIII poly-
morphism and the risk of Aneurysmal subarachnoid hae-morrhage (aSAH) in a South Indian population.
Methods: The study was performed in 200 subjects with
aSAH and 205 healthy control subjects. Five ml bloodsamples were collected from subjects and DNA isolated
were used for genotyping of rs5985 (Val34Leu) poly-
morphism of Factor XIII with Taqman ®allelic discrimina-
tion assay. Statistical software R.3.0.11 was used to analyse
the data and Pvalue <0.05 was considered as statistically
signiﬁcant.
Results: In our study, Factor XIII Val/Leu variant
genotype frequency was higher in control subjects (18%)
compared to aSAH patients (9%). Val34Leu variant showedsigniﬁcant difference in genotypes ( χ
2=5.81 ; df =2;P=
0.04) and allele frequencies ( χ2=4.12 ; df =1;P=0.04)
between cases and controls. Val/Leu genotype (OR =0.48,
95%CI=0.26-0.88, P =0.02) and Leu allele was signi ﬁ-
cantly associated with low risk of aSAH (OR =0.55, 95%
CI=0.32-0.95, P =0.03). Signi ﬁcant association of geno-
types was observed in dominant model (OR =0.50,95%
CI=0.28-0.90, P =0.02). In subtyping, we found Leu/Leu
genotype was associated with Basilar top aneurysm(OR=3.59, 95%CI =1.1111.64, P=0.03).
Conclusion: These results suggest that Factor XIII
Val34Leu polymorphism is associated with lower risk ofaSAH in South Indian population.
Grant Reference: The funding for the study was
obtained from Department of Science and Technology(DST), Government of India (SR/WOS A/LS-1040/2014).
G.K. Chetan: None. S. Arati: None. D.I. Bhat: None.
E-P09.08
A new case involving 2q13 microduplication associated
with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability anddysmorphic features
I. O. Focsa1, I. Streata2, S. Sosoi2, M. Ioana2, R. Grozavescu3,
M. Budisteanu3,4,51"C. Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest,
Romania,2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova,
Romania,3Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia Clinical Hospital of
Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania,4Victor Babes National
Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania,5Titu Maiorescu
University, Bucharest, Romania
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental
condition characterized by impairment of social interaction,reduced communication skills and stereotyped patterns of
behavior. The etiology of ASD is complex including
genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors. 2q13 dupli-cation have been associated with developmental delay,
intellectual disability, ASD and dysmorphism. Several
previous studies have linked the NPHP1 gene, located inthis genomic region, to ASD. In this paper we report a new
case of 2q13 duplication in association with ASD and
intellectual disability. The patient is a 5 years old boy bornat term from health, non-consanguineous parents who was
referred to the department of Child Psychiatry for speech
delay and behavioral problems. Clinical evaluation revealeddysmorphic features (high forehead, large protruding ears,
open-held mouth), severe speech delay (he says only
6 simple words), moderate intellectual disability, autisticbehavior (no visual contact, dif ﬁcult social interaction,
stereotypic movements). The genomic pro ﬁle obtained by
array-CGH (Agilent platforms) unveiled a 645 Kb dupli-cation at 2q13 (110457697-111103309, hg18) encompass-
ingRGPD6 ,MALL andNPHP1 genes. To date, 11 cases
with 2q13 microduplication, including NPHP1 andMALL
genes, have been reported. All patients presented behavior
problems including ASD, attention de ﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder. Intellec-tual disability was also noted in 8 patients. Other features
described in some cases were speech delay and dysmorphic
traits. All these ﬁndings were found in our case, further
contributing to the delineating of the 2q13
microduplication.
I.O. Focsa: None. I. Streata: None. S. Sosoi: None. M.
Ioana: None. R. Grozavescu: None. M.
Budisteanu: None.
E-P09.09
Duplication of 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 region in Bulgarian
autistic patient
A. Mandadzhieva1,2, A. Kirov2, I. Pacheva3,4, E. Simeonov5,T .
Todorov1,2, A. Todorova1,2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2IMDL Genome Centre Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical
University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,4University Hospital “St.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 959George ”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,5Pediatric Clinic, Aleksandrovska
University Hospital, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
It is well known that copy number variants (CNVs) with
different frequency and inheritance patterns contribute to
neurodevelopmental disorders etiology and could be con-sidered as signi ﬁcant risk factors. Here we report autistic
behaviour patient with lack of speech and developmental
delay that was referred for genetic testing. Both father andbrother of the proban are heterozygous carriers of beta-
talasemia mutations. The patient was previously tested for
Fragile X-syndrome and X-linked mental retardation relatedgenes were sequenced as well as whole exome sequencing
was performed without detecting any relevant variants
correlating with the clinical features. The only positiveresult was for HLA DQ2 and HLA DQ8 genes predisposing
to celiac disease. At the end aCGH array (180K) was per-
formed and it detected 278kb duplicated region (11p14.3 /chr11: 22102205-22361578) that included the ANO5 and
SLC17A6 genes. This duplication was interpreted as
uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance based on the international
recommendations. Second aCGH analysis with higher
resolution (2,7M) was perform so we can gain additional
information and eventually to clarify the previous ﬁnding.
An additional duplication of 312 kb was detected in chro-
mosome 15 (15q11.2), which included 4 genes: TUBGCP5 ,
CYFIP1 ,NIPA2 and NIPA1 (PMIDs: 28588435,
27566550). Duplication was inherited by the father who is
without clinical manifestation. The 15q11.2 BP1-BP2
region is found duplicated or deleted in people with cog-nitive, language, and behavioral impairmen and a variable
phenotype so probably this ﬁnding is the leading cause for
the clinical features in the affected child.
A. Mandadzhieva: None. A. Kirov: None. I. Pacheva:
None. E. Simeonov: None. T. Todorov: None. A.
Todorova: None.
E-P09.10
Metabolism of vitamin D system in children with autismspectrum disorders
S. Lisniak, Y. Grechanina
Kharkov interregional specialized medical genetic center,Kharkiv, Ukraine
Introduction: The frequency of autistic spectrum disorders
(ASD) over the past 5 years has increased from 1:110 to1:68 and continues to grow. An important role in etio-
pathogenesis of ASD is given to metabolic disorders, in
particular, to the disorder of metabolism of vitamin D sys-tem, which plays one of the leading roles in maintaining the
epigenetic health of the organism.Purpose: To study the state of vitamin D metabolism in
children with ASD for the development of the examination
and treatment algorithms.
Results: We examined 130 children: 86 with ASD and 44
neurotypical. The polymorphism Bsml of the VDR gene
was studied: bb (pathological homozygote) - 13 (15.20%)and 0 (0%), respectively, Bb - 43 (50.00%) and 26
(59.09%), BB - 29 (33.72%) and 18 (40.90%). 95% of
children with ASD showed a decrease of 25-OH-D level inthe blood, whereas in the control group in only 9% cases.
Polymorphic variants of the genes methylation cycle were
studied: an increase in the frequency of MTHFR 677 C/Tpolymorphisms (47.67% and 36.36%, respectively),
MTHFR 677 T/T (9.30% and 6.82%), MTRR 66 G/G
(31.40% and 25.00%), MTR 2756 A/G (44.19% and34.09%).
Conclusions: The speci ﬁc weight of vitamin D de ﬁciency
in children with ASD occupies one of the leading places andfrequent combination with a disorder of the methylation
cycle allows to carry out effective complex therapy.
S. Lisniak: None. Y. Grechanina: None.
E-P09.11
Identi ﬁcation of 4q24 microdeletion in a child with autism
spectrum disorder, epilepsy and postaxial polydactyly
O. Novoselova1,2
1Filatov Children's clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research
Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Identi ﬁcation of rare CNVs leads to the great
difﬁculties in evaluating the clinical signi ﬁcance of these
chromosomal changes, and this is an important part of
genomic research.
Materials and Methods: We examined a 6-years old
male patient with a mild dysmorphic features: short
palpebral ﬁssures, long eyelashes, large ears with ﬂeshy
lobe and outward turned helix, hyperlaxity of joints. The
boy is only child of non-consanguineous healthy parents
with no history of congenital anomalies or developmentaldelay. The boy was born with uses of vacuum extraction
after 41 weeks of an uneventful pregnancy. At birth, he
presented macrosomia (4230g/57cm, head circumference37cm), bilateral postaxial polydactyly and stridor. Devel-
opmental delay presented from early stages, later he
demonstrated poor speech. He was diagnosed autismspectrum disorder at the age of 3 years. At the age of 5
years he demonstrated subclinical epileptiform activity
on EEG.
Results : Chromosomal microarray analysis using Affy-
metrix Cytoscan 750k array revealed a 6 Mb microdeletion960 J. del Picchiaat 4q24 region (arr[hg19] 4q24(101574821_107631432)
x1). Due to bioinformatics assay deletion was classi ﬁed as
variant of unknown signi ﬁcance. However, deletions
comprising the region 4q24 have recently been described
among individuals with an overlapping phenotype. The
CXXC4 gene located in deleted region might be a candidategene for postaxial polydactyly, as it inhibits the Wnt-
signaling pathway and subsequently transcription of GLI3
gene, which is associated with polydactyly.
Conclusions: We assume that the 4q24 locus is
associated with a combination of polydactyly and mental
retardation. Finding candidate genes associated withcognitive impairment is a potential target for further
investigation.
O. Novoselova: None.
E-P09.12
Analysis of ATXN1 andATXN2 repeat length in C9ORF72
expansion carriers
A. Marjanovic1,2, V. Dobricic1, M. Brankovic1,2, M. Jankovic1,
G. Mandic1,2, E. Stefanova1,2, Z. Stevic1,2, I. Novakovic1,2,V .
Kostic1,2
1Neurology Clinic, Belgrade, Serbia,2Faculty of Medicine,
Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: Phenotypic spectrum of C9ORF72 hex-
anucleotide expansion, besides amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), is widening toother neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer ’s
disease (AD) and Huntington disease like (HD like) syn-
drome. Latest studies hypothesize possible role of CAGrepeats of ATXN1 andATXN2 gene in phenotypic expres-
sion of C9ORF72 expansion carriers.
Materials and Methods: A large cohort of Serbian
patients diagnosed as ALS (311), FTD (276), AD (170), HD
like (145) was analyzed to determine the number of
C9ORF72 repeats using standard PCR ampli ﬁcation with
oneﬂuorescently labeled primer followed by fragment
analysis on capillary electrophoresis. Repeat-primed PCR
was performed for apparently normal homozygous samples.In addition, all C9ORF72 expansion carriers were screened
to estimate the number of CAG repeat length in ATXN1 and
ATXN2 using one ﬂuorescently labeled primer and sized by
capillary electrophoresis.
Results: The presence of hexanucleotide repeats was
detected in 12 ALS (3,86%), 5 FTD (1,81%) and 1 HD like(0,7%) patients. One (0,59%) AD patient had borderline
repeats number. In majority of C9ORF72 expansion carriers
ATXN1 and ATXN2 repeat length was normal. The most
frequent ATXN1 allele was with 29 repeats and the most
frequent ATXN2 allele was with 22 repeats. Intermediaterepeat length allele of ATXN1 (35 repeats) was detected in
only one ALS patient. Intermediate repeat length of ATXN2
(27 and 28 repeats) was detected in 2 ALS patients.
Conclusion: To elucidate the signi ﬁcance of ATXN1 and
ATXN2 intermediate repeats among ALS C9ORF72 carriers
further analysis needs to be conducted.
A. Marjanovic: None. V. Dobricic: None. M. Branko-
vic: None. M. Jankovic: None. G. Mandic: None. E.
Stefanova: None. Z. Stevic: None. I. Novakovic: None. V.
Kostic: None.
E-P09.14
Further delineation of ACPHD syndrome and a novel
mutation in DNAJC3
S. Zeybek1, G. Farre2, M. Öztürk1, B. Albuz1, S. Beltran2,A .
Bowcock3, G. Çetin1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School of
Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey,2CNAG-CRG, Centre
for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science andTechnology, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,
3Department of Dermatology, Oncological Sciences and
Genetics and Genome Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine atMount Sinai, New York, NY, United States
We recently identi ﬁed two siblings from consanguineous
parents who shared similar phenotypic features. These
included motor and mental retardation, cerebellar ataxia,
neuropathy, bilateral hearing loss, endocrine changes andsome congenital anomalies including microcephaly, facial
asymmetry, tubular nose, prominent ears. We performed
chromosomal microarray analysis and whole exomesequencing on the family to identify the genetic cause. No
copy number changes were detected, but we identi ﬁed a p.
Arg415Pro homozygous mutation in DNAJC3 gene in bothaffected siblings. This mutation was predicted to be dama-
ging and was not present in Exac or Kaviar databases.
DNAJC3 is a co-chaperone of BiP, an endoplasmatic reti-culum member of the HSP70 family, which promotes normal
protein folding. Homozygous mutations in the DNAJC3 gene
were recently identi ﬁed as being causative for combined
cerebellar and peripheral ataxia with hearing loss and dia-
betes mellitus (ACPHD) syndrome [OMIM #616192] and
since then one patient with hypothyroidism in addition toACPHD has been reported. The clinical features of the
patients were consistent with ACPHD syndrome, but are now
further expanded to include growth hormone and thyroidhormone de ﬁciencies and mild dysmorphic features. Given
the crucial role of DNAJC3 in endoplasmatic reticulum
protein folding, the clinical phenotype of the patients withDNAJC3 mutations may correlate with the overlapping fea-
tures of the unfolded protein response diseases likeAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 961Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome, Wolcott-Rallison syndrome,
and Wolfram syndrome type 1.
S. Zeybek: None. G. Farre: None. M. Öztürk: None. B.
Albuz: None. S. Beltran: None. A. Bowcock: None. G.
Çetin: None.
E-P09.15
An Iranian patient with Charcot Marie Tooth type 2 caused
by a novel GDAP1 mutation
A. Kouroshnia1, E. Davoudi-Dehaghani2, M. Zafarghandi1,S .
Dabbagh-Bagheri1, T. Shirzad1, H. Bagherian1, S. Zeinali1,2
1Dr. Zeinali's Medical Genetics Lab, Kawsar Human Genetics
Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research
Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran,
Islamic Republic of
Introduction: Charcot Marie Tooth Type 2 (CMT2) is a
type of CMT which is characterized by distal limb muscleweakness and atrophy.So far more than 20 different genes
have been identi ﬁed for CMT2.
Materials and Methods: A 4-year-old boyfrom an
Iranian consanguineous family with muscle weakness,
walking dif ﬁculty, severe peripheral polyneuropathy, are-
ﬂexia and kyphoscoliosis, referred to Kawsar Human
Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), was investigated in
this study. Whole exome sequencing was used to ﬁnd the
genetic cause of the disease. Sanger sequencing wasperformed to con ﬁrm the NGS ﬁnding and genotyping the
parents.
Result: A novel homozygous splice site mutation (c.579
+5G>C) in GDAP1 gene was identi ﬁed in the proband. The
results of family segregation analysis and in silico study
showed that this mutation cancause CMT disease type 2.
Discussion: Here we report a new mutation in the
GDAP1 gene in an Iranian patient with CMT2. Despite the
importance of the study on genetic causes of CMT incountries with high rate of consanguineous marriages, only
limited studies have been performed on the molecular
genetics of the different types of CMT in Iran. It is clear thatidenti ﬁcation of common causes of CMT in Iranian
population can be helpful for genetic counseling and
designing a cost effective molecular diagnostic algorithmfor this disease in Iran.
Keywords: Charcot Marie Tooth Type 2, GDAP1 gene,
novel mutation
M.Kouroshnia: None. E. Davoudi-Dehaghani: None.
M. Zafarghandi: None. S. Dabbagh-Bagheri: None.
T. Shirzad: None. H. Bagherian: None. S.
Zeinali: None.E-P09.16
Behavioral phenotype related to CNV in 2q13: report of
one patient affected by duplication and a patient carrying a
deletion
M. Vismara1, F. Scionti2, L. Pensabene2, K. Roppa2,G .
Romano2, M. Ceravolo2, D. Concolino2
1PhD school of medical genetics, Sapienza University, Roma,
Italy,2UOC “Pediatria Universitaria ”, Azienda Ospedaliera
“Pugliese-Ciaccio ”–Università “Magna Graecia ”,
Catanzaro, Italy
Two unrelated patients with behavioral phenotype and a
CNV affecting the same region in 2q13 are here presented:
one has a deletion (patient A), and the other a duplication(patient B). Patient A, female, clinical diagnosis: ”Border-
line intellectual functioning +mixed disorder of scholastic
skills ”. Last follow-up at 10 +4/12 years: height: 75
th-90th
pc; weight: 75th-90thpc; head circumference: 51cm; Tan-
ner’s scale: B1-P2, thelarche. Dysmorphic features reported:
low frontal hairline, low ears implant, hypertelorism, cubi-tus valgus, right convex scoliosis; signs of developmental
dyspraxia.Patient B, male, clinical diagnosis: “pervasive
developmental disorder not otherwise speci ﬁed with speech
delay and stereotypies ”, last follow-up at 10 +6/12 years:
height: 10
thpc; weight: 10th-25thpc; head circumference:
50cm; intermammillary distance: 16cm; Tanner ’s scale: G2
(testis 4cc). Dysmorphic features reported: asymmetric and
long head and face, low frontal hairline, hypotelorism,
enophthalmos, deviated nose, thin lips, high-arched palate,unusual voice ’s pitch, stiff right elbow, 5
thﬁnger clin-
odactyly; right genu valgum; internal foot rotation; no
scoliosis. SNP-arrays were obtained at 75kb resolutionusing a Cytoscan HD. Data was analyzed using ChAS and
UCSC ’s hgLiftOver and genomeBrowser. Both patients are
affected by a 492kb CNV in the same region located in2q13 cytoband. According to ISCN2013 and hg38, result
for patient A is arr[hg38]2q13(110116257-110608419)x1,
and arr[hg38]2q13(110119299-110611687)x3 for patient B.RT-PCR on NPHP1 was used to con ﬁrm results. Genes
involved in both CNVs are NPHP1 ,LIMS3 ,RGPD5 , and
RGPD6 ; there are also a miRNA, 3 LOCs and a lincRNA.
The CNV present in Patient B also comprises the ﬁnal part
ofMALL .
M. Vismara: None. F. Scionti: None. L. Pensabene: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Magna Graecia
University. K. Roppa: None. G. Romano: None. M.
Ceravolo: None. D. Concolino: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Magna Graecia University.962 J. del PicchiaE-P09.17
Search of genetic markers associated with cognitive
performance in the elderly by whole exome sequencing: a
pilot study
V. A. Stepanov1,2, K. Vagaitseva1, A. Zarubin1, A. Bocharova1,
O. Makeeva1,3
1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Medical
Research Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation,2Tomsk State
University, Tomsk, Russian Federation,3Nebbiolo Cenere for
Clinical Trials, Tomsk, Russian Federation
Cognitive performance is an important endophenotype for
various neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases.The aim of the study was to ﬁnd new genetic markers,
located in the exome, associated with the variability of the
cognitive functions in the normal elderly. The cognitivefunctions were assessed using the Montreal Cognitive
Assessment (MoCA) in 710 elderly from Tomsk, Russia.
The sample was subdivided into 4 quartiles according tototal MoCA score. Subsets of individuals from the 1
stand
4thquartiles were subjected to whole exome sequencing
using SeqCap EZ MedExome kit which covers approxi-mately 1.5% of the human genome. Four genetic markers
located in the introns of three genes (PKD1 on chromosome
16, ATAD5 and DNAH17 on chromosome 17) were foundto be exome-wide signi ﬁcantly associated with the cognitive
performance. All 4 SNPs as well as their respective genes
were not found previously in any association with cognitivefunctions, neurodegenerative or neuropsychiatric diseases.
PKD1 encodes polycystin 1, transient receptor potential
channel interacting protein, involved in polycystic kidneydisease. Genetic markers in ATAD5, encoding of ATPase
family AAA domain containing protein 5, were found
associated with height and body mass index in previousGWA studies, while genetic variability in dynein axonemal
heavy chain 17 gene (DNAH17) contribute to triglyceride
levels. The associations found in this pilot study are nowunder replicative analysis in a wider sample from the nor-
mal elderly population characterized by the battery of
cognitive tests. This work was supported by the RussianScience Foundation (project # 16-14-00020).
V.A. Stepanov: None. K. Vagaitseva: None. A.
Zarubin: None. A. Bocharova: None. O. Makeeva: None.
E-P09.18
Classic Dravet Syndrome in an adolescent male –case
report
T. Marcovici1,2, M. Puiu1,2, C. Bacos3, I. Jurca-Simina1,2,O .
Belei1,2, O. Marginean1,2, A. Grozavu41Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Timisoara, Romania,2Louis Turcanu Children Emergency
Hospital, Timisoara, Romania,3Dr. Bacos Cosma Medical
Center, Timisoara, Romania,4County Emergency Hospital
Bacau, Bacau, Romania
Introduction: Dravet syndrome is a genetic severe myo-
clonic epilepsy of childhood with worldwide birth pre-
valence is <1/40,000. Affected children present from theﬁrst year of life prolonged febrile and non-febrile, gen-
eralized, clonic or hemiclonic epileptic seizures. 85-90% of
Dravet syndrome cases are due to a mutation or deletion intheSCN1A gene. This disorder can be autosomal dominant
inherited but most are due to de novo mutations. Moderate
to severe cognitive impairment and intractable epilepsy iscommon. Diagnosis is based on clinical and electro-
encephalographic (EEG) ﬁndings. The most common cause
of death is status epilepticus.
Materials and Methods : We present a boy aged 12 years
and 7 months diagnosed from the ﬁrst year of life with
Dravet syndrome. The patient ’s clinical work-up included
neurologic, functional and imagistic assessment (brain MRI,
electroencephalogram). SCN1A gene sequencing was
performed.
Results : Our patient has often been hospitalized for
severe recurrent febrile seizures, some accompanied by
apnea requiring orotracheal intubation and assisted ventila-tion. The patient presents daily partial seizures under
antiepileptic treatment and tonic-clonic febrile generalized
seizures during upper-tract respiratory simple infections. Heshows developmental regression (moderate cognitive
impairment, lack of coordination, hyperactivity, dif ﬁculty
in relating to others), restless sleep and requires constantcare from his mother. The electroencephalogram showed
abnormal activity. SCN1A sequencing revealed
c.4970_4971insATCG, p.Thr1658SerfsX14, a not yetreported small insertion.
Conclusions: This is a typical case of Dravet syndrome
with dif ﬁcult seizure management. The condition severely
impacts the patient ’s and family ’s quality of life and the
long-term prognosis is poor.
T. Marcovici: None. M. Puiu: None. C. Bacos: None. I.
Jurca-Simina: None. O. Belei: None. O. Marginean:
None. A. Grozavu: None.
E-P09.19
Novel homozygous KCNJ10 mutation in a patient with non-
syndromic early-onset cerebellar ataxia
F. Nicita1, G. Tasca2, M. Nardella1, E. Bellacchio1,I .
Camponeschi1, G. Vasco1, T. Schirinzi1, E. Bertini1, G. Zanni1Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9631Bambino Gesù Children ’s Research Hospital, Rome, Italy,
2Fondazione Policlinico Universitario ‘A. Gemelli ’, Rome,
Italy
Mutations in KCNJ10, which encodes the inwardly recti-
fying potassium channel Kir4.1, a primary regulator ofmembrane excitability and potassium homeostasis, cause a
complex syndrome characterized by seizures, sensorineural
deafness, ataxia, intellectual disability and electrolyteimbalance called SeSAME/EAST syndrome. We describe a
41 years old patient with non-syndromic, slowly pro-
gressive early-onset ataxia. Targeted next generationsequencing identi ﬁed a novel c.180T>G (p.Ile60Met) mis-
sense homozygous mutation. The mutated residue Ile60Met
likely impairs phosphatidylinositol 4, 5 bisphosphate (PIP2)binding which is known to play an essential role in channel
gating. Our study expands the clinical and mutational
spectrum of KCNJ10-related disorders and suggests thatscreening of this gene should be implemented in patients
with early-onset ataxia, with or without syndromic features.
F. Nicita: None. G. Tasca: None. M. Nardella: None. E.
Bellacchio: None. I. Camponeschi: None. G. Vasco:
None. T. Schirinzi: None. E. Bertini: None. G.
Zanni: None.
E-P09.20
Heterozygous premature stop mutation in GAL gene maynot the cause of epilepsy
K. Arvai1, B. Kocsis-Deák2, V. Klujber1, B. Balla1, B. Tobias1,J .
Kosa1, P. Lakatos3
1PentacoreLab Ltd., Budapest, Hungary,2Semmelweis
University 1st Department of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary,
31st Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: Epilepsy has a complex etiology. Despite
evidence for the participation of genetic factors, the geneticbasis of epilepsy remains largely unknown. Here we are
presenting a case of a 8 year old girl, with healthy parents
and with epilepsy and mental retardation. Dravet syndromewas rule out before our examination.
Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was
extracted from her blood sample and ﬁrst analyzed with a
comprehensive epilepsy gene panel test, which contains 200
most relevant genes for epilepsy. Capture based library
preparation (GeneSG) was used. Second, exome sequencingwas performed using Agilent SureSelect V5 kit coupled
with Illumina HiSeq sequencing. Sequencing reads were
mapped to the reference genome (hg38) and after variantcalling the variants were classi ﬁed based on ESP, ExAc,
ClinVar and HGMD information.Results: Gene panel test identi ﬁed a heterozygous variant
with uncertain signi ﬁcance in the AMT gene (c.893C>T)
suggesting a possible diagnosis of glycine encephalopathy,
but clinical tests became negative. Exome sequencing
revealed a heterozygous likely pathogenic premature stop
codon in GAL gene (c.7C>T). GAL gene is linked tofamilial temporal lobe epilepsy (AD). The minor allele
frequency of the T allele is 0.00006 in ExAC. Family
analysis discovered that, the healthy father is a carrier of thismutation.
Conclusions: The heterozygous premature stop codon
mutation of the GAL gene may not the cause of epilepsy.
K. Arvai: None. B. Kocsis-Deák: None. V. Klujber:
None. B. Balla: None. B. Tobias: None. J. Kosa: None. P.
Lakatos: None.
E-P09.21
EXOSC3 mutation in infant with hypotonia and cerebellarhypoplasia
V. Maroulis1, E. Goula2, S. Mouskou3, M. Papadakis1,A .
Malama4
1Neolab SA, Athens, Greece,2Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, P.
& A. Kyriakou General Children ’s Hospital, Athens, Greece,
3Neurology Department, P.& A. Kyriakou General Children ’s
Hospital, Athens, Greece,4Radiology Department, Agia So ﬁa
General Children ’s Hospital, Athens, Greece
Α2,5 months-old infant girl, was admitted to the ED in a
pre-arrest state and was resuscitated successfully, although
she continued to present a very important respiratory dis-
tress syndrome that demanded intubation and mechanicalventilation subsequently. The baby presented microcephaly,
generalized hypotonia with present tendon re ﬂexes, ble-
pharoptosis and nystagmus with no eye contact, no reactionto stimuli, and failure to thrive. From her medical history,
she was a preterm baby (35w), IUGR (weight of birth
2180g), from healthy parents, who presented hypotonia atbirth and had been hospitalized at the NICU for feeding
difﬁculties and swallowing insuf ﬁciency. She had also one
more hospitalization because of reduced feeding, vomitingand suspicion of aspiration. Infection and metabolic
screening, karyotype and gene test for Prader-Willi were
performed and were negative.
Cerebral MRI indicated an important cerebellar hypopla-
sia with a predominant frontal lobe, hypoplasia of middle
cerebellar peduncles and vermis, as well as communicationof the 4
thventricle with mega cisterna magna.
During the last hospitalization at the PICU, the patient
passed away due to severe respiratory failure andcardiorespiratory arrest. A whole exome sequencing had
already been demanded, that identi ﬁed an homozygous p.964 J. del PicchiaGly31Ala mutation in EXOSC3, posing the diagnosis of
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1B. The p.Gly31Ala
mutation is well correlated with the severe phenotype of
the disease expressed in our patient, as well as with her
Romani origin. A blood sample from the mother of the baby
was requested and the analysis is in progress, in order toprovide genetic counseling.
V. Maroulis: None. E. Goula: None. S. Mouskou:
None. M. Papadakis: None. A. Malama: None.
E-P09.23
Detection of inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) in patientswith psychosis using NGS
S. van Koningsbruggen1, T. van Amelsvoort2, M. Marcelis2,P .
Martinez2, M. Mannens1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Department of Psychiatry and
Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht,
Netherlands
Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are a group of genetic
disorders involving abnormalities in biochemical processes.The majority of IEMs are caused by defective enzymes,
which often results in accumulation of toxic upstream
substances leading to problems. IEMs are considered as rarediseases occurring in less than 1/100.000 live births and
presenting during early childhood. The true incidence is
thought to be much higher because of under recognition ofclinical manifestations, especially as symptoms can be quite
aspeci ﬁc and diverse. It is hypothesized that patients with
psychotic disorders can be present in the under diagnosedgroup of IEMs. It is important to recognize the (neuro)
psychiatric presentations of IEMs, since some IEMs are
easily treatable and since treatment is more ef ﬁcacious at
early stages of psychiatric manifestations, before irrever-
sible neurological damage occurs. Unfortunately, diagnosis
is often missed or delayed resulting in poorer prognosis.The objective of this study is to investigate the diagnostic
yield of a NGS based gene panel for neurodegenerative
metabolic disorders into a clinical psychiatric setting. Weaim to detect rare, treatable organic causes of psychotic
disorders in patients at ‘’high risk ’’.W e’re fully analyzing
the coding regions of 67 IEM genes using a type-A genepanel in 100 patients with, preferably, a psychotic disorder
and additional criteria such as cognitive decline, treatment
resistance or neurological symptoms. In addition, we pro-vide pharmaco genetic information by genotyping the most
relevant anti-psychotic metabolizing sequence variants in
cytotochrome p450 genes.S. van Koningsbruggen: None. T. van Amelsvoort:
None. M. Marcelis: None. P. Martinez: None. M.
Mannens: None.
E-P09.24
A case with Joubert syndrome with a new mutation in theCEP290 gene
M. Balasar1,Ö .K ırbıyık2, G. D. Emlik3, H. Yavuz4
1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Medical Genetics, KONYA, Turkey,2İzmir
Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, Department of
Medical Genetics, İzmir, Turkey,3Necmettin Erbakan
University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Radiology,Konya, Turkey,
4Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram
Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Konya, Turkey
Introduction: Joubert Syndrome is a rare genetic disease
with wide clinical and genetic heterogenity. The ‘‘molar
tooth sign ’at the neuroradiological imaging, hypotonia and
developmental delay are essential features for diagnosis of
this disease. Up till now, 34 different genes have been
identi ﬁed and most of these demonstrate autosomal reces-
sive pattern. Here, two mutations on CEP290 gene, one of
which we ﬁrstly reporting in literature, are presented.
Material-Methods: 7 months old female patient admitted
to our clinic with developmental delay and upward motion
of eyes. She was second child of an unrelated parents. She
was born at the 43th weeks of gestation with vaginaldelivery and she showed no complication postnatally. At
the physical examination wide-prominent forehead, rotatory
nystagmus, left upper eyelid ptosis, hypertelorism, ante-verted nares, wide philtrum and inverted nipples observed.
Fundoscopy revealed hypopigmented regions at the retina.
Cranial MRI showed ‘molar tooth sign ’, characterized by
dysplastic appearance of vermis and cerebellar hemispheres.
Results: Karyotype analysis was 46,XX. Next generation
sequence analysis of CEP290(NM_025114) gene showedmutations of c.5493delA and c.5975_5976delGA. The
variant of c.5493delA was previously reported as patho-
genic at ClinVar and HGMD databases, whereasc.5975_5976delGA variant was not reported at neither of
these databases. Because of frameshift nature of this
deletion and patient ’s consistent phenotype with Joubert
syndrome, we assume this variation to be pathogenic.
Conclusions: We report a novel mutation in CEP290
gene which may cause Joubert syndrome.
M. Balasar: None. Ö. K ırbıyık:None. G.D. Emlik:
None. H. Yavuz: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 965E-P09.25
A case with Kleefstra Syndrome derived from ring
chromosome 9
B. S. Eklioglu1, P. Tasdemir2, L. Simsek2, M. E. Atabek1
1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Konya, Turkey,
2Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey
Kleefstra Syndrome (KS,OMIM 610253) is a rare neuro-
genetic disorder estimated to affect at least 1:200,000
individuals. KS is most commonly caused by deletion in the
9q34.3 chromosomal region that includes EHMT1 gene and
characterized by intellectual disability, childhood hypoto-
nia, and distinctive facial features (arched eyebrows, mid-
face hypoplasia, anteverted nares, full everted lower lip).Also clinical features include congenital heart and urogen-
ital defects, epilepsy, behavioral and psychiatric disorders.
The proband, a 2 years old girl, was the second-born childof nonconsanguineous marriage. She was born at term
weighed 2500 gr. On examination, facial dysmorphic fea-
tures including arched eyebrows, low-set ears and thickenedear helices, microcephaly, thickened lips were observed.
Cytogenetic analysis revealed ring chromosome formation
derived from chromosome 9. The karyotype was interpretedas 46,XX,r(9)(p24q34). DNA microarray analysis was
performed by Affymetrix Cytoscan Optima (Affymetrix,
USA) and the result was arr[hg19] 9p24.3p24.1 (203,861-8,348,602)x3 arr[hg19] 9q34.3(140,719,389-141,020,389)
x1. Here we present a girl that present distinctive facial
features with Kleefstra Syndrome resulted from ringchromosome 9.
B.S. Eklioglu: None. P. Tasdemir: None. L. Simsek:
None. M.E. Atabek: None.
E-P09.26
Leptin receptor gene variant rs1137101 is associated withmultiple sclerosis onset age
I. Kolic1, M. Zivkovic1, A. Stankovic1, E. Dincic2, D. Alavantic1,
L. Stojkovic1
1Laboratory for Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Vinca
Institute of Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia,2Clinic for Neurology, Military Medical Academy,
Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: Changes in leptin receptor (LEPR) activity
are related to pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS). MS isa complex neurological disease whose prognosis depends
on various factors such as disease onset age, gender, type ofneurological dysfunction, etc. LEPR gene variant
rs1137101 (c.668A>G, p.Gln223Arg) alters receptor bind-
ing activity. In this study, we aimed to investigate the
association of LEPR rs1137101 gene variant with clinical
parameters of MS.
Materials and Methods: The study included 475 patients
with relapsing-remitting (RR) MS: female to male
ratio=1,6, age(mean±SD) =38,1±10,4 years, disease onset
age(mean±SD) =30,8±9,0 years, EDSS(mean±SD) =3,1
±1,8, MSSS(mean±SD) =4,8±2,4. Genotyping was per-
formed using TaqMan ®technology. Statistical analysis
was done using SPSS software (SPSS 17.0).
Results: We found a signi ﬁcantly different distribution of
rs1137101 genotypes by recessive model, GG vs. AA +AG,
according to MS onset age cutoff of 30 years (MS onset age≤30: AA +AG=75,6% and GG =24,4%, MS onset age ˃30:
AA+AG=84,9% and GG =15,1%; Fisher's exact test p =
0,015). Carriers of A allele had a more frequent MSoccurrence after the age of 30, in comparison to GG
genotype carriers, and this association remained signi ﬁcant
after the adjustment for gender (adjusted OR =1,82, ±95%
CI=1,13-2,91, p =0,013).
Conclusions: LEPR gene variant rs1137101 is associated
with onset of RR MS in an age-dependent manner. Thecurrent ﬁnding should be veri ﬁed in a larger study group.
Acknowledgements: This study was conducted as part of
the grants OI175085 and III41028, ﬁnanced by the Ministry
of Education, Science and Technological Development,
Republic of Serbia.
I. Kolic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. A. Stankovic: None.
E. Dincic: None. D. Alavantic: None. L. Stojkovic: None.
E-P09.30
MYH7-related myopathy in аBulgarian family: a novel
splice acceptor variant in patients with late onset clinical
manifestation established by NGS
S. Tsaneva1,2, T. Todorov1, A. Maver3, B. Peterlin3,V .
Guergueltcheva4, A. Todorova1,2, V. Mitev2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University Medical Center, Ljubljana,Slovenia,
4Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital So ﬁamed,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
A patient from Bulgaria with suspected clinical diagnosis of
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1A was tested for
mutations in the MYOT gene [OMIM *604103], unfortu-
nately with a negative result. The patient has a positive
family history - father, two aunts and sister with the same966 J. del Picchiaclinical manifestations. Based on the clinical symptoms of
the patent: muscle pain in the legs and hands, dif ﬁculty in
climbing stairs, EMG which showed myogenic damage, we
performed NGS (Illumina TruSight One). Targeted eva-
luation of genes associated with the clinical symptoms of
the patient showed a heterozygous splice acceptor variantc.5560-2A>C (NM_000257.3) in MYH7 gene. The detected
variant was con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. c.5560-2A>C
is not recorded in the database dbSNP and was not presentamong 60000 controls subjects of the ExAC project. The
detected variant is predicted to result in an in-frame deletion
of exon 38 of the MYH7 transcript. A variant with similareffect was identi ﬁed in patients with MYH7-related myo-
pathies. Segregation analysis of the family showed the same
variants in the patient ’s sister and her two children (who do
not have clinical presentation at the moment). The mother
of the patient with a congenital heart defect is not a carrier
of the detected variant. In conclusion, we present a novelsplice acceptor variant which can lead to skipping of exon
38 of the MYH7 gene. The detected variant was established
only in the family members with muscular clinical mani-festations problems.
S. Tsaneva: None. T. Todorov: None. A. Maver: None.
B. Peterlin: None. V. Guergueltcheva: None. A. Todor-
ova: None. V. Mitev: None.
E-P09.31
CNVs associated with autism spectrum disorder in a cohort
of children from Goiás (Brazil)
A. D. da Cruz1,2,3, I. P. Pinto1,2, G. R. Nascimento1,M .A .
Gigonzac1,3, A. S. da Cruz1, T. C. Vieira1,3, D. M. Cunha1,C .L .
Ribeiro1,2, C. C. da Silva1,2,3, L. B. Minasi1
1Ponti ﬁcal Catholic University of Goiás, School of Agricultural
and Biological Sciences, Genetics Master ’s Program, Replicon
Research Group, Goiânia, Brazil,2Federal University of
Goiás, Biotechnology and Biodiversity PhD Program,
Goiânia, Brazil,3Human Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, Secretary of Goias State for Public Health,
Goiânia, Brazil
Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neu-
rodevelopmental disorder with a complex genetic archi-
tecture. The worldwide prevalence of autism is increasing.However, autism prevalence is low (0.27%) in Brazil due to
misdiagnosis of the disorder.
Material and Methods: We report on 16 probands with
ASD referred by the public health system of Goiás. ASD
assessment using Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised
(ADI-R), G-band karyotyping, and PCR of FMR1 using
Amplidex
®kit were carried out for all patients. Chromoso-
mal Microarray Analysis (CMA) using GeneChip®CytoScanHDTMarray was done for patients who had
normal results in karyotype and PCR.
Results: The behavioral phenotypes for all participants
were classi ﬁed in the ASD according to ADI-R results
whose karyotypes showed neither visible numerical nor
structural chromosomal aberrations. FMR1 analysis
revealed two children affected by Fragile-X Syndrome.
CMA showed a total of 21 CNVs identi ﬁed in 12/14 (86%)
patients. A total of 13/21 pathogenic CNVs were observedin 8 patients, all located at genetic ASD hotspots, including
22q11.23, Xp22.33 (2/13), 16p11.2 (3/13), harboring no
OMIM genes. However, the hotspots at 15q13.3, 15q11.2(2/13), and Xp11.23 (2/13) harbored CHRNA7 ,PWRN2 and
ZNF630 genes, respectively, associated with ASD. The
remaining CNVs were classi ﬁed as having unknown
clinical signi ﬁcance, distributed at loci: 2q12.2, 3p22.1,
9p21.1 (3/8), Xp22.32, Xq21.1, and Xq24. Two patients
showed no alterations in CMA.
Conclusions: Identify CNVs and genes using CMA in
our patients was very important to understand the hetero-
geneous spectrum of ASD. The results helped the clinicalmanagement of all patients.
A.D. da Cruz: None. I.P. Pinto: None. G.R. Nasci-
mento: None. M.A. Gigonzac: None. A.S. da Cruz: None.
T.C. Vieira: None. D.M. Cunha: None. C.L. Ribeiro:
None. C.C. da Silva: None. L.B. Minasi: None.
E-P09.32
Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm and renal failure in
an adult patient with undiagnosed Neuro ﬁbromatosis type
1 (NF1)
M. Tzetis1, S. Koutsias2, E. Mourmoura3, A. Mitrakos4,I .
Fylaktou4, I. Papathanasiou3, M. Tsipi4, M. Poulou4, K. Kosma1,
A. Giannoukas5, A. Tsezou6
1National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Department
of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece,2University of Thessaly,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Vascular Surgery, Larissa,Greece,
3University of Thessaly, Faculty of Medicine,
Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Larissa,
Greece,4National and Kapodistrian University Athens,
Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece,5University
of Thessaly, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Vascular
Surgery, Larissa,, Greece,6University of Thessaly, Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Biology, Larissa, Greece
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is an
autosomal dominant disorder affecting 1/ 3000 individuals
and caused by SNVs, deletions and duplications affecting
theNF1 gene. Vascular lesions of medium and large size
arteries and veins are a well recognized, albeit rare, mani-
festation of NF1. We report on an adult patientAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 967retrospectively diagnosed (clinically and molecularly) with
NF1 after surgery for a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
and renal failure.
Materials and Methods: A 37 year old female patient
was admitted for emergency surgery due to a ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm, renovascular hypertension andrenal failure. Signs of NF1: multiple café-au-lait macules,
axillary ﬂeckling, multiple cutaneous neuro ﬁbromas, and an
external vaginal plexiform neuro ﬁbroma, became evident
upon patient examination. DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood and was analyzed by NGS with a
customized NF1 gene panel (QIAseq, Qiagen GmBh,
Hilden Germany) that covers 100% of the coding exons,
as well as the intron-exon boundaries. Additionally,
Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA) was done usingthe high resolution 2x400K G3 CGH +SNP microarray
platform (G4842A, Design ID 028081, Agilent Technolo-
gies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
Results: NGS did not reveal a pathological SNV for the
NF1 gene but the CMA revealed a novel duplication
covering exons 19-27 of the NF1 gene [arr[GRCh37]
17q11.2(29553704_29562744)x3].
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed a novel NF1 gene
duplication (exons 19-27) in a 37 years old female patientpresenting with mild NF1 but spontaneously ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm. The rare presentation of cases
with NF1 vasculopathy could be due to an under-appreciation of its recurrence.
M. Tzetis: None. S. Koutsias: None. E. Mourmoura:
None. A. Mitrakos: None. I. Fylaktou: None. I.
Papathanasiou: None. M. Tsipi: None. M. Poulou: None.
K. Kosma: None. A. Giannoukas: None. A.
Tsezou: None.
E-P09.33
High Throughput Sequencing identi ﬁesPINK1 p.G47R: A
rare mutation identi ﬁed in a Parkinson ’s disease patient
Y. Muscat1, G. Camilleri1, F. Borg Carbott1, C. Karen1,M .
Mallia2, N. Vella2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1, R. Farrugia1
1University of Malta, Msida, Malta,2Mater Dei Hospital,
Msida, Malta
Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in PTEN induced
kinase-1 ( PINK1 ) reportedly increase risk for late-onset
Parkinson disease (PD). PINK1 localises to the mitochon-
dria, recruiting and phosphorylating Parkin leading tomitophagy of damaged mitochondria. Mutations in PINK1
abolish such effect, increasing the vulnerability of cells to
oxidative stress.
Methods: High throughput sequencing (HTS) of PD
related genes identi ﬁed an extremely rare mutation, c.G139C:p.G47R in exon 1 of PINK1 . The Maltese
Geoparkinson collection (158 patients, 378 matched con-
trols) was genotyped for this variant by PCR and RFLP
using Hpy166II.
Results: The variant (gnomAD maf < 1:10,000) was
identi ﬁed in heterozygosity in a 73 year old male patient
with two affected ﬁrst degree relatives. p.G47R results in
the replacement of glycine, a small amino acid with a non-
polar, aliphatic side chain, with arginine, an amino acid witha large positively charged side chain. G47 is found in the
mitochondrial transit domain (MTD) of PINK1 , which is the
part of the protein responsible for the transport of PINK1 tothe mitochondrion. Data analysis of 101 HTS datasets and
PCR-RFLP of the Maltese Geoparkinson collection did not
identify any other individual with this variant.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of the rare variant p.
G47R in a late-onset PD patient with a family history of the
condition.
Funding: Patient data and samples were collected as part
of the 5
thframework (FP5) EU funded GeoParkinson study,
project number QLK4-CT-1999-01133. HTS was fundedthrough the NGS Project funded by the National Research
and Innovation Programme (2012).
Y. Muscat: None. G. Camilleri: None. F. Borg
Carbott: None. C. Karen: None. M. Mallia: None. N.
Vella: None. S. Bezzina Wettinger: None. R.
Farrugia: None.
E-P09.35
Novel COL4A1 mutation in a fetus with early prenatal onset
of schizencephaly
Y. Tsurusaki, Y. Sato, J. Shibasaki, N. Aida, K. Hiiragi, Y.
Kimura, M. Akahira-Azuma, Y. Enomoto, K. Kurosawa
Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan
Introduction: Schizencephaly is a congenital anomaly
characterized by an abnormal gray matter-lined defectextending from the pial surface to the lateral ventricles.
Moreover, porencephaly is a congenital brain disorder
characterized by cavitation or a cerebrospinal ﬂuid-ﬁlled
cyst in the brain without gray matter lining. To date,
mutations in COL4A1 have been reported to cause por-
encephaly or schizencephaly. Here, we report a Japanesepatient with schizencephaly, determined by serial fetal
ultrasonography, fetal magnetic resonance imaging, and de
novo novel mutation in COL4A1 .
Materials and Methods: To investigate the molecular
basis of a Japanese patient with schizencephaly, genomic
DNA from the patient and his parents was isolated fromperipheral blood by standard protocols after receiving
written informed consent. Genomic DNA was captured968 J. del Picchiausing the TruSight One Sequencing Panel (Illumina, Inc.,
San Diego, CA, USA). Captured DNA was sequenced on a
MiSeq platform (Illumina) with 151 bp paired-end reads.
Results: Average coverage depth of the entire panel was
58.51 reads, with 97.7 % of targeted bases covered at 10×
sequence reads. Targeted resequencing identi ﬁed a novel
heterozygous mutation in COL4A1 , which is a known
schizencephaly-causing gene (NM_001845; c.2645G>A
and c.2646C>A, p.Gly882Glu). Sanger sequencing con-ﬁrmed this variant occurred as a de novo event.
Conclusions: Our report may be useful for determining
the mechanism and developmental process of COL4A1 -
related disease.
Y. Tsurusaki: None. Y. Sato: None. J. Shibasaki:
None. N. Aida: None. K. Hiiragi: None. Y. Kimura:
None. M. Akahira-Azuma: None. Y. Enomoto: None. K.
Kurosawa: None.
E-P09.36
Contribution of genetic variants in the cognition of Mexican
patients with schizophrenia: a pilot study
N. Monroy-Jaramillo1, D. Dávila Ortiz de Montellano1,I .
Fricke-Galindo2, B. Pérez-Aldana2, S. González-Arredondo1,E .
Hernández-Mondragón1, M. López-López2, C. Aviña-Cervantes1,
Y. Rodríguez-Agudelo1
1National Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Mexico,
Mexico,2Metropolitan Autonomous University, Mexico,
Mexico
Introduction: Cognitive impairment is a cardinal symptom
of schizophrenia (SZ), relevant for prognosis and functionalcapacity of patients. Variants of COMT, PRODH andDISC-
1are risk factors for SZ and individually associated with
executive-functions and social-cognition. Their combina-tion may have epistaxis with signi ﬁcant effects on affected
brain regions in SZ. Herein, we describe a cognitive-
molecular evaluation in Mexican SZ patients.
Material and Methods: 9 variants of COMT ,1 5o f
PRODH and 4 of DISC-1 were genotyped in 150 patients
and 150 controls matched for age-gender-ethnicity. Theassociation between alleles/genotypes/haplotypes and the
score in cognitive domains was evaluated by the battery
MATRICS in a subgroup of 40 participants/group.
Results: p.Val158Met COMT (p=0.0006, OR =2.80,
IC95%=1.54-5.09); p.Asp426Asn PRODH (p=0.02,
OR=1.58, IC95% =1.04-2.42) and p.Ser704Cys DISC-1
(p=0.0198, OR =1.8, IC95% =1.68-1.92) were associated
with SZ. Risk alleles of COMT and PRODH in this
subgroup were related to lower scores in MATRICS(p<0.01). The multivariate analysis suggested that COMT
variants might participate in perception and management ofemotions in SZ patients (c.1-98A>G); while p.Val158Met
and c.-225T>C were associated with lower scores in
attention processes. The allele Val158 of COMT degrades
catecholamines faster than the risk allele and has been
related to ef ﬁciency in attention tasks and other cognitive
abilities.
Conclusions: variants of these genes were con ﬁrmed
with SZ risk. COMT variants were associated with
alterations in tests assessing social-cognition and working-memory in SZ patients, but these results should be later
conﬁrmed. COMT could be a marker of cognitive
impairment and candidate for therapeutic interventions inSZ patients. CONACyT_233695.
N. Monroy-Jaramillo: None. D. Dávila Ortiz de
Montellano: None. I. Fricke-Galindo: None. B. Pérez-
Aldana: None. S. González-Arredondo: None. E. Her-
nández-Mondragón: None. M. López-López: None. C.
Aviña-Cervantes: None. Y. Rodríguez-Agudelo:
None.
E-P09.37
Association study of COMT andMAOA genes
polymorphisms on a risk of schizophrenia development in
the Southern Russian patients
V. Kushchenko1, E. Mashkina1, V. Soldatkin2, A. Bouleiko2
1Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian
Federation,2Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don,
Russian Federation
Introduction: For a long time, the dysregulation in dopa-
mine signaling was considered a major mechanism of
schizophrenia development. It is proposed that the increaseof dopamine production results in a psychiatric phenom-
enon called aberrant salience, which forces the brain to
detect various external stimuli as important or life-threatening. Polymorphisms of the dopamine metabolism
genes MAOA andCOMT were studied in order to assess this
hypothesis.
Materials and Methods: The patient group consisted of
100 male and 98 female individuals who suffered from
schizophrenia. The control group consisted of 71 indivi-duals. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood
samples. The potential in ﬂuence of the rs4680 COMT gene
polymorphism and the MAOA-LPR polymorphism onschizophrenia development was studied using PCR.
Results: The study showed a lack of any signi ﬁcant
differences between both groups studied in regard to theVal158Met COMT gene polymorphism. In case of the
MAOA-LPR polymorphism, there were signi ﬁcant differ-
ences between the groups regarding allelic frequencies. Thecontrol group exhibited a higher frequency of 4-tandem
repeats in the promoter region of the gene (p<0,001). InAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 969addition, the female patients demonstrated a higher rate of
the 3-tandem repeats polymorphism than other gendered
groups (p<0.05).
Conclusions: We failed to establish the association of the
Val158Met COMT gene polymorphism with an increased
risk of schizophrenia. On the other hand, the allelesassociated with a decreased activity of the MAOA gene
may potentially contribute to the disorder development. A
further research on the dopamine metabolism genes inrelation to the schizophrenia development is required.
V. Kushchenko: None. E. Mashkina: None. V.
Soldatkin: None. A. Bouleiko: None.
E-P09.38
The prevalence of miR-181b & let-7g expression inschizophrenia cases
S. EROGLU1, O. EROGLU2
1Bilecik State Hospital, Provincial Directorate of Health,
Bilecik, Turkey,2Bilecik Şeyh Edebali University, Faculty of
Science and Letters, Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Bilecik, Turkey
Introduction: The aim of this study is to examine the
diagnostic competence of miR-181b and let-7g blood levels
in schizophrenia cases.
Materials and Methods: 60 patients who are diagnosed
in psychiatry clinic in Bilecik State Hospital were included
in the study. In addition, 6 people who are diagnosed withschizophrenia belonging to 3 different families are included
in the study group. RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and
qRT-PCR steps were performed with Qiagen branded kitsbased on SYBR Green method, using the protocol of the
commercial company. For statistical analysis, - ΔCt values,
obtained from the use of ce-miR-39 Ct values in normal-ization, were used. Differences between groups were tested
by independent sample t test and variance analysis. ROC
analysis was performed to calculate the diagnostic compe-tence. "Fold change" calculations were performed online on
Qiagen webpage. In all analyzes, alpha error level was
accepted as 0.05.
Results : The results are summarized in Table 1
Compared Groups miRNA P value Fold Change AUC Speci ﬁcity Sensitivity
Schizophrenia (54
patients)miR-
181b<0.001 -7.89 0.817 89% 72%
let-7g 0.895
Family (6 patients) miR-
181b<0.001 -9.75 0.880 93% 86%
let-7g 0.746Conclusion: We have observed that only miR-181b differ
in schizophrenia cases. It is also important that miR-181b
upregulation found to be signi ﬁcant in all family cases.
Signi ﬁcantly, these changes in miRNA expression may
have the potential of new biomarkers and this miR-181b
upregulation in schizophrenia may also provide the basis fornew clinical diagnostics.
S. Eroglu: None. O. Eroglu: None.
E-P09.39
The identifying in SCN1A gene a novel variants associated
with epilepsy
M. Belenikin1, A. Slavokhotova2
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State
University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation,2Vavilov
Institute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation
Background: Mutations in SCN1A gene are the most
common cause of GEFS +(generalized epilepsy with febrile
seizures plus), SMEI/Dravet syndrome (severe myoclonic
epilepsy of infancy). Currently more than six hundred
clinically important variants are known in SCN1A gene (710
pathogenic in according ClinVar database).
The aims of study: Here, we report mainly for a novel
missense and nonsense mutations found in SCN1A ,
associated with SMEI or GEFS +, according to our clinical
research study.
Methods: DNA isolation was performed by MagNAPur-
eLC2; 90 biological samples (including probands, parents, a
few controls) were tested by NGS (454 GSJunior sequencer
(we have conducted research in 2014-2015), NimbleGenSeqCap target enrichment) for genes associated with
epileptic encephalopathy (34 genes)). Informed consents
were obtained from legal representatives of patientsaccording local ethical approval. All steps of the sample
preparation or sequencing were performed in according to
the manufacturer's protocols.
Results: We identi ﬁed a number of heterozygous
missense and nonsense mutations (hg19 genome assem-
bly) in SCN1A gene: chr2:g.166847972G>A (p.Ala>Val);
chr2:g.166848441T>G (p.Ile>Leu); chr2:
g.166859155C>T (p.Gly>Ser); chr2:g.166897905A>G
(p.Ser>Pro); chr2:g.166904163C>A (p.Asp>Tyr); chr2:g.166909412A>G (p.Leu>Ser); chr2:g.166901591G>A
(p.Arg>Ter); chr2:g.16691 2936C>T (p.Trp>Ter); chr2:
g.166930011T>A (p.Lys>Ter).
Conclusions: The authors are grateful to Mds Ananyeva
T., Ayvazyan S., Lukyuanova E., and Zhilina S. from
Research Center for Children Medical Care for clinicalselection of patients. The research was supported by the
Department of Health of Moscow (project 2014-2015).970 J. del PicchiaM. Belenikin: None. A. Slavokhotova: None.
E-P09.40
A novel variation in SCN2A gene in a patient with Dravet
syndrome
A. G. Zamani1, L. Simsek1, H. Caksen2, M. S. Yildirim1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey,2Department of
Pediatric Neurology, Meram Medical Faculty,Necmettin
Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey
Introduction: Dravet syndrome, also known as severe
myoclonic epilepsy in infancy(SMEI), is an epilepticencephalopathy and a component of genetic epilepsy with
febrile seizures plus(GEFS +) spectrum. Although patho-
genic variants of SCN1A is most common in etiology,plenty of other genes including SCN2A, held responsible
for this disease. SCN2A encodes the brain sodium channel
NaV1.2 which plays a signi ﬁcant role in generation and
propagation of action potential in nerve cell.
Materials and Methods: 13 years old female patient
referred to our clinic with epilepsy, intellectual disability andexcessive sweating. The patient had febrile convulsion
subsequent to routine vaccination at 5 months old. At age 3,
she developed afebrile convulsions and followed by anti-epileptics thereafter. Motor milestones were delayed. Her
family history was uneventful except death of her father
because of colon cancer at 28 years of age. In physicalexamination; tremor and avoidance of eye contact observed.
Cranial MRI and genitourinary USG ﬁndings were
insigni ﬁcant.
Results: Sequence analysis using NGS technology, showed
no signi ﬁcant variation in SCN1A, SCN1B, GABRG2 and
SCN9A. Whereas in SCN2A(NM_001040142), we found asubstitution(c.3454G>A, p.Ala1152Thr) that changes amino
acid sequence. This variation have not been reported in
Ensemble(Grch38) and CLINVAR databases.
Conclusion: Because of biochemical differences between
alanine and threonine, it seems likely that this variation
could effect secondary and tertiary structure of brain sodiumchannel NaV1.2 which in turn could end up with phenotype
described above. Further studies are needed to determine
the exact effect of this variation on severity of disease andprognosis of patients.
A.G. Zamani: None. L. Simsek: None. H. Caksen:
None. M.S. Yildirim: None.
E-P09.41
A novel nonsense variant (Lys177X) of FGF14 in a
Japanese patient with autosomal dominant spinocerebellar
ataxiaS. MIURA1, K. Kosaka2, R. Fujioka3, Y. Uchiyama4,T .
Taniwaki1, T. Shimojo2, H. Shibata2
1Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, Kurume University Schoo, Kurume,
Japan,2Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan,
3Department of Food and Nutrition, Beppu University Junior
College, Beppu, Japan,4Department of Radiology, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan
Spinocerebellar ataxia 27 (SCA27) is an autosomal domi-
nant SCA caused by variations in the FGF14 gene encoding
ﬁbroblast growth factor 14. We examined a Japanese SCA
patient whose deceased father also suffered from SCA. Thepatient was a 63-year-old male. He had completed junior
high school without further education. The chief complaint
was slowly progressive dysarthria and gait disturbancethose appeared at age 47. He showed pathological saccadic
dysmetria, saccadic intrusions into smooth pursuit eye
movements, dysarthria, and limb and truncal ataxia. Therewas a wide-based gait without cane. Limb muscle strength
was intact. Deep tendon re ﬂexes were normal or slightly
reduced. Pathological re ﬂexes were not shown. He
demonstrated mildly impaired vibration sense in the lower
limbs. There were no urinary dysfunctions. Brain MRI
showed cerebellar atrophy without brainstem involvement.Weﬁrst con ﬁrmed the absence of repeat expansion in
known genes responsible for SCAs1-3, 6-8, 12, 17 and
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy. By the exome analy-sis, we identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous missense variant
(NM_004115, c.529A>T; Lys 177 X) in exon 4 of the
FGF14 gene. FGF14 is known to interact with voltage-
gated sodium channels. The variant is expected to generate
premature FGF14 proteins lacking the heparin binding site
in FGF domain which could modulate the activity ofFGF14. We con ﬁrmed the absence of the variant in 502
healthy Japanese individuals by Sanger sequencing. There
was no record of the variant in ExAC. We conclude that thenovel variation in FGF14 is the causative variant for the
SCA27 patient.
S. Miura: None. K. Kosaka: None. R. Fujioka: None.
Y. Uchiyama: None. T. Taniwaki: None. T. Shimojo:
None. H. Shibata: None.
E-P09.42
Genetic and clinical analysis of spinocerebellar ataxia type
36 in a Turkish Family with review of literature
M. Elmas1, A. Gündo ğdu2,I .Şahbaz2, C. Koço ğlu2, T. Kalkan3,
H. Tokta ş4,B .D e ğirmenci1,B .G ö ğüş1, H. Demirba ş5,& .
Öztürk5, M. Solak1,N .B a şak2Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9711Afyon Kocatepe University, Medical Genetic Department,
Afyonkarahisar, Turkey,2Boğaziçi University, Suna and İnan
Kıraç Foundation, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory,
Istanbul, Turkey,3Antalya Research Hospital, Antalya, Turkey,
4Afyon Kocatepe University, Physical theraphy rehabilitation
Department, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey,5Afyon Kocatepe
University, Neurology Department, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey
Expansion of GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat in the intron
1 of NOP56 was identi ﬁed as the cause spinocerebellar
ataxia type 36 (SCA36), a rare SCA subtype accompanied
by motor neuron involvement. First of all, it was determinedthat these two patients were related to each other. After the
affected individuals were identi ﬁed in their families. In the
pedigree analysis, it was found that the disease was trans-mitted dominantly. The inheritance pattern of the disease
has been determined. A neurological examination was
performed to patients. Three major ﬁndings were identi ﬁed
as a result of the neurological examination performed.1)
both upper and lower motor neurons de ﬁcit (tongue fasi-
culation, clonus, babinski extensions)2) loss of musclepower in both upper and lower extremities (3/5) 3) unre-
sponsiveness at cerebellar physicial examination (dysmetry,
dysdiadochokinesia). Mild cognitive retardation wasdetected in the mental examination of the patients. Dysar-
thria and tongue fasiculation was a severe ﬁnding in both
patients.As the disease progressed, walking and balanceloss increased, resulting in wheelchair movement. Sig-
niﬁcant enlargement of cerebellar follicles, which were
compatible with cerebellar atrophy, was found in brain MRimages of patients. In EMG, absence of sensory response
was detected with lower motor neuron de ﬁcit. Bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss was detected in the hearingexaminations of the patients and the patient was given
hearing aid. Diplopia was detected in the eye examinations
performed by the patients. As a result of all these physicalexamination ﬁndings and imaging ﬁndings, SCA type 36
was suspected in the patients and the molecular test
performed.
M. Elmas: None. A. Gündo ğdu: None. I.Şahbaz:
None. C. Koço ğlu:None. T. Kalkan: None. H. Tokta ş:
None. B. De ğirmenci: None. B. Gö ğüş:None. H.
Demirba ş:None. &. Öztürk: None. M. Solak: None. N.
Başak:None.
E-P09.43
A novel splice-site variant in COL11A1 gene - familial case
of genetically veri ﬁed Marshall- Stickler syndrome in
Bulgaria
M. Mladenova1,2, T. Todorov1, L. Grozdanova3, V. Mitev2,A .
Todorova1,21Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3University Hospital “St. George ”, Medical University,
Plovdiv, Bulgaria
Stickler syndrome is a hereditary autosomal dominant dis-
order affecting 1 in 7,500 to 9,000 newborns. The condition
is characterized by typical facial, ocular and auditory fea-tures. Similar features are also found in Marshall syndrome
leading to a continuing debate whether these are distinct
entities or different manifestations of a single syndrome.Several mutations causing Stickler syndrome have been
found in the COL2A1 gene, also mutations have been
detected in the COL11A1 causing Stickler and Marshall
syndrome. Here we present the ﬁrst genetically veri ﬁed case
of Marshall- Stickler syndrome in Bulgaria - a familial case
spread through at least three generations. The proband is a2-years old girl with ocular hypertelorism, midface hypo-
plasia, small saddle nose with ﬂat bridge and craniofacial
dysplasia. The proband ’s father has the same clinical
manifestations like the proband, but with a tall and thin
stature and mild hearing loss. The same dysmorphology is
presented also by the grandfather. Both the father and theproband are clinically diagnosed as Marshall-Stickler syn-
drome. After a negative COL2A1 result, we provided a
mutation screening of the COL11A1 gene and found a novel
splicе-site mutation c.3474 +1G>A in intron 45. This var-
iant is related to the clinical presentation in the patient and
his father. The variant c.3474 +1G>A affects the donor
splice site of intron 45 resulting in altered splicing, which
leads to production of a nonfunctional protein. The mutation
affects the region coding the major triple-helical domain,which represents a mutation “hot spot ”for the gene.
M. Mladenova: None. T. Todorov: None. L. Grozda-
nova: None. V. Mitev: None. A. Todorova: None.
E-P09.45
Whole exome sequencing helps the diagnosis of two siblingswith SLC19A3 mutation
A. H. Cebi, T. Kamasak, S. Seyhan, H. Onder Yilmaz, A. Cansu
Karadeniz Technical Universiry, Trabzon, Turkey
The diagnosis of potentially treatable disorders are very
important for the patient and the family. One of these dis-
ease is biotin or thiamine responsive encephalopathy type 2.Early usage of the thiamine and biotin has a dramatic
clinical effect. Here we report two siblings with early onset
encephalopathy and epilepsy. One of them was a boy. Hewas one and half years old and the other was three months
old girl when they were sent to our clinic. Brain MRI972 J. del Picchiaﬁndings of the boy shows the atrophy of frontoparietal and
occipital cortex. He had seizures since three months. His
sisters MRI ﬁndings was active demyelinating neuronal
loss. She hasn ’t got seizures. Their metabolic screening
were normal. The parents were ﬁrst degree relatives. We
sent the patients and parents blood for whole exomesequencing. Both of the siblings has a homozygous muta-
tion at SLC19A3 gene p.Lys290Glufs*16(c.623_624insA) .
When we look at the parents they were heterozygous car-riers. We con ﬁrm the results with sanger sequencing. We
started their treatment after the results. We are following the
patients for two months. Before treatment the brother nee-ded the ventilation machine from his tracheostomy. Now he
can breath without ventilation machine. We expect them to
be better in time.
A.H. Cebi: None. T. Kamasak: None. S. Seyhan: None.
H. Onder Yilmaz: None. A. Cansu: None.
E-P10 Neuromuscular disorders
E-P10.01
Genetic variability of amino acid transporter genes affects
physical decline after the ﬁfth decade of life and human
survival
F. Iannone, P. Crocco, S. Dato, E. Hoxha, A. Montesanto, G.
Passarino, G. Rose
Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences,
University of Calabria, Rende (Cs), Italy
Physical function impairment with increasing age has been
associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Amino
acid availability is a rate-limiting factor in the regulation of
muscle protein metabolism, and hence a risk factor for age-related decline in muscle performance. Amino acid trans-
porters are emerging as sensors of amino acid availability
and activators of mTORC1 signalling, acting astransceptors.
Hence, we sought to evaluate the association of 58 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 selected aminoacid transporter genes with parameters of physical perfor-
mance (Hand Grip, Activity of Daily Living, and Walking
time). By analysing a sample of 458 subjects aged 50-89years, we found signi ﬁcant associations with SLC7A5,
SLC7A8, SLC36A1, SLC38A2, SLC3A2, SLC38A7
genes. Further investigation of the SNPs in a cross-sectional study including 271 subjects aged 90-107 years
revealed associations of SLC3A2, SLC38A2, SLC38A3,
SLC38A9 variability with longevity. Finally, a longitudinalstudy examining the survival rate over 10 years showed
age-dependent complexity due to possible pleiotropiceffects on different phenotypes for SNPs in SLC36A1,
and trade-off dynamics for a SNP in SLC38A9, conferring a
survival advantage before 90 years of age and
disadvantage later.
On the whole, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that
amino acid transporters may impact on the age-relatedphysical decline and survival at old age in a complex way,
likely through a mechanism involving mTORC1 signalling.
F. Iannone: None. P. Crocco: None. S. Dato: None. E.
Hoxha: None. A. Montesanto: None. G. Passarino: None.
G. Rose: None.
E-P10.03
Theﬁrst patient homozygous for c.197G>T p.G66V
mutation in CHCHD10
S. Penttilä1, M. Jokela1, S. Porre2, O. Raheem3,1, B. Udd1,4,5
1Neuromuscular Research Center, University of Tampere and
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland,2Department
of Pathology, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland,
3Division of Pathology, HUSLAB, Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,4Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics
and Department of Medical Genetics, Medicum, University ofHelsinki, Helsinki, Finland,
5Department of Neurology, Vaasa
Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland
Introduction: Dominant mutations in CHCHD10 have
been reported to cause a wide range of neurological dis-
orders. The most common CHCHD10 -related disease in the
world is spinal muscular atrophy Jokela type (SMAJ,
OMIM #615048), that is caused by mutation c.197G>T p.
G66V. SMAJ is a relatively benign adult-onset disorder,characterized by painful cramps and fasciculations affecting
the proximal and distal muscles of the upper and lower
limbs. The disease is slowly progressive, resulting inweakness and muscle atrophy later in life. In Finland, there
are approximately 200 SMAJ patients due to a Finnish
founder mutation c.197G>T p.G66V.
Aims: We describe the ﬁrst patient homozygous for
c.197G>T p.G66V.
Results: The onset of the disease was already in
childhood and at the age of 36 the patient became wheel-
chair bound. In contrast to heterozygous SMAJ, muscle
biopsy shows clear mitochondrial pathology and thedegenerative muscle changes on MRI are extensive. The
parents of the homozygous patient both belong to
previously known SMAJ families and have a regular SMAJphenotype.
Conclusions: The phenotype of the homozygous patient
is much more severe compared to conventional hetero-zygous patients. This is the ﬁrst reported individual in theAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 973world who carries con ﬁrmed pathogenic CHCHD10 muta-
tions on both alleles.
S. Penttilä: None. M. Jokela: None. S. Porre: None. O.
Raheem: None. B. Udd: None.
E-P10.08
A new case with GLYT1 encephalopathy and sequence
variant in the SLC6A9 gene
U. Grasshoff1, S. Beck-Woedl1, T. Haack1, K. Kagan2, S. Haen3,
E. Botzenhart4
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Rare
Disease Center, Tuebingen University, Tübingen, Germany,
2University Women's Hospital, Tübingen, Germany,
3University Hospital, Institute of Pathology, Tübingen,
Germany,4Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,Germany
Introduction: Glycine encephalopathy with normal serum
glycin (OMIM #617301, also known as GLYT1 encepha-
lopathy) is a very rare autosomal-recessive disorder only
reported in a few families of Arab descend so far. Thepatients usually present at birth with severe hypotonia,
respiratory failure and facial dysmorphism. Increased fetal
nuchal translucency (NT) and arthrogryposis were pre-viously reported. Homozygous SLC6A9 mutations (solute
carrier family 6 (neurotransmitter transporter, glycine),
member 9 or glycine transporter, type 1) are the only knowncause of GLYT1 encephalopathy.
Case report: We report on a young healthy and non-
consanguineous couple of German origin. They had twoconsecutive pregnancies with multiple fetal abnormalities.
Theﬁrst fetus was female (46,XX) and presented with an
increased NT >6mm, arthrogryposis and polyhydramnion(week 13 and 16). The pregnancy was terminated at 21
+weeks. The fetus in the second pregnancy was male (46,
XY) and showed a very similar phenotype with early nuchaltranslucency (4,8 mm) and severe arthrogryposis on follow-
up scans. This pregnancy was also terminated. Exome
analysis revealed a homozygous missense variant in theSLC6A9 gene (c.352G>A,p.Val118Met) in both children,
both parents being heterozygous carriers. The variant is
located in the ﬁrst transmembrane domain of the transporter.
Several in vitro tools predict the exchange of a highly
conserved amino acid.
Conclusion: We postulate that this is the ﬁrst described
famliy of non-Arab origin with GLYT1 encephalopathy and
theﬁrst family with a severe prenatal phenotype with
increased nuchal translucency and arthrogryposis caused byamissense variant in SLC6A9 .U. Grasshoff: None. S. Beck-Woedl: None. T. Haack:
None. K. Kagan: None. S. Haen: None. E.
Botzenhart: None.
E-P10.09
A novel pathogenic MYH3 mutation in a child with
Sheldon-Hall syndrome and vertebral fusion
M. Scala1, A. Accogli1, E. De Grandis1, A. Allegri1,C .
Bagowski2, M. Shoukier2, M. Maghnie1, V. Capra1
1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,2Prenatal Medicine
Munich, Munich, Germany
Introduction: Sheldon –Hall syndrome (SHS), also named
distal arthrogryposis (DA) 2B, is characterized by con-
genital non-progressive contractures. Causative mutations
in four genes have been described: MYH3 ,TNNI2 ,TPM2 ,
and TNNT3 . We report the ﬁrst patient with typical SHS
phenotype and exceptional vertebral fusions.
Materials and Methods: An 8.5-year-old boy was
evaluated for dysmorphic facial features (triangular face with
prominent nasolabial folds an d chin, arched eyebrows, and
downslanting palpebral ﬁssures), camptodactyly of both hands
combined with clinodactyly of toes, and several tendon
retractions. Left hand X-ray showed a complete bony luno-
triquetral coalitio n. Spine MRI and CT scan revealed multiple
cervical and dorsal vertebral fusions. Patient's karyotype and
CGH-array were normal. On susp icion of SHS, all the coding
exons of MYH3 and of the adjacent intronic regions were
investigated by high throughput next generation
sequencing (NGS).
Results: The novel, very rare heterozygous variation
c.859T>G, p.Phe287Val was identi ﬁed. This mutation
produces a substitution of a Phenylalanine with a Valine
at the position 287 and was predicted to be pathogenic byall the prediction programs used.
Conclusions: MYH3 mutations are responsible for MYH3 -
related disorders: DA1, DA2A, DA2B, DA8, and autosomaldominant spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (Table). Our
patient ’s phenotype suggests the existence of a phenotypic
continuum for these disorders and a pivotal role for MYH3 in
regulating muscular and bone morphogenesis.
Acronyms Alias OMIM # Main clinical features Responsible genes Affected
MYH3domains
DA1 Digitotalar
dysmorphism108120 Camptodactyly and
clubfoot, hypoplasticinterphalangeal creasesMYH3, TNNI2,
TNNT3, TPM2Head
DA2A Freeman-Sheldon
syndrome193700 Contractures of hands
and feet, scoliosis,oropharyngeal
abnormalities with
distinctive “whistling-
face”MYH3 Head,
coiled coil(IQ motif)974 J. del PicchiaTable (continued)
Acronyms Alias OMIM # Main clinical features Responsible genes Affected
MYH3domains
DA2B Sheldon-Hall
syndrome601680 Distinctive face,
calcaneovalgusdeformity,camptodactyly, ulnar
deviationMYH3, TNNI2,
TNNT3, TPM2Head,
neck-coiled coil
DA8 Autosomal
dominant multiplepterygium syndrome178110 Multiple pterygia,
congenital contracturesof limbs, severescoliosis, vertebralfusionsMYH3 Head, tail
ADSS Autosomal
dominant
spondylocarpotarsalsynostosis272460 Progressive vertebral
fusions, carpal and
tarsal coalitions,clinodactyly, shortstatureMYH3 Head,
coiled coil
Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Jan 5. https://doi.org/10.1002/a
jmg.a.38593 .
M. Scala: None. A. Accogli: None. E. De Grandis:
None. A. Allegri: None. C. Bagowski: None. M.
Shoukier: None. M. Maghnie: None. V. Capra: None.
E-P10.10
A novel variation in a patient with Sjogren-Larsson
syndrome
K. Metli1, A. G. Zamani1, S. Ceylaner2, M. S. Yildirim1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey,2Intergen
Genetics Center, Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder with neurocutaneous symp-
toms. Mental retardation and spasticity are among majorclinic symptoms followed by less frequently symptoms
such as seizures, retinal abnormalities and photophobia.
SLS is caused by mutations in the aldehyde dehydrogenasefamily 3 member A2 (ALDH3A2) gene that encodes a fatty
aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH).
Material and Methods: In this case, six years old boy
consulted to our clinic with complaints of ichthyosis and
inability to walk. The patient is son of a consanguineous
couple who are ﬁrst cousins. Brain MRI had demonstrated
bilateral periventricular subcortical white matter leukoma-
lacia. Karyotype and ALDH3A2 gene analysis planned due
to these results.
Results: Karyotype analysis showed no constitutional
abnormality. Next generation sequencing analysis of
ALDH3A2(NM_001031806.1) gene showed homozygoussubstitutionof c.799-1G>A(IVS5-1G>A) at the last nucleo-
tide of the 4th intron. This variant, is analysed in silica
databases of ‘Mutation Taster ’and ‘Human Splicing
Finder ’and suggested to be pathogenic. Parental genotypesshowed thatboth parents had the same mutation
heterozygously.
Conclusion: Uptodate, more than 90 different mutations
of ALDH3A2 in SLS patients published. Since the location
of the variant we are presenting, is on the splice site, it is
probable that the variant can cause misregulation of splicingand can have effects on mRNA or protein products of the
gene or the regulatory elements binding introns. According
to databases, this variant might affect the protein featuresbecause of the alteration within splice site, likely to disrupt
normal splicing.
K. Metli: None. A.G. Zamani: None. S. Ceylaner:
None. M.S. Yildirim: None.
E-P10.11
A novel frameshift variant in TNPO3 - a report of the
second LGMD1F family
A. Väisänen1, O. Danielsson2, S. Penttilä1, A. Vihola1,3,B .
Udd3,4,5
1Neuromuscular Research Unit, University of Tampere,
Tampere, Finland,2Neuromuscular Unit, Division of
Neurology, Department of Clinical and ExperimentalMedicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden,
3Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical
Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,
4Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa,
Finland,5Neuromuscular Research Center, Department of
Neurology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland
Introduction: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, type 1F
(LGMD1F) is an ultra-rare autosomal dominant myopathycaused by heterozygous mutations in the TNPO3 gene. The
sole previously reported LGMD1F family manifests notable
variation of the phenotype regarding the age of onset, pre-sentation and progression of muscle weakness affecting
pelvic and shoulder muscles. Owing to the wide variation in
the clinical picture of LGMDs, the precise diagnosis ofthese disorders is challenging. With the implementation of
massively parallel sequencing (MPS) assays, the diagnostic
accuracy and clari ﬁcation of the genetic background of
these diseases has been signi ﬁcantly improved.
Material and Methods: We used a previously developed
targeted gene panel, MYOcap, to screen for possiblepathogenic variants in two affected members of a Swedish
family with a childhood-onset muscle weakness affecting
proximal as well as distal muscles. The MYOcap assayconsists of 265 genes and 5394 exons that are known or
suspected to cause muscular dystrophy or myopathy.
Results: Our MYOcap assay identi ﬁed a novel hetero-
zygous single nucleotide deletion c.2757delC in the affected
members of the family. The deletion causes a frameshift inAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 975exon 22 of the TNPO3 gene and is predicted to result in
extension of the reading frame by 20 codons downstream
(p.R920GfsX20).
Conclusions: The predicted consequence of c.2757delC
mutation is very similar to the previously reported mutation
in the published LGMD1F family (c.2771delA p.*924Cext15). In the family reported here, the phenotype
was more compatible with congenital myopathy with slow
progression during adult and late life.
A. Väisänen: None. O. Danielsson: None. S. Penttilä:
None. A. Vihola: None. B. Udd: None.
E-P11 Multiple Malformation/anomalies syndromes
E-P11.01
Distal 11q monosomy - clinical, endocrinological, molecular
data for a patient
E. Braha1, I. Gherlan2, V. Plaiasu3, O. Popa4, E. Gorduza5
1National Institute of Endocrinology "CI Parhon", Bucuresti,
Romania,2National Institute of Endocrinology "C.I. Parhon",
Bucuresti, Romania,3Alfred Rusescu Institute for Mother and
Child Care, Bucuresti, Romania,4National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucuresti, Romania,5University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania
Jacobsen syndrome (JS), a rare contiguous gene syndrome
is due to partial 11q deletion. There is a wide severityspectrum of the clinical phenotype but typical features
include growth and psychomotor retardation, facial dys-
morphism and thrombocytopenia. The deletion size rangesfrom ~7 to 20Mb, with the proximal breakpoint subband
11q23.3 to telomeric 11q. The literature data shows that the
severity of clinical features in patients with JS is not clearlycorrelated with deletion size. The deletion occurs de novo in
85% of reported cases. We have evaluated a 7 years
11 months old patient with thrombocytopenia, facial dys-morphism, failure to thrive, dwar ﬁsm, microcephaly, long
ﬂat philtrum with thin lips, prominent columella, psycho-
motor retardation. Familial anamnesis revealed only catar-act for patient ’s father. The karyotype was normal. Array-
CGH notice a 6 Mb deletion on 11q24-q25. The genetic
tests for parents are in work. We identi ﬁed only a level of
IGF1 at the lower limit of normal, although the literature
data indicated GH de ﬁciency or primary hypothyroidism in
patients with JS. Special attention should be focused onbleeding concerns related to platelet number. This patient's
development will be observed multi-disciplinary to review
the progress.
E. Braha: None. I. Gherlan: None. V. Plaiasu: None.
O. Popa: None. E. Gorduza: None.E-P11.04
Report of a child with a nearly complete 17p duplication
M. GOKCU, G. KAYA, M. H. YARAR, A. H. CEBI
Karadeniz Teknik University, Trabzon, Turkey
Introduction: The phenotypic characteristics of the dupli-
cations are variable according to their size and the generegions they contain. Such chromosomal gains that generate
suspicious images at chromosome analysis can be fully
demonstrated by the array CGH method. Materials and
Method: Firstly chromosome analysis was performed and a
chromosomal change was found. To investigate the basis of
the change, chromosome analysis in the parent and arrayCGH for the patient were performed.
Results: A 2.5-month-old girl was referred to our clinic
because of the growth retardation and presence of triangularface, high palate, and low ear. Patent Foramen Ovale,
secundum ASD and right cerebellomedullary cervical cyst,
myelination delay, slit ventriculs and corpus callosumpartial agenesis were present in the brain MRI of the SGA
baby with hypotonia, feeding dif ﬁculty, apnea, GER. The
chromosome analysis of the patient was found as 46,XX,der(15)add(15)(p13) subsequently to clarify the infrastructure
of this change, parents ’chromosome analysis and patient ’s
array CGH were performed. Mother was detected as 46,XX,t(15; 17)(p13p11.2). In array CGH, the patient was found to
have 3 copies in the short arm of chromosome 17 at the
nucleotides between chr17: 525-22,084,950 in size22084.425 kbp, 17p13.3p11.2.
Conclusions: Although balanced translocation result in
normal phenotype in carriers, it is important that thesechanges could cause both balanced and unbalanced changes
in their children. Evaluation of the array CGH method
together with chromosome analysis is an effective methodfor detecting such uncommon chromosomal anomalies so
that unbalanced abnormalities can be fully demonstrated.
M. Gokcu: None. G. Kaya: None. M.H. Yarar: None.
A.H. Cebi: None.
E-P11.05
Prenatal analysis of hypoplastic left heart Syndrome
associated with a 22q11 microdeletion
Y. Stratis, C. Müller-Hofstede, P. Wieacker, A. Röpke
Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany
The 22q11 deletion syndrome is one of the most common
microdeletions associated with a broad spectrum ofabnormalities. The fetal phenotype associated with a 22q11
deletion is poorly described in literature but genetic analysis976 J. del Picchiais usually indicated when a congenital conotruncal heart
defect is detected. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome asso-
ciated with a 22q11 deletion syndrome is very rarely
reported, while mutations in the GJA1- and the NKX2gene
are known to be associated with this heart malformation.
Here we report on a 35 year old pregnant woman who wasreferred to our institute for prenatal cytogenetic analysis
because ultrasound examination showed a hypoplastic left
heart syndrome with an atresia of the aorta and the mitralvalves. Conventional karyotyping revealed an apparently
normal female karyotype. After genetic counselling, array-
CGH was performed and revealed a deletion of 1,3 Mb inthe critical region of the 22q11 deletion syndrome. This
deletion was con ﬁrmed by FISH. Cytogenetic analysis of
the patient and the childfather must be performed to revealif the deletion is familial or de novo.This case clearly
illustrates the importance of performing prenatal Array-
CGH in cases of severe heart malformations, and shows thatgenetic analysis for a 22q11 deletion might be also useful in
cases of hypoplastic left heart Syndrome.
Y. Stratis: None. C. Müller-Hofstede: None. P.
Wieacker: None. A. Röpke: None.
E-P11.07
De novo interstitial deletion of 2q22.3-24.1
C. B. Mueller-Hofstede, A. Röpke, P. Wieacker
Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany
We report on a nineteen months old boy with develop-
mental delay, epilepsy and hydronephrosis. Birth-weight,
length and head circumference were below 3rdcentile. After
birth, hypotonia, feeding dif ﬁculties and a neonatal seizure
occured. At presentation he crawled without any speech
development. Length and head circumference were below3
rdcentile, weight 75th-90thcentile. He showed narrow and
short palpebral ﬁssures, an epicanthus, long eyelashes,
small nose, broad nasal bridge, low-set ears with largelobes, open-mouth with tented upper lip, small chin, small
hands and feet with 2/3-syndaktyly. Array CGH analysis
uncovered an interstitial 6.5 Mb deletion of 2q22.3-q24.1conﬁrmed in the child and excluded in parents by FISH
analyses. In literature the 2q23.1 deletion syndrome is
characterized by intellectual disability, speech-impairment,autistic-like behavior, sleep abnormalities, seizures, ataxia,
microcephaly, hypotonia, initially feeding dif ﬁculties, later
hyperphagia, coarse face, abnormalities of the ears and theeyes, open mouth, prominent incisors, tented upper lip,
short hands and feet. The size of the described deletions
varies (38 kb to 19 Mb) with the smallest region of overlapcontains only the MBD5-gene. The protein encoded by
MBD5 is expressed in brain and is involved intranscriptional regulation interacting with e.g. MECP2.
Symptoms of isolated MBD5 alterations and 2q23.1 dele-
tions overlap but some features (e.g. microcephaly, hyper-
phagia, open mouth with downturned corners, small hands/
feet) are observed predominantly in 2q23.1 deletion, sug-
gesting further deleted genes contribute to an extendedphenotype. Our case suggests that a recognizable phenotype
and facial gestalt can be de ﬁned in patients with a 2q23.1
deletion.
C.B. Mueller-Hofstede: None. A. Röpke: None. P.
Wieacker: None.
E-P11.08
Ade novo 8q22.2q22.3 interstitial microdeletion in a girl
with developmental delay and congenital defects
R. Marcinkute1, D. Brazdziunaite1, N. Burokiene2, V. Dirse2,E .
Preiksaitiene3, A. Utkus3
1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Clinic of Internal Diseases, Family Medicine andOncology, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius,
Lithuania,
3Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 8 are
rare. We present a 3.5-year-old girl with developmentaldelay and congenital abnormalities due to de novo
8q22.2q22.3 microdeletion. The girl was born to healthy
non-consanguineous parents at full term. Fetal ultrasoundshowed mild growth retardation. Birth weight was 2670 g,
height 50 cm, OFC 31 cm. The patient had congenital hip
dysplasia, bilateral foot deformity, and radioulnar synos-tosis. Dysmorphic features included up-slanting palpebral
ﬁssures, wide eyebrows, altered dermatoglyphics, short
halluces, and hypertrichosis on the back, arms and forehead.Echocardiogram showed open foramen ovale and small
secondary atrial septal defect. The psychomotor and lan-
guage development was severely delayed. She had stereo-typic movements, including hand waving and head twisting.
The patient had a seizure episode at age 2.5 years, but EEG
showed no epileptic activity. The girl had hypermetropiaand atopic dermatitis. 8q22.2q22.3 deletion, 4.9 Mb in size
(arr[hg19] 8q22.2q22.3 (99,938,470-104,936,546)x1) was
identi ﬁed by SNP-array analysis. De novo origin of the
deletion was con ﬁrmed by RT-PCR as both parents are not
the carriers of the deletion. Our patient shares the majority
of the features described in previously reported sevenpatients with overlapping deletions, including radioulnar
synostosis, previously described in one of these patients.
We conclude, that the 8q22.2q22.3 microdeletion results ina recognizable phenotype with speci ﬁc facial features and
congenital abnormalities. More patients have to beAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 977evaluated to establish a phenotype-genotype correlation and
variability of clinical features. This research was funded by
a grant (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179) from the
Research Council of Lithuania.
R. Marcinkute: None. D. Brazdziunaite: None. N.
Burokiene: None. V. Dirse: None. E. Preiksaitiene: None.
A. Utkus: None.
E-P11.09
AHDC1 gene truncating 1p36.11p35.3 microdeletion in a
patient with developmental delay, dysmorphic features and
congenital heart defects
B. Aleksi ūnienė1,2, B. Tumien ė1,2, A. Utkus1,2
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences of the Faculty of Medicine of Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Centre for Medical Genetics,
Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius,
Lithuania
Xia-Gibbs syndrome is a recently described genetic syn-
drome due to heterozygous truncating mutations in AHDC1
gene on chromosome 1p36.11. The syndrome is char-acterized by global developmental delay, hypotonia,
obstructive sleep apnea, intellectual disability and seizures.
Congenital heart defects were not described in patients withXia-Gibbs syndrome. The patient was a 1,5-years-old girl,
theﬁrst child of healthy non-consanguineous parents, born
from the ﬁfth pregnancy (there were four miscarriages)
complicated by polyhydramnios with small birth weight
(3‰). Pulmonary artery stenosis with atrial septal defect,
transient congenital stridor with laryngeal hypokinesis,corpus callosum hypoplasia with ventriculomegaly were
diagnosed in the neonatal period. Feeding dif ﬁculties with
gastroesophageal re ﬂux and failure to thrive, strabismus
divergens with hypermetropia, muscular hypotonia, psy-
chomotor retardation and dysmorphic features were evident
from the ﬁrst months of age. Whole-genome SNP array
analysis revealed a 1.1 Mb deletion in the 1p36.11p35.3
region, arr[GRCh37]1p36.11p35.3(27862451_29004746)
x1.The mother ’s SNP array revealed no abnormalities,
while the father was not available for testing. The deleted
region involves 22 OMIM genes including one OMIM
morbid gene, AHDC1 , with the distal breakpoint of the
deletion disrupting AHDC1 introns 5-6 in the 3 ’untrans-
lated region. Other genes with presumable haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency (HI< 20; FGR, RCC1, PPP1R8, MED18, EYA3,
TAF12, DNAJC8 ) do not have described functions in heart
development except from TRNAU1AP , a transfer RNA
selenocysteine 1 associated protein 1, that has an essentialrole in the synthesis of selenoproteins. In conclusion, pre-
sented patient exhibits typical clinical features of Xia-Gibbssyndrome with additional cardiac phenotype presumably
due to haploinsuf ﬁciency of TRNAU1AP gene.
B. Aleksi ūnienė:None. B. Tumien ė:None. A.
Utkus: None.
E-P11.10
A 3-year-old girl with Aicardi syndrome phenotype and
MECP2 gene duplication
A. Ivankov, A. Bobinec, I. Sansovi ć, M. Kero, I. Barisic
Children's hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Introduction: Aicardi syndrome (AIS) is a rare disorder
characterized by agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC),distinctive chorioretinal lacunae and infantile spasms. It
occurs almost exclusively in females. The cause is probably
ade novo dominant X-linked mutation, lethal in 46,XY
males. Here we report a case of a 3-year-old girl with
typical AIS phenotype and MECP2 duplication.
Results: Our patient, a 3-year-old girl, has moderate
global developmental delay. In infancy she developed
infantile spasms and later on myoclonic seizures. She has
axial hypotonia and wide gait with a pronounced spasticpattern. Brain MRI revealed ACC with additional anoma-
lies. Ophthalmologic exam showed two chorioretinal
lacunae in the left eye. She is prone to viral infectionsand has mild facial dysmorphia. Chromosomal microarray
revealed 254 kb long de novo Xq28 duplication, which
encompasses six genes, including MECP2 andIRAK1 .
Conclusion: In males, MECP2 duplication features are
infantile hypotonia, developmental delay/intellectual dis-
ability, poor/absent speech, progressive spasticity, recurrentinfections and seizures. Most female carriers are asympto-
matic due to skewed X-inactivation. Only 19 symptomatic
females have been reported so far. Our patient ’s phenotype
is consistent with MECP2 duplication, except chorioretinal
lacunae that are a hallmark of the AIS. This is the ﬁrst case
linking these two conditions, pointing to the possibility thatthe gene for AIS might be within the Xq28 region. The gene
of interest is FLNA , located distally of the duplication in our
patient. FLNA causes periventricular heterotopia often seen
in AIS cases which makes him a good candidate for AIS
phenotype.
A. Ivankov: None. A. Bobinec: None. I. Sansovi ć:
None. M. Kero: None. I. Barisic: None.
E-P11.11
Highly frequent mutations in a Spanish Alström cohort
B. Bea Mascato1, M. Álvarez-Satta1, C. Ayuso2, M. Corton2,D .
Valverde1978 J. del Picchia1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology,
Faculty of Biology, University of Vigo. Institute of Health
Research Galicia Sur (IIS-Galicia South). Center for
Biomedical Research (CINBIO)., Vigo, Spain,2Center for
Biomedical Research in the Rare Diseases Network
(CIBERER), Department of Genetics, Sanitary ResearchInstitute-Jiménez Díaz Foundation University Hospital-
Autonomous University of Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid,
Spain
Alström syndrome (ALMS) is a rare disease whose symp-
toms include defects of cardiac function, progressive loss ofvision, early onset diabetes mellitus type 2, obesity, deaf-
ness, growth retardation and renal failure. It is caused by
mutations in the ALMS1 gene which encodes the ALMS1
protein, a structural component of centrosome involved in
intracellular transport among many other roles.
We analyzed the sequence of ALMS1 in a cohort of 11
unrelated ALMS families. Several mutations were identi ﬁed
in exons 7, 8, 16 and 17. Most of the mutations were found
in exon 8. Two mutations had a high incidence in thecohort: p.(Tyr1714 *) (exon 8; rs772136379) with 36% and
p.(Ser3872Tyrfs * 19) (exon 17), with 27%. We described
one homozygote for p.(Tyr1714 *) mutation and one for p.(Ser3872Tyrfs * 19), all the other families with this
mutations were compound heterozygotes. Segregation
analysis showed that the p.(Tyr1714 *) mutation is linkedto the SNP rs45608038 which presents a low frequency
(≈2%) in European populations.
ALMS patients usually account for private mutations. For
theﬁrst time we can see mutations with a large incidence in
an ALMS cohort. Additional analyzes are underway to
decipher whether these families maintain a genealogicalrelationship, although families have been recruited from
different national geographic areas and none of them
reported to have kinship relations with the other ones. Ifthe common heritage of mutation p.(Tyr1714 *) were
demonstrated, we could be talking about a founder allele for
Spanish patients.
B. Bea Mascato: None. M. Álvarez-Satta: None. C.
Ayuso: None. M. Corton: None. D. Valverde: None.
E-P11.12
Amelogenesis imperfecta as a pathognomonic oral ﬁnding
in enamel renal syndrome
N. F. Hassib, M. I. Mostafa, H. ElSadek, U. S. Hellal, M. S.
Abdel-Hamid
National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt
Introduction: Enamel renal syndrome is an autosomal
recessive disorder. Amelogenesis imperfecta and gingivalenlargement, as oral ﬁndings, in addition to nephrocalci-
nosis, are the diagnostic clues for the syndrome. In this
research, we present the clinical and oral ﬁndings in two
patients with enamel renal syndrome.
Material and Methods: The two patients were com-
plaining primarily of amelogenesis imperfecta and gingivalenlargement. A gingival biopsy was taken, Abdomen
ultrasound was requested, and molecular studies were
performed.
Results: Gingival biopsy revealed ﬁbro-osseous lesions,
renal calculi were found by ultrasonography, and Fam20A
mutation was detected. The collective ﬁndings con ﬁrmed
the enamel renal syndrome.
Conclusion: Amelogenesis imperfecta as a dental
anomaly could be a powerful diagnostic evidence to certainrare diseases. Dentists should be aware of dental anomalies
associated with different syndromes.
N.F. Hassib: None. M.I. Mostafa: None. H. ElSadek:
None. U.S. Hellal: None. M.S. Abdel-Hamid: None.
E-P11.14
Detection of Chromosomal Imbalances in an Argentinean
group of patients with Intellectual Disability or Multiple
Congenital Anomalies
L. D. Espeche1, M. Delea1, S. Massara2, A. Solari1,M .P .
Bidondo1, P. Barbero1, J. Oliveri2, M. Ritler3, P. Brun2,V .
Cosentino4, R. Martin5, M. A. Mori5, M. Palomares5, J. Nevado5,
L. B. Dain1, S. Rozental1
1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Ciudad autonoma de
Buenos Aires, Argentina,2Hospital de Alta Complejidad en
Red El Cruce, Buenos Aires, Argentina,3Hospital Materno
Infantil Ramón Sardá, Ciudad autonoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina,4Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos Luisa
Cravenna de Gandulfo, Buenos Aires, Argentina,5Instituto
Nacional de Genetica Medica y Molecular, Madrid, Spain
Introduction: ArrayCGH is a signi ﬁcantly high resolution
method to scan the genome for gains and losses of chro-
mosomal material. Although in several countries it is a ﬁrst-
tier test for patients with intellectual disability (ID) or withmultiple congenital anomalies (MCA), in our country it
represents an expensive technique and a very few labora-
tories have begun to implement it. Karyotyping remains tobe the routine study in public health.
Aim: To report the ﬁndings in an Argentinean cohort of
patients with ID and patients with MCA.
Materials and Methods: we studied 165 patients with
two arrayCGH plataforms (Agilent ISCA-v2-60K and
KaryoArray ®v3.0-8x60K): 125 had ID and 40 had MCA.
They did not show a cytogenetic anomaly or had a failed
karyotype test.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 979Results: We found that 14/125 (11%) ID patients had
causal or potentially causal CNVs: 11 were recognizable
syndromes and 2 had an imbalance associated with a
microdeletion syndrome accompanied with other patho-
genic imbalance. Besides, 10/40 (26%) MCA patients
presented causal or potentially causal CNVs: 2 werechromosomal anomalies, 3 were recognizable syndromes
and 1 had a microdeletion syndrome accompanied with
other pathogenic imbalance.
Conclusion: ArrayCGH was useful to perform an
accurate analysis of microdeletions or duplications that
could not be detected by standard karyotyping. Thepercentage of pathogenic imbalances was higher in patients
with MCA than in those with ID in accordance with the data
reported in the literature.
L.D. Espeche: None. M. Delea: None. S. Massara:
None. A. Solari: None. M.P. Bidondo: None. P. Barbero:
None. J. Oliveri: None. M. Ritler: None. P. Brun: None.
V. Cosentino: None. R. Martin: None. M.A. Mori: None.
M. Palomares: None. J. Nevado: None. L.B. Dain: None.
S. Rozental: None.
E-P11.15
A case of MAGEL2 mutation in a patient with prenatallydiagnosed distal arthrogryposis and severe neonatal
hypotonia
R. Stoeva1, V. Flurin2, H. Denoual2, A. Ziegler3, A. Mantel4,J .
Bouligand4, J. Melki5, D. Martin Coignard1
1Service of Medical Genetics, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans,
France,2Service of Pediatrics, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans,
France,3Service of Medical Genetics, University Hospital
Angers, Angers, France,4Service of Molecular Genetics,
Bicetre Hospital, Paris, France,5UMR 1169, INSERM and
University of Paris South, Paris, France
Here we present a case of 6-months-old girl with prenatal
signs of distal arthrogryposis, severe neonatal hypotoniaand de novo mutation in the MAGEL2 gene. She was born
after ﬁrst pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents.
Decreased foetal movements and anomaly in ﬁngers ﬂexion
without polyhydramnios were noticed prenatally. The foetal
karyotype and 8x60 K Agilent array CGH were normal. The
birth was at term with weight and high on the 75th per-centile. Severe axial hypotonia and ﬂexed 3
rd,4thand 5th
ﬁngers were noticed. There were feeding dif ﬁculties and
vesicoureteral re ﬂux with moderate renal insuf ﬁciency. The
dysmorphology examination showed bilateral single palmar
crease, frontal bossing and prominent ears. The panel of
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita genes detected a denovo heterozygous frameshift mutation in the MAGEL2
gene (15q11.2), c.1996dup, p.(Gln666Prfs*47). This geneis described implicated in Shaaf-Yang syndrome with a
Prader Willi-like phenotype. MAGEL2 is maternally
imprinted gene and mutation occurred on the paternal allele.
With the presented case we would like to highlight the
importance that MAGEL2 is included in the panel of genes
tested in patients presenting a neonatal hypotonia with orwithout arthrogryposis or polyhydramnios.
R. Stoeva: None. V. Flurin: None. H. Denoual: None.
A. Ziegler: None. A. Mantel: None. J. Bouligand: None.
J. Melki: None. D. Martin Coignard: None.
E-P11.16
A novel ECEL1 mutation expands the phenotype of distal
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita type 5D to include
pretibial vertical skin creases
E. Stattin1, J. Johansson1, S. Gudmundsson1, A. Ameur1,S .
Lundberg2, M. Bondeson1, M. Wilbe1
1Immunology, genetics and pathology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden,2Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden
Background: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC)
is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by multiple joint
contractures often in association with other congenital
abnormalities. Pretibial linear vertical creases are a rareﬁnding associated with arthrogryposis, and the etiology of
the speci ﬁc condition is unknown.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing,
segregation analysis and bioinformatics analysis were used
to genetically characterize a boy from a consanguineous
family, presenting with AMC and pretibial vertical linearcreases on the shins.
Results: Whole exome sequencing and variant analysis
revealed homozygous novel missense variants of ECEL1
(c.1163T>C, p.Leu388Pro, NM_004826), and MUSK
(c.2572C>T, p.Arg858Cys, NM_005592). Both variants
are predicted to have deleterious effects on the proteinfunction, with amino acid positions highly conserved
among species. The variants segregated in the family, with
healthy mother, father and sister being heterozygous carriersand the index patient being homozygous for both mutations.
Conclusion: We report on a unique patient with a novel
ECEL1 homozygous mutation, expanding the phenotypic
spectrum of Distal Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita
Type 5D to include vertical linear skin creases. The
homozygous mutation in MUSK is of unknown clinical
signiﬁcance. MUSK mutations have previously shown to
cause Congenital myasthenic syndrome, a neuromuscular
disorder with defects in the neuromuscular junction.
Grant references: Marcus Borgströms Foundation,
Magnus Bergvalls Foundation, The Royal Physiographic980 J. del PicchiaSociety in Lund and Swedish Society for Medical Research
(SSMF).
E. Stattin: None. J. Johansson: None. S. Gudmunds-
son: None. A. Ameur: None. S. Lundberg: None. M.
Bondeson: None. M. Wilbe: None.
E-P11.17
Baraitser-Winter Syndome: A Turkish boy with a novel
ACTB variant
K. Karaer
Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetic, Gaziantep, Turkey
Introduction: Baraitser-Winter syndrome is a rare devel-
opmental disorder characterized by hypertelorism, ptosis,
ridged metopic suture, high-arched eyebrows and brainmalformations. Other common manifestations include
hearing loss, short stature, seizures, intellectual de ﬁcit of
variable severity, and abnormalities of the urinary system.This syndrome is caused by missense variations in ACTB or
ACTG1 .
Materials and Methods: We diagnosed a 5-year-old
Turkish boy as Baraitser Winter syndrome with typical
clinical features. All coding exons and the ﬂanking intronic
regions of the ACTB andACTG1 genes were ampli ﬁed by
PCR followed by bidirectional direct sequencing. Varia-
tions were detected by comparing the reference sequences
and interpreted by in silico predictive programs.
Results: We identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous sequence
change, c.332A>G [p.(Asn111Ser)] which is located at the
exon 3 of ACTB . This variation is not present in single
nucleotide polymorphism and 1000 genomes databases;
moreover, in silico analysis using SIFT, PolyPhen2 and
Mutation Taster predicts as potentially deleterious. Parentalcarrier testings con ﬁrmed that these variants occured as de
novo events which con ﬁrmed a de novo event.
Conclusions: The aim of this paper is to highlight the
importance of the genotype-phenotype variability that needs
to be considered during clinical assessment. Fuctional
studies and additional case reports are required to under-stand the affect of the mutation and genotype-phenotype
correlation.
K. Karaer: None.
E-P11.18
Duplications in the 11p15 imprinted region: report of threepatients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Ciara1, M. Kugaudo1,2,R .Śmigiel3,M .
Klimkowska-Boczo ń4, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Pelc1,P .
Halat-Wolska1, D. Siestrzykowska1, P. Kowalski1,B .Cha łupczy ńska1, A. Gutkowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1,K .
Chrzanowska1
1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children ’s Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw,Warsaw, Poland,
3Department of Pediatrics, Wroclaw Medical
University, Wroclaw, Poland,4Clinical Department of
Pediatrics, Clinical Central Hospital No 2, Rzeszow, Poland
Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is
characterized by overgrowth, macroglossia, abdominal walldefects, and a high risk of childhood tumors. BWS is caused
by various 11p15 genetic or epigenetic defects leading to
abnormal expression of imprinted genes. The genes in the11p15 region are organized into two imprinted domains:
ICR1 and ICR2. A small number of BWS cases (2-8%) are
due to copy number variations (CNVs) in thechromosome 11p15.
Materials and Methods: We present epigenetic/genetic/
clinical pro ﬁles of three patients with BWS. Molecular
analyses were performed on leukocyte DNA and com-
prised: MS-MLPA, SNuPE, arrayCGH and FISH.
Results: In all patients aberrant methylation was
associated with the presence of paternal origin CNVs,
including: duplication of the whole 11p15 region (unba-
lanced translocation with involvement of 7p22.3 deletion),duplication of ICR1 and part of ICR2, and duplication of
ICR1. Patients demonstrated typical features for BWS,
additionally, the patient with duplication of the whole11p15 region had developmental delay and facial dys-
morphism. All identi ﬁed CNVs were present on maternal
alleles of the patients ’healthy fathers.
Conclusions: The study shows that interpreting of 11p15
CNVs is challenging and phenotypic consequences may
depend on the localization, size, as well as the parentalorigin of the aberrant segment. A complex molecular
approach to analyze 11p15 region is required for accurate
diagnosis of BWS allowing the recurrence risk determina-tion and proper genetic counseling.
The study was partly ﬁnanced by CMHI project 241/16.
D. Jurkiewicz: None. E. Ciara: None. M. Kugaudo:
None. R.Śmigiel: None. M. Klimkowska-Boczo ń:None.
D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. M. Pelc: None. P.
Halat-Wolska: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. P.
Kowalski: None. B. Cha łupczy ńska: None. A. Gut-
kowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. K.
Chrzanowska: None.
E-P11.20
A female with a maternally inherited nonsense mutation inPHF6 with expanded phenotypes of Borjeson-Forssman-
Lehmann syndromeAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 981X. Zhang, Y. Fan, Y. Yu
Shanghai institute for pediatric research, Xinhua Hospital
afﬁliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong Univ, Shanghai, China
Introduction: Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome
(BFLS) is a rare X-linked disease caused by PHF6 varia-
tions. Patients with BFLS present moderate to severe
intellectual disability, developmental disorders, obesity,epilepsy, hypogonadism, characteristic faces and anomalies
ofﬁngers and toes. However, the genetic ﬁndings and
clinical observations are exclusively based on patients ofEuropean ancestry. Phenotypic spectrum in other popula-
tions is not well delineated.
Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was
conducted in a female Chinese patient with major features
of BFLS. Sanger sequencing was performed to validate the
mutation and inheritance. The pattern of X-chromosomeinactivation was evaluated by assays of differential
methylation in the genes between the active and the
inactive chromosome X based on Methylation-speci ﬁc
PCR. Phenotypic comparison was conducted based on this
patient and cases in literature.
Results: A novel nonsense heterozygous mutation of
c.673C>T; p.R225X was identi ﬁed in the patient, which is
inherited from her unaffected mother. Both the patient and
her mother showed highly skewed X-inactivation. Thispatient showed complete de ﬁciency of growth hormone,
which was not reported before, and adverse effect emerged
after treatment of growth hormone. She also exhibitedphenotypes partially overlapping with Cof ﬁn-Siris
syndrome.
Conclusions: Complete de ﬁciency of growth hormone is
a new phenotype presented in our Chinese patient with
BFLS. X-inactivation pattern in the peripheral blood may
not be a reliable predictor of the BFLS presentation. (Thisstudy was supported by Grant No. 81500972, to YF; No.
81670812, to YGY.)
X. Zhang: None. Y. Fan: None. Y. Yu: None.
E-P11.21
A Novel Nonsense Mutation In The EYA1 Gene Found In A
Patient With BOR Syndrome
M. Öztürk1, S. Zeybek1, B. Dursun2, B. Albuz1, Ö. Anla ş1,H .
Gürkan3, G. O. Çetin1
1Medical School of Pamukkale University Department of
Medical Genetics, Denizli, Turkey,2Medical School of
Pamukkale University Department of Nephrology, Denizli,
Turkey,3Medical School of Trakya University Department of
Medical Genetics, Trakya, TurkeyIntroduction: Branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR), is an
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the coex-
istence anomalies of the external,middle or inner ear mal-
formations with pre-auricular pits or tags, conductive,
sensorineural or mixed hearing loss, branchial cleft
anomalies, and renal anomalies ranging from mild,asymptomatic hypoplasia to complete renal agenesis.
Clinical Report: A 38 years old male patient was referred
us because of chronic renal insuf ﬁciency and hearing
impairment. Clinical examination showed auricular defor-
mity, pre/post-auricular pits, operated bilateral branchial
ﬁstulae and unilateral peripheral facial nerve palsy.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed unilateral kidney hypopla-
sia. An audiogram showed right sided moderate mix hearing
loss and left sided sensorineural hearing loss. Laboratorytests resulted in high blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 23 mg/dL
and serum creatinine 1.81 mg/dL; low glomerular ﬁltration
rate (GFR) 46 mL/min. We performed sequence analysis fortheEYA1 gene which is responsible for 40% of the etiology.
Results: We found a premature stop codon mutation on p.
Tyr182* (c.546C>G) of the EYA1 gene. It is a novel
mutation and based on ACMG 2015 criteria, it was
considered as a pathogenic variant that clearly causes
severe damage on protein function.
Conclusion: We present this case of BOR syndrome with
a novel mutation at EYA1 gene in order to contribute to the
literatüre. Reference Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S et al ,
Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence
variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the Amer-
ican College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and theAssociation for Molecular Pathology. Genet
Med2015; 17:405-424.
M. Öztürk: None. S. Zeybek: None. B. Dursun: None.
B. Albuz: None. Ö. Anla ş:None. H. Gürkan: None. G.O.
Çetin: None.
E-P11.22
New case of S. SIfrim-Hitz-Weiss (#617159) caused by de
novo mutation in CHD4 gene
M. Sánchez Soler1, A. Serrano Antón1, V. López González2,M .
Ballesta Martínez2, M. Segura-Puimedon3, B. Rodríguez-
Santiago3, B. Rodríguez-Santiago3, L. Armengol3, E. Guillén
Navarro2
1Medical Genetic Sección, H. Clinic Universitary V. Arrixaca,
IMIB-Arrixaca, El Palmar, Spain,2Medical Genetic Sección,
H. Clinic Universitary V. Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca. CIBERER.ISCIII. Madrid, Spain, El Palmar, Spain,
3qGenomics
Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: Sifrim-Hitz-Weiss syndrome is an autosomal
dominant intellectual disability syndrome recently982 J. del Picchiadescribed, associated with variable congenital defects,
including cardiac, skeletal, and urogenital ones. Some
patients may have short stature, macrocephaly, hearing loss,
and dysmorphic facial features. It is caused by mutation in
CHD4, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler gene.
Material and Methods: We described the case of a 24
year-old-man born to healthy non-consanguineous parents.
Pregnancy and neonatal period were normal. He presented
with psychomotor retardation, hypotonia and muscleweakness with normal electromyogram. He was schooling
with support and speech therapy. After ﬁnishing the
compulsory schooling he studied to be a social worker,and nowadays he is working. At the age of 11 scoliosis was
detected, he needed corset during 3 years. 9 years later,
bilateral cryptorchidism was diagnosed after an ultrasoundperformed because of abdominal pain. He underwent
surgery of testes, histological analysis didn`t show malig-
nancy. He is followed up by an Endocrinologist due to thediagnosis of hypogonadotropism- hipergonadotropic and
subclinic hypotiroidism. His stature is normal (p13) and he
has dismorphic features: square-shaped face, relativemacrocephaly, hypertelorism, bilateral ptosis and small
low set ears. After ruling out cromosomopathy, de novo
mutation c.T4012G was detected by exome sequencing.
Conclusions: We present a new case with some of the
characteristic features: hearing loss, hypogonadism, delay
neurodevelopment, muscle weakness, dysmorphic facialfeatures; but without cardiac anomalies nor intelectual
disability, showing the variable expressivity in this
syndrome. It should be included in the diferential diagnosisof rasopathies, facial dysostosis and Charge Syndrome.
M. Sánchez Soler: None. A. Serrano Antón: None. V.
López González: None. M. Ballesta Martínez: None. M.
Segura-Puimedon: None. B. Rodríguez-Santiago: None.
B. Rodríguez-Santiago: None. L. Armengol: None. E.
Guillén Navarro: None.
E-P11.23
Cytogenetically pseudobalanced chromosome 2 structuralrearrangements associated with 2q23.1 microdeletion
syndrome
A. D. Kolotii1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, Y. B. Yurov1,2,O .S .
Kurinnaia1,2, M. A. Zelenova1,2, M. A. Bulatnikova3,I .Y .
Iourov1,2,4
1Academician Yu.E. Veltishchev Research Clinical Institute of
Pediatrics, N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research MedicalUniversity, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation,
Moscow, Russian Federation,
2FSBSI «Mental Health
Research Center», Moscow, Russian Federation,3Stem cell
bank “Pokrovsky ”, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation,
4FSBEI FPE «Russian Medical Academy of PostgraduateEducation» of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome ("pseudo-
Angelman" syndrome) is characterized by speech delay and
intellectual disability, autistic features, inappropriatelaughter and short stature. The disease is mainly associated
with MBD5 loss. Over 100 cases of the syndrome are
described in the available literature. Here, we report on twocases of cytogenetically pseudobalanced chromosome
2 structural rearrangements associated with 2q23.1 micro-
deletion syndrome.
Materials and Methods: Using karyotyping and SNP
array (Affymetrix Cytoscan HD), we detected two cases of
2q23.1 microdeletion resulted from a paracentric inversionand reciprocal translocation in a cohort of 466 patients with
intellectual disability, autistic features and congenital
malformations.
Results: The patients were a 2-year-old girl and a 6-year-
old boy, exhibiting 2q22.3q24.1(148,513,845-
155,196,310)×1, 46,XX,der(2)inv(q21.1q22.3)del(q22q24)and 2q23.1q23.3(148,851,963-151,316,465)×1,
2q22.2q24.1(143,753,727-155,408,790)×1~2, 46,XY,t
(2;11)(q31.1;q21), respectively. Common clinical featureswere motor, speech and developmental delay, gait dis-
turbance, myopia. Additionally, the girl exhibited micro-
cephaly, cleft palate, muscle hypotonia, hearing loss,congenital heart disease. The boy presented with seizures,
protruding ears, micrognathia, joints hypermobility. Beside
MBD5 deletion, both cases demonstrated a loss of ACVR2A,
ORC4, EPC2, KIF5C, LYPD6, MMADHC, RND3, NMI,
TNFAIP6, RIF1, NEB, ARL5A, CACNB4, STAM2,
PRPF40A, RPRM, GALNT13, FMNL2 andARL6IP6 .
Conclusions: Rare cases of pseudobalanced chromoso-
mal rearrangements exemplify the intrinsic need for
genome-wide CNV scan in molecular cytogenetic diag-nosis. Furthermore, these cases demonstrate the complexity
of pseudobalanced chromosomal abnormalities that can be
easily overlooked. Supported by RSF (14-15-00411).
A.D. Kolotii: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. Y.B.
Yurov: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. M.A. Zelenova:
None. M.A. Bulatnikova: None. I.Y. Iourov: None.
E-P11.24
Intrafamiliar clinical variability of Circumferential SkinCreases Kunze Type caused by a novel heterozygous
mutation of N-terminal TUBB gene
M. Dentici, A. Terracciano, E. Bellacchio, R. Capolino, A.
Novelli, M. Digilio, B. DallapiccolaAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 983Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy., Rome,
Italy
Circumferential skin creases Kunze type ’(CSC-KT; OMIM
156610, 616734) is a rare disorder characterized by folding
of excess skin, which leads to ringed creases, primarily ofthe limbs, known as “Michelin Tyre Baby Syndrome ”
(MTBS). Additionally, CSC-KT patients exhibit facial
dysmorphism (epicanthal folds, upslanting palpebral ﬁs-
sures, hypertelorism), cleft palate, growth retardation,
intellectual disability (ID) and multiple congenital mal-
formation. Recently, 2 heterozygous mutations in TUBB
gene and 4 mutations (both homozygous and heterozygous)
inMAPRE2 gene were identi ﬁed in 3 and 4 patients,
respectively, with CSC-KT. In the 3 TUBB gene-related
CSC-KT patients, all mutations falled in the N-terminal
domain of the gene and were de novo . Mutations in the C-
terminal of TUBB gene are associated to microcephaly and
structural brain malformation, in the absence of sign or
symptoms of the CSC-KT. Here, we report a 9-year-old boy
in whom the diagnosis of CSC-KT was suggested, based onthe presence of MTBS, typical facial dysmorphism,
microcephaly, severe ID and brain malformation, including
cortical atrophy and corpus callosum hypoplasia. Sangersequencing identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous c. 218 T>C (p.
Met73Thr) variant in the N-terminal of TUBB gene. The
variant was inherited from the mother that was retro-spectively evaluated, and showed MTBS with a sponta-
neous improvement and no other signs of CSC-KT. We
report the ﬁrst transmitted TUBB gene-related CSC-KT
caused by a novel heterozygous mutation of N-terminal of
the gene. These data further validates the role of TUBB
mutations in causation of this condition and de ﬁnitely
includes the CSC-KT syndrome in tubulinopathies.
M. Dentici: None. A. Terracciano: None. E. Bellac-
chio: None. R. Capolino: None. A. Novelli: None. M.
Digilio: None. B. Dallapiccola: None.
E-P11.25
Clinical exome sequencing in genetic diseases -
interpretation of family trio
R. Michalovská, T. Pis, L. Hruskova, A. Jurcekova, R. Alanova,
Z. Vlckova
GHC Genetics, Praha 1, Czech Republic
Introduction: Clinical analysis of exome is method for
comprehensive diagnosis and interpretation undiagnosed
genetic disease and rare disease. Diagnoses are based on
known or presumed pathogenic variants in genes alreadyassociated with a similar phenotype. Here, we extend
this paradigm by evaluating novel bioinformaticsapproaches to aim? identi ﬁcation of new gene-disease
associations.
Materials and Methods: We performed massive parallel
sequencing on MiSeq (Illumina) using panel Clinical
Exome kit by Sophia Genetics, followed by Sanger
sequencing, CNV and MLPA analysis. This solutionconsists of 116,355 individually designed probes that span
approx.. 11 Mb of target regions covering more than 4,900
genes, with known mendelian/inherited disease-causingmutations.
Results: Altogether, we have tested 5 family trios
(mother, father and child) using Clinical Exome kit. Duringthe testing of clinical exome we required to obtained all the
relevant genetic diagnosis and clinical phenotype informa-
tion of the analysed patients. These 3 families werediagnosed mainly of the heritable disorders like Ollier
syndrome ⋯. In summary, we have found causal DNA
variants in genes already associated with a phenotype. Wehave also identi ﬁed pathogenic or potential pathogenic
variants in other genes, which are probably not associated
with disease, however their clinical interpretation is unclearand should be ﬁnalized in the cooperation of clinical and
molecular geneticist. These results demonstrate the ef ﬁ-
ciency of exome sequencing approach in performingmolecular diagnosis of undiagnosed genetic disease.
Conclusions: We have tested patients to detect a
mutation in gene of undiagnosed genetic disease.
R. Michalovská: None. T. Pis: None. L. Hruskova:
None. A. Jurcekova: None. R. Alanova: None. Z.
Vlckova: None.
E-P11.26
De novo apparently balanced complex chromosomalrearrangement involving three chromosomes with cryptic
genomic imbalances
M. Minzhenkova1, Z. Markova1, I. Kanivets2, N. Shilova1
1Federal State budgetary Institution ‘Research Centre for
Medical Genetics ’, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Genomed
ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements
(CCR) are extremely rare in humans. Most apparently
balanced CCRs are de novo and usually detected in phe-notypically normal subjects. But in some cases found in
patients with congenital abnormalities and/or mental retar-
dation which may be due to cryptic genomic imbalance. Wereport an exceptional CCR in a child with mental retarda-
tion, microcephaly, muscular hypotension, corpus callosum
hypoplasia.
Materials and Methods: G-banding analysis revealed a
de novo CCR involving the chromosomes 4, 5, 7. By FISH984 J. del Picchiausing different types of probes (PCP, MCB, subtelomeric) it
was possible to clarify how the chromosomes were
rearranged and to determine the breakpoints. aCGH was
applied for detection of genomic imbalance.
Results: Conventional karyotyping showed translocation
t(4;5;7)(q31;q32;p21)dn. MCB analysis of chromosomes 4,5, 7 was employed to delineate the breakpoints in every
chromosome. Unexpectedly we detected that a segment of 4
(q31.23q32.2) was inserted in the derivative chromosome 5(q31.1). Arm-speci ﬁc and subtelomeric probes were applied
to con ﬁrm the insertion 4q in 5q. Furthermore, aCGH-
analysis showed four cryptic deletions associated with thebreakpoints on chromosomes 4 and 5.
Conclusions: Initially, CCR described here was inter-
preted as balanced, and derived from a three-waytranslocation between chromosomes 4, 5, 7. However,
FISH and aCGH-analysis revealed that the rearrangement
was far more complex than originally estimated involving alarger number of breaks. Only a combination of several
different approaches was suf ﬁcient to resolve the nature of
this CCR which had an unexpected level of complexity,involving 3 chromosomes, 5 breakpoints, 1 insertion and 4
deletions.
M. Minzhenkova: None. Z. Markova: None. I.
Kanivets: None. N. Shilova: None.
E-P11.27
Detection of Complex Genetic Anomalies with Next
Generation Sequencing
M. YARAR, M. GOKCU, A. H. CEBI
Karadeniz Teknik University, Trabzon, Turkey
Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing can be used to
diagnose complex genetic changes in which conventionalgenetic methods are inadequate.
Materials and Method: Whole exome sequencing was
done because the patient had multiple anomalies.
Findings-Results: A 17-year-old male with multiple
anomalies was referred to our polyclinic for genetic
evaluation and clari ﬁcation of the diagnosis. There were
chronic cough, torticollis, short stature, glaucoma and
microphthalmia on the anamnesis and physical examination
of the patient. Computerized spiral tomography of chest andmagnetic resonance imaging of brain performed respec-
tively, there were widespread bronchiectasis, multiple
arachnoid cysts, ventriculomegaly and microphthalmia. 6cousins and 2 siblings of the patient died due to similar
ﬁndings and because his parents were relatives blood was
taken from the family to perform whole exom sequencing.Homozygous mutation in the PRESS56 gene (c.571G>T),
homozygous mutation in the MCIDAS gene (c.904C>T)were detected in the patient. Mother and father were found
to be carriers in terms of these mutations.
Conclusions: Next generation sequencing should be
preferred in patients with complex genotype resulting
multiple anomalies.
M. Yarar: None. M. Gokcu: None. A.H. Cebi: None.
E-P11.28
Cytogenomic characterization of a complex smallsupernumerary marker chromosome leading to partial 4q
and 21q duplications: clinical implication and review of the
literature
F. T. Bellucco, R. A. Fock, H. R. Oliveira-Jr, A. B. Perez, M. I.
Melaragno
Universidade Federal de S ão Paulo, S ão Paulo, Brazil
Complex small marker chromosomes (sSMC) consist of
chromosomal material derived from more than one chro-
mosome. Complex marker chromosomes derived fromchromosome 4 and 21 are rare with only ﬁve cases
described in the literature, and two listed in the online
database of sSMCs ( http://ssmc-tl.com/sSMC.html ). We
describe a patient who presents a complex sSMC derived
from a maternal translocation between chromosomes 4 and
21, revealed by G-banding, MLPA, and array techniques.Theﬁnal cytogenomic result was given as 47,XX, +der(21)
t(4;21)(q32.1;q21.2)mat .arr 4q32.1q35.2
(158907036_190957460)×3, 21q11.2q21.2(15016486_25605895)×3. There are 234 RefSeq genes in
the 4q32.1q35.2 duplicated region, 74 of them are OMIM
genes with 17 associated with diseases. Regarding theregion in which there are no probes on SNP array, the
duplicated region on chromosome 21 has 25.6 Mb from
21pter to 21q21.2 (1-25605895) and contains 121 RefSeqgenes, 18 of them are OMIM genes and 2 are disease-
causing genes. Our patient presents prominent forehead, ﬂat
face, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, hypertelorism, large nose
with a prominent nasal bridge, downturned corners of the
mouth, short neck, scoliosis, high arched palate, clin-
odactyly, tapered ﬁngers and single palmar creases. Apart
from the breakpoints, our patient shows a similar phenotype
to the 4/21 sSMC cases and a compilation of the ﬁndings
found in isolated 4q and 21q duplications. Neuropsycho-motor developmental delay and facial dysmorphism were
the most important ﬁndings. The wide range of phenotypes
associated with sSMCs emphasizes the importance ofdetailed cytogenomic analyses for an accurate diagnosis,
prognosis, and genetic counseling.
Financial Support: FAPESP, Brazil.
F.T. Bellucco: None. R.A. Fock: None. H.R. Oliveira-
Jr:None. A.B. Perez: None. M.I. Melaragno: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 985E-P11.29
Possible involvement of FREM2 homozygous mutation in a
Japanese family with unilateral small kidney determined by
whole-exome sequencing
S. Katayama1, N. Takeuchi1, Y. Hozumi1, A. Morii1,T .
Shimomura2, T. Makifuchi3,4, T. Inazu1
1Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan,2Department
of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Saigata Medical
Center, Niigata, Japan,3Department of Clinical Research,
National Hospital Organization Saigata Medical Center,
Niigata, Japan,4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Joetsu
General Hosipital, Niigata, Japan
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract
(CAKUT) constitute a major cause of chronic disease inhumans. More than 50 genes have been reported as mutated
in CAKUT affected cases. Recently, mutations in genes
encoding Fraser syndrome protein 1 ( FRAS1 ), FRAS1
related extracellular matrix protein 2 ( FREM2 ) and gluta-
mate receptor interacting protein 1 ( GRIP1 ) cause CAKUT.
A patient with consanguineous parents underwent whole-exome sequencing to identify the causative gene(s) for his
unilateral small kidney, relatively hypouricemia and mental
retardation. After WES, we narrowed down our search forcandidate genes to 48 responsible for the small kidney
phenotype. Lastly, we identi ﬁed a FREM2 homozygous
mutation (c.C4030T, p.R1344C) and a GRIP1 homozygous
mutation (c.C692T, p.A231V) probably associated with
unilateral small kidney. In silico analysis revealed that
R1344C in FREM2 was probably damaging, and thatA231V in GRIP1 was benign. R1344 in FREM2 is evolu-
tionarily conserved, and is located within chondroitin sul-
fate proteoglycan repeats, which could be the bindingdomain for several growth factors. Furthermore, the late
patient ’s brother and sister manifested a relatively bilateral
small kidney and normal kidney. However, his genotypingwas a GRIP1 homozygous mutation without FREM2
mutation, and her genotyping was a FREM2 and GRIP1
heterozygous mutation. Therefore, these results suggest thatthe mutation in FREM2 is pathogenic and might be asso-
ciated with the unilateral small kidney phenotype. This is
theﬁrst report of homozygous missense mutation in
FREM2 found in a patient with a unilateral small kidney in
a Japanese family.
S. Katayama: None. N. Takeuchi: None. Y. Hozumi:
None. A. Morii: None. T. Shimomura: None. T.
Makifuchi: None. T. Inazu: None.
E-P11.30
Phenotype variability of autosomal dominant congenitalﬁbrosis of extraocular muscles CFEOM in the family with
mutation in TUBB3 gene
J. Pilch1, A. Sobczy ńska-Tomaszewska2, K. Czerska2, P. Skiba3,
E. Emich-Widera1
1Department of Pediatric Neurology, Katowice, Poland,
2MEDGEN Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland,3Department of
Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University,, Wroclaw, Poland
Ophthalmoplegia and limited eye movement are frequently
observed neurological abnormalities. It could be result ofacquired diseases, inborn errors of metabolism or congenital
defects. In some patients abnormalities in associated eyes
structures often coexist with inborn defects of other organsbeing one of the symptoms of a speci ﬁc syndrome, but
sometimes it could be an isolated entity. One of them is
congenital ﬁbrosis of extraocular muscles (CFEOM).
CFEOM is a complex condition with AR or AD inheritance
and high clinical variability as a result of mutation in one of
at least six genes. Some patients may have unilateral eyeinvolvement. Here we report a family with CFEOM. In a
10-years-old boy ptosis of eyelids, exotropia and ﬁngers
camptodactyly were present since the neonatal period.Physical examination additionally revealed severe limited
movement of eyes, small facial dysmorphic features. In
other family members (mother, aunt, grandmother andcousin) only abnormalities in associated structures of eyes
were reported. aCGH revealed in the boy a small
14q31.3q32.11 duplication of uncertain clinical sig-niﬁcance. Based on clinical symptoms, a mutation in
TUBB3 gene has been suspected. A p.Arg190Cys
(c.568C>T, rs267607162) mutation registered in theHGMD and in ClinVar as pathogenic variant was identi ﬁed
in affected boy and other family members. The CFEOM3A
was con ﬁrmed in this family. Given high clinical variability
in patients with CFEOM it is recommended to look for
mutations in CFEOM genes in group of patients with
congenital inborn defects and abnormalities in associatedstructures of eyes.
Support: Institutional grant KNW-1-126/K/6/K
J. Pilch: None. A. Sobczy ńska-Tomaszewska: None. K.
Czerska: None. P. Skiba: None. E. Emich-Widera: None.
E-P11.31
Congenital heart defects in patient with new KMT2D
frameshift mutation
D. Krgovi č1,2, S. Stangler Herodez1, N. Marcun Varda3,B .
Zagradisnik1, A. Zagorac1, A. Erjavec Skerget1, N. Kokalj
Vokac1,2986 J. del Picchia1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre
Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Medical Faculty, University of
Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,3Department of Paediatrics,
University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia
Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) are the most
common type of birth defect in newborns. CHD are also
frequently accompanied by genetic syndromes. Usually,
additional features along with CHD are observed in thesesyndromes. The genetic cause of the syndromes can be
single-gene mutations and copy number variations. Because
the clinical picture of patients with different syndromes canoverlap, it is very important that a good clinical examination
is performed, which leads to a better diagnosis of these
conditions.
Material and Methods: A 10-moths old boy was
referred for NGS analysis due to the CHD observed during
the pregnancy. After birth vesicoureteral re ﬂux, muscular
hypotonia, cleft palate, and mild microcephaly was noted.
The prenatal testing was performed for observed CHD,
which included classical karyotyping, molecular karyotyp-ing and QF-PCR for exclusion of aneuploides and
microdeletions/microduplications syndromes. All genetic
tests were negative. NGS analysis was performed withpanel covering more than 4800 disease-associated genes.
Analysis was initially focused on genes associated with
CHD, but no clinically signi ﬁcant variants were detected.
Only after the extended genetic analysis, which also
included genes related to additional features observed in
our patients, enabled us the detection of a previouslyundescribed frameshift mutation c.11093delG in KMT2D
gene which is associated with Kabuki syndrome.
Conclusion: Broad spectrum of clinical features observed
in Kabuki patients and its rare incidence disables the easy
recognition of this syndrome. Our case presents the
importance of a good clinical characterizations of thepatients which undergo the NGS analysis for successful
diagnostics.
D. Krgovi č:None. S. Stangler Herodez: None. N.
Marcun Varda: None. B. Zagradisnik: None. A.
Zagorac: None. A. Erjavec Skerget: None. N. Kokalj
Vokac: None.
E-P11.32
Molecular diagnostics of Cornelia de Lange syndrome andrelated genetic disorders
J. Pospisilova1, V. Krutilkova1,2, P. Cibulkova1, P. Solarova3,M .
Senkerikova3, A. Boday1
1AGEL Laboratories, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Novy
Jicin, Czech Republic,2Ambulance of Clinical Genetics –
Zenklova, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of MedicalGenetics, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec
Kralove, Czech Republic
Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a
rare complex disorder with multiple structural and devel-
opmental defects characterized by typical facial features,intellectual disability, and congenital anomalies. It has been
estimated to occur in about 1:10 000 individuals where
severe forms of CdLS are revealed easilly, but as moremildly affected individuals have been reported, its actual
prevalence may be much more common. Diagnostics of
CdLS is complicated with a presence of clinically over-lapping syndromes.
Methods: Our custom NGS panel (completed by MLPA)
encompasses genes associated not only with a speci ﬁc
diagnosis (CdLS in this case) but also with diseases, which
are hardly distinguishable from CdLS because of their
phenotypic similarity.
Results: To date we have investigated 13 pacients with
CdLS clinical diagnosis. Four of them (three children and
one fetus) carried pathogenic variants in NIPBL gene or
SMC3 gene, so their diagnosis was con ﬁrmed on molecular
level. Our custom NGS panel includes genes related with
clinically overlapping syndromes, so we were able toidentify pathogenic variants in ANKRD11 gene ( KBG
syndrome ) and AFF4 gene ( CHOPS syndrome ) in two
children patients.
Conclusions: For a routine molecular testing it ‘s
important to create custom NGS panels with a great
prudence. Only in this case it can be a successful diagnostictool which can solve the issue with molecular diagnostics of
clinically overlapping syndromes.
J. Pospisilova: None. V. Krutilkova: None. P. Cibulk-
ova: None. P. Solarova: None. M. Senkerikova: None. A.
Boday: None.
E-P11.33
Widening the spectrum of congenital anomalies related to a
partial 21q monosomy detected prenatally
A. Sajeva1,2, F. Lalatta1, T. Rizzuti3, S. Boito4, N. Persico4,R .
Silipigni5, S. Guerneri5, E. Scola6, C. M. Cinnante6, F. Triulzi6,
L. Ronzoni1, C. Cesaretti1, F. Natacci1
1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda,
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,2Specialisation
School in Medical Genetics - University of Milan, Milano,
Italy,3Pathology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda,
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,4Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology 'L. Mangiagalli', Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano,Italy,
5Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'
Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9876Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda,
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy
Introduction: A 29-year-old pregnant woman was referred
at 20+4weeks because of fetal anomalies. The couple was
healthy, unrelated and of South American origin. Level IIultrasonography (US) revealed a cystic hygroma, complete
agenesis of corpus callosum, aortic valvular stenosis with
aortic hypoplasia, left ventricular hypoplasia and ventricularseptal defect, ﬂexion deformity of hands. Brain abnormality
was con ﬁrmed at MRI.
Materials and Methods: Agilent Technologies 60K
Chromosomal MicroArray (CMA) performed on amniotic
ﬂuid cells revealed a loss of 21,5 Mb of chromosome
21q11.2q22.12, encompassing many OMIM genes, 8 ofwhich are known to be disease-associated. CMA also
showed two small imbalances inherited from the healthy
mother. The imbalance appeared as a complete chromo-some 21 monosomy upon cytogenetic analysis of cultured
cells. Maternal karyotype was normal, whereas paternal one
revealed a 1p22-p36.1 paracentric inversion. FISH analysiswith a probe speci ﬁc for subtelomeric 21q regions (Vysis)
was normal for both parents. The pregnancy was termi-
nated. Fetal pathology and autoptic MRI con ﬁrmed all
prenatal US ﬁndings while also identifying periventricular
nodular subependymal heterotopia and very distinctive
facial features (low-set and posteriorly set ears, frontalhirsutism with broad eyebrows, hypertelorism, a broad nasal
bridge with anteverted nostrils, microretrognathia and high-
arched palate).
Conclusions: This case, characterized by a broad loss of
genetic material, widens the phenotypic spectrum of 21q
deletions revealing a very peculiar prenatal picture. Similarbut smaller imbalances have been described as de ﬁnitely
pathogenic in children with intellectual disability, hypopla-
sia of the corpus callosum, dysmorphic facial featuresand VSD.
A. Sajeva: None. F. Lalatta: None. T. Rizzuti: None. S.
Boito: None. N. Persico: None. R. Silipigni: None. S.
Guerneri: None. E. Scola: None. C.M. Cinnante: None.
F. Triulzi: None. L. Ronzoni: None. C. Cesaretti: None.
F. Natacci: None.
E-P11.34
Chromosomal microarray versus karyotyping for diagnosisof a rare inherited apparently balanced translocation
involving chromosomes 13 & 21
V. PLAIASU1, D. Ozunu1, G. Motei1, M. Ivan1, M. Zeleniuc2,G .
Cardos3, P. Gurban3, G. Dinulescu3, C. Diaconu4
1INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania,
2Personal Genetics-Medical Genetics Center, UMF CarolDavila, Bucharest, Romania,3Personal Genetics-Medical
Genetics Center, Bucharest, Romania,4Institute of Virology
Stefan S.Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania
Introduction: Apparently balanced chromosomal rearran-
gement associated with an abnormal phenotype is a rareevent, but with dif ﬁcult management. In the past few years
array CGH changed the diagnostic approach to many con-
genital diseases offering an accurate detection of chromo-some imbalances.
Material and Methods: A 6 months old girl, the third
child of the couple with history of infertility, was referred toour genetic center because of developmental delay,
dysmorphic features, agenesis of corpus callosum, sacral
dimple, abnormal skin pigmentation with linear intercostallocalisation, growth retardation. Cytogenetic analysis
showed a derivative chromosome 21 inherited apparently
from her mother and arrayCGH result was: arr[hg19]13q12.11-q12.3(20407295-31729705)x3,21q11.2-q21.3
(15485008-30013630)x1. FISH testing was necessary to
clarify the results.
Discussion: The patient presented a visible abnormal
chromosome 21, apparently inherited from a normal
mother. The abnormal phenotype of the proband suggestedthe continuation of the investigation efforts. ArrayCGH and
FISH were subsequently applied and showed a proximal
duplication of about 11,3 Mb of 13q12.11-q12.3 and aproximal deletion of about 14,5 Mb of 21q11.2-q21.3. The
child’s der(21) was con ﬁrmed to be inherited from a
maternal balanced translocation between 13q and 21q. Thisstructural chromosomal abnormality exposes the mother to
a high risk of offspring affected by unbalanced chromoso-
mal disorder and could explain her infertility.
Conclusions: Without complete investigation of subtle
rearrangements, genetic counseling is a real challenge.
ArrayCGH analysis should be performed when thekaryotype is apparently balanced but a chromosome
anomaly is still suspected based on the clinical phenotype.
This work was supported by PN-II-PT-PCCA-2013-4-133grant
V. Plaiasu: None. D. Ozunu: None. G. Motei: None. M.
Ivan: None. M. Zeleniuc: None. G. Cardos: None. P.
Gurban: None. G. Dinulescu: None. C. Diaconu: None.
E-P11.35
Patient with de novo 18q22.1-q22.3 delection. A case report
M. Molina Zayas, m. Martinez Atienza, M. Del Aguila García, A.
González Ramirez, S. García Linares, A. Mora Guijosa, A.
Poyatos Andújar., M. Perez Sanchez
Servicio Andaluz de Salud (SAS)., Granada, Spain988 J. del PicchiaLaboratory evaluation of patients with developmental delay/
intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, dismorphic
features and autistic disorders has changed signi ﬁcantly in
the last years with the introduction of microarray technol-
ogies. Structural aberrations of chromosomes are associates
with various syndromes, although there are a lot of cho-mosomal gains and losses that are not yet associated with a
speciﬁc syndrome. Most of the cases are the novo, few
cases are due to unbalanced rearraments and others areinherents. We present a three years-old boy derived from
neuropediatric for genetics studies due to global develop-
mental delay. He was born at 38 gestation week from noconsanguineous healthy parents. Karyotype in leucocites
was normal (46;XY). Comparative Genomic Hybridization
(CGH-Array) with the Nimblegen CGX CytogeneticMicroarrays platform, suplied by PerkinElmer, was per-
formed for the patient and parents. The CGH- Array was
normal en both parents, but the patient presented a delecc-tion of 2,40 Mb in 18q22.1-q22.3 chromosomical region
(arr[hg19] 18q22.1-q22.3 (66,375,444-68,773,023)x1
Abnormal Male). The duplication is “de novo ”and no
previously described. These delection have 11 genes
included (5 OMIM) and then with a high pathologic prob-
ability. . Chromosomic aberrations detected “de novo ”and
no previously described can be di ﬁcult to determine his
pathologic potential, and it is necesary to have in mind the
patient pathology and genes involved in the delecction/duplication . In our case we believe that the chromosomal
alteration detected, alone or in conjuntion with another
chromosomal or enviromental cause will be responsible ofthe patient pathology.
M. Molina Zayas: None. M. Martinez Atienza: None.
M. Del Aguila García: None. A. González Ramirez:
None. S. García Linares: None. A. Mora Guijosa: None.
A. Poyatos Andújar.: None. M. Perez Sanchez: None.
E-P11.36
Distribution of the Common TERT and TP53 Variants in
Down Syndrome Children
A. Toylu, B. Nur, O. Altiok Clark, E. Mihci
Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey
Introduction: The phenotype spectrum of Down syndrome
(DS) related with the trisomy of chromosome 21 has a multi
system associated features, but the exact mechanism of
these abnormalities are not fully explained to date. Tounderstand the role of common variants of TERT and TP53
genes on the diversity of DS phenotype, the frequency of
these two variants was aimed to be investigated. The TERTgene rs2736100 A-C intronic variant is known with its
association with various morbidities. The TP53 gene codon72 Arg>Pro variant is related with altered TP53 protein
functions. Allele distributions of these common variants
were assessed between DS and control children.
Materials and Methods: DS (n:80) and control (n:32)
subjects were included in this study. TERT gene rs2736100
A-C intronic variant and TP53 gene p.Arg72Pro (c.C215G)variant was determined with melting analysis of hybridiza-
tion probes.
Results: The allele frequency of TERT and TP53 variants
were not different between DS and control groups, however
allele frequencies were higher than that of the highest
population level. The TERT variant distribution was similarin the control group of children with homozygous Pro72
variant or Arg72 variant carriers. The variant distribution of
TERT, however, was signi ﬁcantly lower in DS group of
children with homozygous Pro72 variant compared to
Arg72 variant carriers.
Conclusion: Similar distribution of the common variants
of TERT and TP53 genes are implying that these variants
may contribute to DS phenotype by more complex
associations.
Grant number: Akdeniz University TSA-2016-1531
A. Toylu: None. B. Nur: None. O. Altiok Clark: None.
E. Mihci: None.
E-P11.37
Enamel-renal syndrome: identi ﬁcation of two novel non-
consanguinous families with mutations in FAM20A gene
F. Jobic1, S. de Broca2, R. Vargas-Poussou3, L. Lichtenberger4,
G. Jedraszak5, M. Mathieu-Dramard1, G. Morin1
1Clinical Genetics, Amiens, France,2Maxillo-facial surgery,
Amiens, France,3Molecular Genetics - Georges Pompidou
European Hospital, Paris, France,4Pediatric nephrology,
Amiens, France,5Laboratory of Human Genetics, Amiens,
France
Amelogenesis imperfecta forms a group of inherited con-
ditions having in common a defect in dental enamel for-
mation on primary and/or secondary dentitions. It can be
isolated or syndromic. When associated with nephrocalci-nosis, the condition is designated as « enamel-renal syn-
drome » or « amelogenesis imperfecta type IG » (OMIM
204690), and is consecutive to biallelic mutations ofFAM20A gene. The encoding protein is involved in the
manufacture and maturation of enamel. However, the
mechanism explaining the renal damage remains unclear.Rare, this autosomal recessive condition is often observed
in consanguineous families. We report on 2 new patients
from distinct and non-consanguineous families. The ﬁrst,
14-year-old, had amelogenesis imperfecta and nephro-
calcinosis without impact on renal function, accidentallyAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 989discovered at age 6 (abdominal pain). Two heterozygous
mutations were discovered in FAM20A : c.1192G>T [p.
(Asp398Tyr)] and c.1228_1229del [p.(Asp410Profs*5)].
The second, 6-year-old, had isolated amelogenesis imper-
fecta. His renal ultrasound examination was normal.
Molecular analysis of FAM20A identi ﬁed 3 heterozygous
mutations: c.826C>T [p.(Arg276*)], c.1369A>T [p.
(Lys457*)] and c.1517T>A [p.(Leu506Gln)]. These obser-
vations con ﬁrm that the emergence of rare diseases of
autosomal recessive inheritance is also possible in non-
consanguineous families. The absence of nephrocalcinosis
in the second patient does not question the diagnosis ofenamel-renal syndrome, and emphasizes that FAM20A
mutations must also be investigated in isolated amelogen-
esis imperfecta. Nephrocalcinosis is inconstant, unapparent,and most often observed later in life. In enamel-renal syn-
drome, the risk for renal function justify the organization of
a rigorous renal supervision.
F. Jobic: None. S. de Broca: None. R. Vargas-Poussou:
None. L. Lichtenberger: None. G. Jedraszak: None. M.
Mathieu-Dramard: None. G. Morin: None.
E-P11.38
Case report: A novel frameshift deletion in ERCC6 gene
causes Cockayne syndrome type B
I. STREATA1,2, R. Plesea1,2, A. Olaru3, E. Popescu1, A. Pirvu1,2,
A. L. Riza1,2, S. Serban-Sosoi1,2, A. Cimpoeru1, M. Cucu1,A .
Dobrescu1,2, A. Morosanu3, C. L. Mocanu3, F. Burada1,2,M .
Ioana1,2
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Human
Genomics Laboratory, Craiova, Romania,2Dolj Regional
Centre of Medical Genetics, Emergency County Hospital
Craiova, Craiova, Romania,3University of Medicine and
Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Cockayne syndrome (CS; OMIM 133540/216400) is a
multi-systemic and progressive rare autosomal recessivecondition. CS is member of the DNA repair disorders
group, with a highly variable clinical phenotype, ranging
from severe prenatal forms to mild cases with late pre-sentations. Classical features include global developmental
delay, post natal growth failure, feeding dif ﬁculty, micro-
cephaly, cutaneous photosensitivity, dental, auditory (pro-gressive hearing loss) and ophthalmological (pigmentary
retinopathy, cataracts and enophthalmia) anomalies. CS is
mainly caused by mutations in ERCC6 (OMIM 609413)and ERCC8 (OMIM 609412) genes.
Case report: We report a sporadic case of a girl with CS
who presented with severe growth failure (3,5 kg at 5 years)- cachectic dwar ﬁsm, microcephaly, congenital cataract and
aged appearance with prominent beaked nose and sunkeneyes. Molecular genetic analysis of DNA from peripheral
lymphocytes using NGS panel (4800 genes) revealed a
novel frameshift deletion in homozygous condition -
NM_000124: c.1323delA (p.Gly442GlufsTer24) - in exon
5ofERCC6 gene. The Sanger sequencing test for the carrier
status of both genitors is scheduled.
Conclusions: Our paper provides, to our knowledge, a
detailed clinical presentation of a newly identi ﬁed homo-
zygous mutation in a girl affected with CS. This expandsthe mutational spectrum associated with this extremely rare
genetic condition. This is the ﬁrst case of CS identi ﬁed and
genetically con ﬁrmed in the South-West Romania.
I. Streata: None. R. Plesea: None. A. Olaru: None. E.
Popescu: None. A. Pirvu: None. A.L. Riza: None. S.
Serban-Sosoi: None. A. Cimpoeru: None. M. Cucu:
None. A. Dobrescu: None. A. Morosanu: None. C.L.
Mocanu: None. F. Burada: None. M. Ioana: None.
E-P11.39
Autosomal recessive oculodentodigital dysplasia: the third
mutation identi ﬁed in the GJA1 gene
E. Tasdelen, C. D. Durmaz, H. G. Karabulut
Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Departments of
Medical Genetic, Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a
rare condition characterized by typical facial appearance
and variable ﬁndings of the eyes, teeth and ﬁngers. Besides
ocular manifestations like microphtalmia, microcornea, iris
abnormalities and glaucome, small nose, microdontia,
dental anomalies, syndactyly of the 4th-5th ﬁngers (type III
syndactyly), absent phalanx of the toes and dry hair can also
be seen in individuals with this syndrome. ODDD is caused
by mutations in the GJA1 gene on chromosome 6q22-q24
and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner in the
majority of the patients. However, in recent clinical reports,
autosomal recessive ODDD cases caused by GJA1 muta-
tions were also described.
Case Report: Here we report a 14-year-old boy with
microphtalmia, microcornea, narrow nasal bridge, hypo-plastic alae nasi, prominent columnella, hypodontia and
partial syndactyly of 2rd - 3th toes. These clinical ﬁndings
were consistent with the diagnosis of ODDD, and a novelhomozygous mutation, c.442C>T, p.Arg148Ter was deter-
mined in GJA1 gene causing to premature stop codon. His
healthy parents were found to be carriers for the samemutation.
Conclusion: p.Arg148Ter mutation in GJA1 gene that
encodes the transmembrane protein, connexin43 (Cx43) isresponsible for the clinical features of the patient causing to
premature stop codon and probably, leading to a truncated990 J. del Picchianon-functional protein. Up to now, autosomal recessive
ODDD has been reported in eleven patients from six
families but, only two of these cases were con ﬁrmed by
molecular analysis. This is the third mutation described so
far in the literature leading to autosomal recessive form
of ODDD.
E. Tasdelen: None. C.D. Durmaz: None. H.G.
Karabulut: None.
E-P11.41
Holoprosencephaly, orofacial cleft and fronto-naso-orbital
encephaloceles in a highly inbred patient: a new recessivedisorder?
A. Richieri-Costa1, R. A. C. Monteiro2, R. M. Zechi-Ceide1,C .
Tonello3, N. M. Kokitsu-Nakata1, S. Vendramini-Pittoli1,R .M .
S. Sandri1, M. L. de Freitas2, J. F. Mazzeu4, F. S. Jehee2,5
1Serviço de Genética, Hospital de Reabilitaç ão de Anomalias
Craniofaciais, Universidade de S ão Paulo, Bauru, Brazil,
2IEP-Santa Casa Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil,
3Craniofacial Team, Hospital de Reabilitaç ão de Anomalias
Craniofaciais, Universidade de S ão Paulo, Bauru, Brazil,
4Faculdade de Medicina. Universidade de Brasília, Brasília,
Brazil,5Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: We describe a four-month-old Brazilian boy
with semilobar holoprosencephaly, fronto-nasal encephalo-
celes and bilateral cleft lip and palate. Malformationsincluded agenesis of the corpus callosum, abnormal cortical
gyres, dilation of the aqueduct, bilateral endolymphatic sac,
bilateral cystic cocci-vestibular malformation and a cribri-form defect. The 3D TC craniofacial images showed
abnormal frontonasal transition region, with a bone bifur-
cation and partial agenesis of nasal bone. The trunk andupper and lower limbs were normal.
Methods: G-banding karyotype and SNP-array.
Results: Karyotype was normal. SNP-array showed no
copy-number alterations but revealed a high rate of regions
of homozygosity with normal copy number (ROH). The
coefﬁcient of inbreeding is 25%, suggesting that the
proband was a result of a parent-offspring or a full-
siblings relationship, which signi ﬁcantly increases the risk
for an autosomal recessive disorder. Searches in theGenomic Oligoarray and SNP array tool for recessive
disorders did not reveal any gene or disorder within the
patient ’s ROH that matched his clinical features. STIL and
FGF8 , two recessive holoprosencephaly genes, do not map
within our patient ’s ROH.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this rare association of
holoprosencephaly with fronto-naso-orbital encephaloceles
without limb anomalies has never been reported before. Noknown recessive disorder matches our patient ’s clinical
symptoms. These results suggest that a recessive mutation
in a new gene could be responsible for this rare association.
It is also possible that these atypical clinical ﬁndings are the
result of a multiple recessive or complex molecular
diagnosis.
Grants: CAPES, CNPq, FAPEMIG.
A. Richieri-Costa: None. R.A.C. Monteiro: None. R.M.
Zechi-Ceide: None. C. Tonello: None. N.M. Kokitsu-
Nakata: None. S. Vendramini-Pittoli: None. R.M.S.
Sandri: None. M.L. de Freitas: None. J.F. Mazzeu:
None. F.S. Jehee: None.
E-P11.42
Holopsosencephaly could be the extreme phenotypeofRTTN mutations
Y. CAPRI1, C. GINS1, F. GUIMIOT1,2, P. LETARD3,A .
VERLOES1,2, S. DRUNAT1, S. PASSEMARD1,2
1CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France,2Inserm U1141, Paris,
France,3Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, France
RTTN was involved in a recessive autosomal poly-
migrogyria (PM) when it was ﬁrst described in 2012. More
recently, in 2015, RTTN was also involved in micro-
cephalic primary dwar ﬁsm (MCPH) and in microcephaly
with simpli ﬁed gyral pattern. Function of the protein
Rotatin is still unknown but its interaction with another
protein of the centriole, the essential organelle required forcell division, has already been described. We report the
clinical, neuroimaging and neuropathological data from 2
foetuses from a consanguineous couple: the 1
stfoetus
showed a severe microcephaly and the pregnancy was ter-
minated at 21WG. Sonogaphic follow-up of the second
foetus reveled a holoprosencephalic aspect and the preg-nancy was terminated at 16WG Neuropathological exam-
ination found a lissencephaly and ventricular heterotopia in
the 1
stfoetus and an “incomplete holoprosencephaly ”and
neuronal migration anomaly in the 2ndfoetus. Previously
described homozygote missense mutation in exon 23 of
RTTN was found. We compared the phenotype of those 2foetuses with 3 new patients of our serie and the patients
previously described in the literature.
Y. Capri: None. C. Gins: None. F. Guimiot: None. P.
Letard: None. A. Verloes: None. S. Drunat: None. S.
Passemard: None.
E-P11.43
Unusual clinical and laboratory ﬁndings in a case with
Ochoa syndromeAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 991D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, H. Kathom1, B. Karashova1,R .
Tincheva1, V. Salpietro2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics
Hospital, Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
2Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College
London,,, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: The Ochoa or Urofacial syndrome (UFS) is a
rare autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in
either HPSE2 orLRIG2 genes. UFS is characterized by the
association of abnormal facial expression with a lowerurinary tract and bowel dysfunction. The patients with this
syndrome made a typical painful grimace when they tried to
smile. Progression to urinary incontinence, megacystis,vesicoureteric re ﬂux, hydroureteronephrosis, and renal
failure if not early recognition of the disease is unavoidable.
We report the ﬁrst Bulgarian case of this rare syndrome.
Materials and Methods: The patient, a seven-year-old
girl, was referred to genetic evaluation because of the severe
mental retardation and autistic behaviour. She was born atterm after complicated pregnancy. The parents are third
cousins. From early childhood the girl suffered from
frequent vomiting episodes during respiratory infectionsand constipation. Physical examination revealed microce-
phaly and mild mandibular prognathism. Serum lactate
levels were signi ﬁcantly elevated. Metabolic and mitochon-
drial DNA testing results were normal. In an attempt to
establish the diagnosis Whole exome sequencing was
carried out.
Results: A homozygous mutation was identi ﬁed in exon
3 of the HPSE2 gene: c.C457T:p.R153X. Recurrent urinary
tract infections were proven as well as a peculiar invertedfacial expression was noticed after receiving results from
DNA analysis.
Conclusions: Unusual clinical and laboratory ﬁndings in
our case led to delay in diagnosis. The characteristic facial
expression allows early detection of this rare disorder. Early
recognition of UFS and adequate prophylaxis and treatmentcan prevent upper urinary tract damage and renal failure.
D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H. Kathom: None. B.
Karashova: None. R. Tincheva: None. V.
Salpietro: None.
E-P11.44
Possible effect of IGFR1 gene on macrocephaly in a patient
with unbalanced 6;15 translocation with 6p25 deletion and
15q26 duplication
K. Yararbas1,2, C. Sayar2, S. Tumer2, D. Ozciger2, C. Tavukcu2,
N. Oncu2, Y. Alanay11Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, Istanbul, Turkey,
2Acibadem LabGen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul,
Turkey
We report a 2.5 years old girl with a 1877kb loss of terminal
6p25.3 and 8849 kb gain of distal 15q26.1 to ter due to anunbalanced translocation inherited from the mother carrying
the balanced translocation. She is the second liveborn from
a 30 year old healthy mother. Prenatal ultrasound showedcystic cysterna magna and MRI follow up revealed ven-
tricular dilatation. She was born at 38 +3 weeks gestation.
Macrocephaly and buphthalmos was noted at birth. She wasoperated for glaucoma. She was evaluated in pediatric
genetics clinic for dysmorphic facial features and develop-
mental delay. The heterozygous loss in 6p25.3 resulted inloss of 6 OMIM annotated genes including the transcription
factor FOXC1 gene. This gene plays an important role in
eye, brain and heart development. Microdeletions of thisregion are known to be associated with microcephaly, dis-
tinct clinical features, like sensorineural hearing loss, ante-
rior chamber eye defects, cardiac defects and developmentaldelay. The gain in 15q26.1-3 includes 17 OMIM genes
including IGF1R gene, which we speculate explains the
macrocephaly, instead of microcephaly. This patientdemonstrates the combination of two copy number variants
where the loss (deletion) predominates the phenotype and
additional ﬁndings are likely to be addressed to the genes in
the gain (duplication) segment.
We conclude that patients with a relatively well-
delineated microdeletion syndrome as 6p deletion shouldbe thoroughly evaluated for additional copy number
variants when presenting with atypical or unusual pheno-
typical ﬁndings with emphasis on all genes involved in the
imbalance.
K. Yararbas: None. C. Sayar: None. S. Tumer: None.
D. Ozciger: None. C. Tavukcu: None. N. Oncu: None. Y.
Alanay: None.
E-P11.45
Identi ﬁcation of novel mutation in KMT2D gene in a
patient with Kabuki syndrome and borderline
chromosomal instability
A. Pietrzyk1,2, Z. Litwinska3, M. Gos4, M. Bryskiewicz1,E .
Studniak1, M. Dlugoszewska4,5, T. Gambin4, S. Zajaczek1,2
1Cytogenetic Unit, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin,
Poland,2Department of Genetics and Pathomorphology,
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland,
3Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland,4Department of Medical
Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland,
5Faculty of Biology, Univeristy of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland992 J. del PicchiaKabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare, multiple congenital
anomaly syndrome. It is caused by mutations in KMT2D
and KDM6A genes that are involved in histone methylation
and thus leading to epigenetic dysregulation. KS is char-
acterized by distinctive facial features, intellectual dis-
ability, postnatal growth retardation and various structuralanomalies. Other ﬁndings such as increased susceptibility to
infections and autoimmune disorders have also been
observed. Cancer predisposition in KS remains uncertainand it has been described in less than 10 cases so far.
We report 10-year-old boy with typical facial features of
KS, fetal ﬁngertip pads, intellectual disability, complex
heart defect, minor skeletal anomalies, hearing loss and
short stature due to growth hormone de ﬁciency. He also
suffered from IgA and IgG hypogammaglobulinemia andwas operated due to neuroblastoma in the 3
rdmonth of
his life.
No imbalance was detected in array CGH. Targeted gene
sequencing revealed a novel, truncating variant
(c.2063_2064del/ p.Arg688Profs*6) in exon 10 of KMT2D
gene which con ﬁrmed diagnosis of KS in the patient.
Additionally performed assay showed bleomycin- induced
chromosome breakage at a rate of bordeline value (0,74 vs
0,8, which was a cut-off value adopted in our facility).
Histone methyltransferase encoded by KMT2D gene is a
major epigenetic factor which interacts with other protein
complexes regulating expression of multiple genes andmany cell functions. The present observation of chromo-
some breakage in a patient with Kabuki syndrome may
therefore indicate its signi ﬁcance for chromatin stability and
affect clinical characteristics and management of the
disease.
A. Pietrzyk: None. Z. Litwinska: None. M. Gos: None.
M. Bryskiewicz: None. E. Studniak: None. M. Dlugos-
zewska: None. T. Gambin: None. S. Zajaczek: None.
E-P11.46
Two Novel KMT2D Gene Variants in Kabuki Syndrome
D. Kan Karaer1, Z. Yuksel2, K. Karaer3
1Department of Genetic Dr.Ersin Arslan Research and
Training Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey,2Department of Genetic
Mersin Women and Children Hospital, Mersin, Turkey,
3Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Genetic, Gaziantep, Turkey
Kabuki syndrome is a rare, multiple malformation disorder
characterized by distinctive facial appearance, cardiac
anomalies, skeletal abnormalities, joint laxity, short stature,
prominent ﬁnger pads and intellctual disability. Recent
studies reported patients with Kabuki syndrome caused by
variations in KMT2D and KDM6A , two interactingchromatin modi ﬁer responsible for 56-75% and 5-8% of the
cases, respectively. Two patients were referred because of
congenital anomalies and dysmorphic features. They were
borned to healthy non-consanguineous parents. We clini-
cally diagnosed two cases of Kabuki syndrome due to
typical features. Sequencing analysis of KMT2D gene was
performed and two novel variations were identi ﬁed. Two
heterozygous variants were found after parental carrier
testing, namely c.438G>A [p.(S146S)] and c.5674C>T [p.(Gln1892X)]. In silico tools (Mutation Taster, SIFT and
PolyPhen) predicts these mutations as potentially deleter-
ious. Parental carrier testings con ﬁrmed that these variants
occured as de novo events. Clinical manifestation of these
two cases assessed as moderate or mild form of the disease.
Therefore, fuctional studies and additional case reports arerequired to understand the affect of these variations and
genotype-phenotype correlation.
D. Kan Karaer: None. Z. Yuksel: None. K.
Karaer: None.
E-P11.47
Kabuki syndrome - long-term follow-up of ﬁve cases
C. Rusu1, M. Starcea1, R. Aanicai2, R. Popescu1, M. Panzaru1,L .
Butnariu1, R. Blok3, C. Schrander-Stumpel3
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania,2"Sf.
Maria" Children's Hospital, Iasi, Romania,3Maastricht UMC
+, Maastricht, Netherlands
Kabuki syndrome (KS) is characterized by distinctive facial
features, minor skeletal anomalies, fetal pads, intellectual
disability (ID) and postnatal growth de ﬁciency. Cardiac,
renal and skeletal defects are sometimes associated.
KMT2D and KDM6A are the only genes known to deter-
mine KS. We present 5 cases with KS in order to illustrateparticularities identi ﬁed, but also to discuss the changing of
the clinical picture in time. All our cases are males, repre-
sent sporadic cases and have been con ﬁrmed by mutation
analysis of KMT2D. Growth charts and evolution in time
will be provided. Case 1: marked postnatal growth retar-
dation, obesity, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, severevesico-ureteral re ﬂux leading to chronic renal failure,
moderate/severe ID with ADHD; the mother has typical
face and fetal pads (no mutation); Case 2: normal growth,obesity, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, heart defect,
unilateral renal agenesis, nephrocalcinosis, moderate ID;
Case 3: normal growth, situs inversus, typical face, fetalpads, cardiac and renal defect, severe ID with behavioral
disturbance; Case 4: normal growth, obesity, typical face,
soft skin, fetal pads, gynecomastia, cardiac and renal defect,moderate/severe ID with ADHD; the mother has typical
face and fetal pads (no mutation); Case 5: postnatal growthAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 993deﬁcit, presternal obesity, typical face, dry skin, fetal pads,
cardiac and renal defect, mild ID with marked ADHD. In
conclusion, we have identi ﬁed particular features in our KS
patients (obesity, soft skin, ADHD, situs inversus). All of
them have cardiac and renal defects. ID was present in all
cases (severe in 4/5 cases).
C. Rusu: None. M. Starcea: None. R. Aanicai: None.
R. Popescu: None. M. Panzaru: None. L. Butnariu:
None. R. Blok: None. C. Schrander-Stumpel: None.
E-P11.48
Kagami-Ogata syndrome: phenotype of a non-Japanesepatient with microdeletion of imprinted region
J. Behunova, J. Neesen, F. Laccone
Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna,Vienna, Austria
Kagami-Ogata syndrome (KOS) originates from an absence
of a maternal copy of imprinted region 14q32.3, where anonexpression of a MEG3 -gene plays a critical role. About
2/3 of the KOS-patients show paternal uniparental disomy
14, the rest either an epimutation or a deletion of the criticalregion. Majority of the published KOS patients are of
Japanese origin and non-Japanese patients have been
reported rather seldom, as well as the phenotypes withmicrodeletion. An Array-CGH analysis in our patient
showed a microdeletion of 670 kb in the critical region
14q32.2, veri ﬁed also by FISH. An MLPA analysis con-
ﬁrmed a heterozygous deletion of MEG3 -, as well as RTL1 -
andDLK1 -genes, and showed a hypermethylation pattern of
MEG3 -gene - the evidence that the deletion originated at the
maternal allele. The healthy mother showed no microdele-
tion and normal MLPA (de novo microdeletion in daugh-
ter). Our patient showed except of the 14q32.3 deletion alsoa deletion of 1,2 Mb in region 16p13.11, however the
possible phenotypes of the absent genes do not correlate
with the phenotype of the patient. The mother does notcarry this second microdeletion and the father was una-
vailable for the analysis. The patient had been evaluated in
her age of 1,5y and 5y. She showed a global developmentaldelay with severe hypotonia, typical costovertebral
anomalies (signi ﬁcant congenital scoliosis, pectus excava-
tum, “coat-hanger" ribs), facial dysmorphy, adducted
thumbs and an abdominal muscle defect. She needed no
ventilation in infancy, but had an absent sucking re ﬂex,
massive sialorrhoea and a PEG till 5y.
J. Behunova: None. J. Neesen: None. F.
Laccone: None.
E-P11.49
Chromosomal Variants in Klinefelter SyndromeV. Djordjevic1, J. Jovanovic1, M. Dencic-Fekete1, Z. Jemuovic2,
S. Pekic3, M. Nikolic-Djurovic3
1Clinic of Hematology, Clinical center of Serbia, Belgrade,
Serbia,2Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic
Disease, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia,3Clinic
for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Clinical
Center of Serbia; Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia
Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) describes the
phenotype of the most common sex chromosome abnorm-ality in humans (1/600 newborn males). The most wide-
spread karyotype in affected patients is 47,XXY, but
various other karyotypes have been described. The aim ofthis study was to examine the karyotypes of a group of our
patients suspected of having Klinefelter's syndrome.
Materials and Methods: Since 1993, 98 adult KS
patients have been evaluated in the Laboratory of
Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Clinic of Hematol-
ogy, Clinical Center of Serbia. Cytogenetic analysis wascarried out on metaphases obtained from
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral lymphocytes
using a standard procedure. Fluorescence in situ hybridiza-
tion (FISH) analysis was performed on peripheral blood
specimens. Vysis CEP X/Y- alpha satellite DNA probes
were used to detect X and Y chromosomes.
Results: We identi ﬁed KS with the ‘classical ’karyotype
in 77 patients, KS with a mosaic karyotype- 47,XXY/46,
XX in three and 47,XXY/46,XY in four (con ﬁrmed by
FISH), KS with the ‘classical ’karyotype together with other
autosomal chromosomal abnormalities in six, and KS with
other numerical sex chromosome abnormalities-48,XXYYin two (con ﬁrmed by FISH) and 47,XYY in six patients.
Conclusion: In our group of KS patients most had the
‘classical ’karyotype, but some men had diverse other
karyotypes. It is important to determine the nature of the
karyotype of every male with clinical features of KS in very
early childhood in order to initiate an adequate, persona-lized, medical approach.
V. Djordjevic: None. J. Jovanovic: None. M. Dencic-
Fekete: None. Z. Jemuovic: None. S. Pekic: None. M.
Nikolic-Djurovic: None.
E-P11.50
Aﬁve-year-old boy with Laurin- Sandrow syndrome with
micro-duplication on 7q36.3, duplicating a part of the
LMBR1 gene
M. Mirzazadeh1, P. Namiranian1, F. Samiei2, L. Alami3,M .H .
Kariminejad1, M. A. Mensah4, S. Mundlos4, A. Kariminejad1994 J. del Picchia1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center,
Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2Samiei Genetic Counseling
Center, Gazvin, Iran, Islamic Republic of,3Alavi Hospital,
Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,4Institut für Medizinische Genetik und
Humangenetik, Charité –Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany
Laurin-Sandrow syndrome (LSS) (OMIM #135750) is a
rare polydactyly syndrome characterized by mirror image
polysyndactyly of hands and feet, nasal defects, and often
accompanied by ﬁbula and ulna duplication along with
absence of tibia and radius. It has an autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance and is caused by heterozygous
mutations in an SHH (OMIM 600725) regulatory element(ZRS) that resides in intron 5 of the LMBR1 gene (OMIM
605522). Microduplications were detected in 3 families
with Laurin- Sandrow syndrome in the 7q36 chromosomalwith lengths varying from 16 to 75 kb. We report on a ﬁve-
year-old Iranian boy of distantly related parents, presented
with prominent forehead and upturned ﬂat tip nose, syn-
dactyly of all ﬁngers and toes, hypoplastic nails, preaxial
polydactyly of both feet and hypoplastic nails of feet. We
identi ﬁed a de novo 86 kb micro-duplication on 7q36.3,
encompassing exons 5 to 15 of the LMBR1 gene including
the ZRS element by array comparative genomic hybridi-
zation (aCGH). The duplication was veri ﬁed by real-time
quantitative PCR (qPCR).
Key words: Laurin- Sandrow syndrome, polysyndactyly,
nasal defect, LMBR1
M. Mirzazadeh: None. P. Namiranian: None. F.
Samiei: None. L. Alami: None. M.H. Kariminejad:
None. M.A. Mensah: None. S. Mundlos: None. A.
Kariminejad: None.
E-P11.52
A 10q21.2 microdeletion identi ﬁed in a patient with
moderate intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial
features
K. Wojciechowska, M. Lejman, M. Babicz, M. Holweg, K.
Sikora, B. Styka, D. Winnicka, I. Jaszczuk, J. R. Kowalczyk
Children's University Hospital, Lublin, Poland
Introduction: Interstitial deletions in 10q21.2-q22.2 are
rare and the phenotype is not well characterized. Important
genes in this region include: RTKN2 involved in lympho-poiesis, ARID5B affecting cell growth differentiation of B-
lymphocyte progenitors, adipogenesis and liver develop-
ment and ZNF365 involved in morphogenesis of basketcells in the somatosensory cortex during embryogenesis andin the oligodendrocyte differentiation during postnatal
growth.
Materials and Methods: Investigation was performed
with whole-genome oligonucleotide microarray CGH
analysis using clinical 60K microarrays from Oxford Gene
Technology (CytoSure ISCA v2).
Results: The patient, a 6-year-old girl is the only child of
nonconsanguineous, caucasian parents. The pregnancy was
physiological and a routine ultrasound during pregnancy didnot show any abnormalities. Delivery was by cesarean
section at 39th week of gestation. The child ’s birth weight
was 3750 g, length 54 cm and the occipitofrontal headcircumference 35 cm. The patient achieved sitting without
support at the age of 6 months, at the age of 18 months she
started walking. At the age of 4 years the patient wasreferred to the genetic clinic for evaluation because of
moderate intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial
features. Her mother had similar dysmorphic facial featuresand intellectual disability. Microarray CGH analysis
showed a deletion at 10q21.2 in the patient and her mother.
The identi ﬁed deletion included RTKN2, ARID5B (exons
8-10) and ZNF365 (exons 1-5).
Conclusion: For the ﬁrst time, we describe the clinical
characteristics of two patients with a deletion of RTKN2,ARID5B and ZNF365.
K. Wojciechowska: None. M. Lejman: None. M.
Babicz: None. M. Holweg: None. K. Sikora: None. B.
Styka: None. D. Winnicka: None. I. Jaszczuk: None. J.R.
Kowalczyk: None.
E-P11.55
Challenges in the modern genetic diagnostics of a child with
a malformative syndrome and intellectual disability
M. Stoyanova1, T. Todorov2, T. Chervenkov1, R. Vazharova3,M .
Ӧzen4, M. Levkova1, I. Jordanova5, L. Angelova1
1Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria,2Genetic Medico-
Diagnostic Laboratory Genica", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Gynecology
and assisted reproduction Hospital Malinov MD, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,4DoneGenetics and Bioinformatics Inc, Istanbul,
Turkey,5Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria
Introduction: Advances in genomics and development of
new genetic tests allow the diagnosis of rare malformativesyndromes that may not be diagnosable with other methods.
In some cases, however, they generate confusing results that
are dif ﬁcult to interpret or use in a way that improves
clinical care.
Materials and Methods: We report on a 7-year old girl
with moderate intellectual disability, psychomotor andspeech delay, hypomimic face with dysmorphic features,
hypodontia, axillary and inguinal linearAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 995hyperpigmentations, horseshoe kidney, clinodactyly and
abnormal toes. At birth severe muscle atonia and are ﬂexia
were observed. Cytogenetic analysis revealed normal
karyotype. At age 6 whole-genome analysis using the
HumanCytoSNP-12Beadchip and whole-exome sequencing
using Illumina MiSeq were performed.
Results: Molecular karyotyping revealed 46,XX,
arr13q14.11 microduplication (440 Kb) with paternal
origin, considered to be benign variant, based on thenormal phenotype of the father and reports in healthy
controls. NGS detected heterozygous variants in several
genes, but only 4 ( WNT10A, ANO5 ,KCNE2 ,POLG ) were
classi ﬁed as “pathogenic ”or“likely pathogenic ”with
possible autosomal dominant expression. However, none
of these gene variants could fully explain the phenotype ofthe child and the next step in the interpretation of the results
will be sequencing of the parents for seeking these
mutations.
Conclusions: Reaching an accurate genetic diagnosis in
children with multiple congenital abnormalities / intellectual
disability syndromes is still a great challenge. In manycases, a detailed family history and genetic evaluation of
additional family members is essential in determining the
signiﬁcance of genetic variants identi ﬁed in the patient.
M. Stoyanova: None. T. Todorov: None. T. Cherven-
kov: None. R. Vazharova: None. M.Ӧzen: None. M.
Levkova: None. I. Jordanova: None. L. Angelova: None.
E-P11.56
A mosaic double aneuploidy: mos 45,X/47,XX, +18/46,XX
with mild phenotype
M. H. Demirbas1, E. Habiloglu1,2, M. A. Ergun1, E. F. Percin1,
M. Yirmibes-Karaoguz1
1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey,2Medical Genetics Department, Duzce
University Faculty of Medicine, Duzce, Turkey
Introduction: Mosaic trisomy 18 and monosomy X con-
cordance is a very rare genetic phenomenon. There is a
small number of cases in the literature. Here, we present an18-year-old girl with mild phenotype.
Clinical Report: An 18-year-old female patient
followed-up to the psychiatric department due to anxietydisorder and nocturnal enuresis. She had no mental
retardation but her school performance was low. She had
short stature, hypotelorism, trident posterior hairline,cubitus valgus, atrial septal defect and irregular menses
with normal uterine and ovarian morphology. Her gonado-
tropin and sex hormone levels was within the normal range.
Materials/Methods: Karyotype analysis was performed
from two separate lymphocyte cultures from the peripheralblood sample and ﬁbroblast culture from the antecubital
skin. Additionally, we evaluated the chromosome X and
chromosome 18 numbers with ﬂuorescent in situ hybridiza-
tion (FISH) technique.
Results: A total of 100 metaphases were counted from
the lymphocyte cultures of the patient. There were 68metaphases with 47,XX, +18; 27 metaphases with 45,X;
and 5 metaphases with 46,XX karyotype. FISH analysis
was con ﬁrmed the result. The ﬁbroblast culture revealed 21
metaphases with trisomy 18 and 51 metaphases with
monosomy X without normal metaphases.
Conclusions: Although the patient showed a high level of
trisomy 18 cell group in the lymphocyte culture, she had
more similar Turner phenotype rather than trisomy 18
phenotype. There is no correlation between the trisomy 18ratio in lymphocyte or ﬁbroblast culture and the phenotype,
as can be seen in this case and in other de ﬁned cases in the
literature.
M.H. Demirbas: None. E. Habiloglu: None. M.A.
Ergun: None. E.F. Percin: None. M. Yirmibes-
Karaoguz: None.
E-P11.57
A variant outside the catalytic domain of SMARCA2 isassociated with a phenotype distinct from Nicolaides-
Baraitser syndrome
G. Cappuccio1, A. Torella2, M. Pinelli1, V. Nigro2,T .
Consortium2, R. Hennekam3, N. Brunetti-Pierri1
1Federico II Univeristy, Naples, Italy,2Tigem, Pozzuoli, Italy,
3Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Mutations in SMARCA2 gene encoding a
chromatin remodeling gene are responsible for Nicolaides-
Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) presenting with intellectualdisability (ID), seizures, short stature, and a recognizable
pattern of facial dysmorphic features. The majority of
NCBRS causative SMARCA2 mutations affect the ATPase
domain (exon 15- 25). To date, SMARCA2 variants outside
the ATPase domain have been identi ﬁed by whole exome
sequencing (WES) in two individuals lacking the typicalNCBRS facial features.
Patient and Methods: Here, we report a 6-year-old
individual harboring a de novo variant detected by WES in
theSMARCA2 gene not affecting the catalytic domain (p.
Leu529Val; exon 9). This individual presented with frontal
bossing, short palpebral ﬁssures, downturned nasal tip with
hypoplastic alae nasi, thin upper lip, moderate ID and
Arnold-Chiari type 1 malformation.
Results and conclusions: The facial features were not
consistent with NCBRS dysmorphic features. Although
further cases need to be investigated, the individual herein996 J. del Picchiadescribed suggest that SMARCA2 mutations falling outside
the catalytic domain might result in a phenotype that is
distinct from NCBRS.
G. Cappuccio: None. A. Torella: None. M. Pinelli:
None. V. Nigro: None. T. Consortium: None. R.
Hennekam: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri: None.
E-P11.58
17q22 microdeletion detected by array-CGH leading toNOG-related symphalangism spectrum disorder (NOG-
SSD)
E. Atl ı, H. Gürkan, E. I. Atli, Y. Özen, D. Eker, C. Akurut, S.
Demir, H. Tozk ır
Trakya University, Edirne, Turkey
17q22 microdeletions involving the NOG gene have been
reported to cause the NOG-related symphalangism spec-
trum disorder (NOG-SSD). NOG-SSD is mainly char-
acterized by symphalangism and the ankylosis of the jointsinﬁngers or toes. Other ﬁndings reported in the literature in
relation to 17q22 microdeletion are microcephaly, urogen-
ital anomalies (absence of uterus / vagina, cryptorchidism,penile chordee, duplex renal system, small penis), mild/
moderate intellectual impairment, speech stress, cervical
and/or other vertebral fusion/defects and hypogonadotropichypogonadism.
A thirteen years old male referred us because of speech
delay and short ﬁfthﬁnger. Her parents were nonconsan-
guineous and healthy. He had dysmorphic features includ-
ing bilateral ptosis, epicanthus, deep-set small eye,
pollybeak deformity, low-set ears, high narrow palate,shortened philtrum, micrognathia, arachnodactyly, long
neck, bilateral shortening of the 5th middle phalanx of the
hand and bilateral syndactyly of toes 2-3, pectus carinatum,and dorsal hypopigmentation, hyperopia. The patient was
operated for undescended testis at the age of ﬁve. There is
only one seizure history occured at the age of 13. G-bandingkaryotype using peripheral blood was normal. Array CGH
analysis was performed on Agilent 4x180K CNV +SNP
oligo-array by manufacturer ’s protocol. 3977 kb sized copy
number deletion arr[hg19] 17q22 (51,848,499-55,825,448)
x1 was identi ﬁed in our patient.
To our knowledge, 17q22 microdeletions involving the
NOG gene has been reported extremely rare previously. The
Array-CGH result of our patient 17q22 microdeletion
contributed to the genotype-phenotype correlations asso-ciated with this chromosomal aberration.
E. Atl ı:None. H. Gürkan: None. E.I. Atli: None. Y.
Özen: None. D. Eker: None. C. Akurut: None. S. Demir:
None. H. Tozk ır:None.E-P11.59
De novo 15q26.2-q26.3 deletion in a patient with oculo-
auriculo-vertebral spectrum
F. Piceci-Sparascio1, H. Hozhabri1, D. Melis2, P. Strisciuglio2,A .
Capalbo3, B. Torres3, L. Bernardini3, A. De Luca1, V. Guida1
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza
Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,2U.O.C. di
Genetica Clinica Pediatrica Dipartimento di Pediatria Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria "Federico II",, Naples, Italy,
3Cytogenetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital,
IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
Normal 0 14 false false false IT JA X-NONE /* Style
Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"-
Tabella normale"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-
colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-prior-ity:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in
5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bot-
tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family:
Cambria; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-
font-family:Cambria; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}Oculo auriculo vertebral spectrum (OAVS, MIM164210) is
a rare disease due to an altered development of the deri-
vatives of the ﬁrst and second branchial arch. We observed
aﬁve-year-old patient with growth retardation, hemi-
mandibular and maxillary hypoplasia, microretrognathia,
preauricular pits, corneal lipodermoid, cataract, vertebralanomalies and congenital heart defects. Simple and com-
plicated dental caries and mild developmental delay were
also present. Thyroid pro ﬁle and hormonal analysis of IGF1
gene were in normal ranges, like analysis of bone age data
which corresponded to chronological age. Research of
microdeletions and microduplications through SNP-arrayanalysis (Cytoscan HD array) identi ﬁed two different
genomic rearrangements: a de novo deletion of about 5 Mb
on chromosome 15q26.2-q26.3 and a maternally trans-mitted deletion of 120 Kb on chromosome 9p22.1. Terminal
deletion of long arm of chromosome 15 are a rare cause of
shorth stature (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation),and are associated to microcephaly, skeletal anomalies,
facial and auricular dismorphic features. The same chro-
mosomal region has been previously involved in OAVS bylinkage analysis in a three-generation family. This study
reports the association between deletion of chromosome
15q26.2-q26.3 and OAVS, adds further genetic hetero-geneity to this condition, suggests the presence of one or
more candidate gene/s in this region, con ﬁrming the
importance of array-based studies in patients with OAVS.<!--EndFragment-->Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 997F. Piceci-Sparascio: None. H. Hozhabri: None. D.
Melis: None. P. Strisciuglio: None. A. Capalbo: None. B.
Torres: None. L. Bernardini: None. A. De Luca: None.
V. Guida: None.
E-P11.60
14q22 Copy Number Variations encompassing OTX2 , new
cases widening the phenotype
F. Blanco-Kelly, H. Stewart, D. Shears
OxGeM (Oxfor Centre for Genomic Medicine), Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United
Kingdom
Introduction: OTX2 (14q22.3) is key in craniofacial and
sensory organ development. 14q22.3 Copy number variants
(CNV) affecting OTX2 have been identi ﬁed in patients with
a great variety of phenotypes, from autosomal dominant
retinal dystrophy to the otocephaly-dysgnathia-complex
(ODC) and hemifacial microsomia (HM), being the mostfrequent phenotype severe eye defects (microphthalmia/
anophthalmia); with or without cerebral malformations and/
or pituitary abnormalities with inter and intra-familialvariability and incomplete penetrance.
We present the phenotypic ﬁndings of a 3 generation
family displaying all the OTX2 associated phenotypes, and a
case presenting neuroblastoma.
Patients and Methods: Comparative genomic hybridiza-
tion (aCGH), Agilent1 60K Human array (ISCA design).Revealed in the Agilent G2565BA microarray scanner
(Plateforma G_enomique, Nantes) and analyzed by Agilent
Cytogenomics 3.0 software. Genomic position: UCSCGenome Browser on Human Feb. 2009 (GRCh37 / hg19)
Assembly43,
Results: Family A: 2.15Mb deletion (14q22.2q22.3)
OTX2 being the only pathology associated OMIM gene.
Family B: 370Kb deletion (14q22.3) affecting exclusively
OTX2 .
Table 1 and ﬁgures 1 and 2 show the cases´ phenotypes.
Conclusions: First family case of a 14q22.2q22.3
deletion exhibiting all OTX2 known phenotypes
Neurobasltoma could be an additional OTX2 phenotypic
characteristic, and supports the possible involvement of
OTX2 in nasal tumours pathogenesis.
Phenotypic variability is key in the counselling of these
families.
Table 1.Clinical ﬁndings on the new described patients
presenting a deletion on 14q22 region
Family / patient A/** A/I.1 A/II.2 A/II.3 A/II.4 A/II.6 B/II.1
14q 22.2q22.3 Not analyzed 22.2q22.3 22.2q22.3 22.2q22.3 22.3Table (continued)
Family / patient A/** A/I.1 A/II.2 A/II.3 A/II.4 A/II.6 B/II.1
Not
analyzed
CNV type, size
and break pointsNA Del,
2.15Mb,55386907-
57537913NA Del, 2.15Mb,
55386907-57537913Del, 2.15Mb,
55386907-57537913Del, 2.15Mb,
55386907-5753791357166523-
57537913
Gender M M M M M F F
Prenatal
ﬁndingsNO NO Agnatia NO NO Ventriculomegaly Small for
gestational age
Age at
lastassessmentNR 32yr 21w* 28w* 10yr 11m 12yr
Strucutral eye
anomaliesNO NO NO NO NO Microphthalmia,
iris coloboma BENO
Optic nerve
defectsNR NR NR NR NR Nistagmus under
investigationNR
Retinal
dystrophyNR Maculopathy NR NR NR Nistagmus under
investigNR
Pituitary
strucutral
anomaliesNR NR NO NO pitutary mass NO Hypoplasia
GH de ﬁcit YES NR (normal
stature)NA NA Normal growth short stature under
investigationYES
Other pituitary
hormone
deﬁcienciesNR NR NA NA NR NR Hypotiroidism
Brain
malformationNR NR NO NO NR Ventriculomegaly,
cerebellar
hypoplasia, small
corpus callosumNO
Neurodevelop-
mentLearning
difﬁculetiesNormal NA NA Autism and
learning
difﬁcultiesNormal Normal
ODC NR Micrognatia Agnatia,
microstomia,
caudally
positioned ears,
absence of
external
auditory canalMicrognatia,
microstomia,
small tongueMicrognatia NR Micrognatia
Facial
asymmetryNR NO NO Jaw
asymmetryNR NO NO
Velopharyngeal
anomaliesNR NR NO NO NR Laryngomalacia NR
Microcephaly NR NO NO NO NR NO NO
Digit anomalies NR NO NO NO ﬁxed position
of 5th ﬁ
ngerNO NO
Kidney
anomaliesNR NR NO NO NR NR NR
Heart anomalies NR NR NO NO NR NR NR
Genital
anomaliesNR NO NO NO NR NO NO
Hearing loss NR NO NA NA NR NO NO
Dysmorphism NR NO YES YES NR NO high foreheadOther NR NO NO NO NR NO NEUROBLAS-
TOMA
F. Blanco-Kelly: None. H. Stewart: None. D.
Shears: None.
E-P11.62
Pre- and postnatal diagnosis of microchromosomalabnormalities in the population of Sverdlovsk Region
(Russian Federation)
S. Deryabina1,2, N. Nikitina1, E. Shamanskaya1, A. Konoplev1,
O. Lagutina1, M. G. Sumina1
1Medical Center 'Health Care of Mother and Child',
Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation,2Ural Federal university
named after the First President of Russia B.N.Yeltsin,Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation998 J. del PicchiaIntroduction: As many of hereditary diseases and syn-
dromes diseases are characterized by territorial and ethnic
heterogeneity it is very important to choice optimal methods
for studying of pathology in particular population.
Materials and Methods: We present a genetic examina-
tion of 3359 samples (2012-2017 y.). 2,947 prenatalsamples of fetuses (villus chorionic, amniotic cells, cord
blood) were analyzed by BACs-on-Beads technology
(PerkinElmer, Finland). 412 samples of whole blood fromchildren with clinical signs of chromosomal abnormalities,
who were born in the same period were performed by
multiplex ligase ampli ﬁcation of probes (MLPA) (MRC-
Holland, Netherland). DNA was examined for aneuploidy
at 13, 18, 21, X, Y chromosomes and 9 microdeletion
syndromes.
Results: The number of microstructural chromosome
disturbances was detected more often for children than in
the fetal materials (17.5% vs. 1.5%).
Syndromes Region Detected
prenatal,
(n=2947)Detected
postnatal,
(n=412)
Di George 22q11.2/
10p1451 2
Cri-du-chat 5p15.3-
15.234
Williams -Buren 7q11.2 1 10
Prader Willi/Angelman 15q11-
q12-8
Wolf-Hirschhorn 4p16.3 - 4
Smith -Magenis 17p11.2 - 2
Miller-Dieker 17p13.3 - 1
Pallister-Killian 12p 1
Microdeletion/microduplication
not associated with known
syndromes35 31
Total (%) 45 (1,5) 72 (17,5)
Conclusions: The existing criteria for selection of
pregnant women for prenatal diagnosis (the combination
of anamnestic, biochemical and ultrasound data) areineffective for diagnosing of micro anomalies of chromo-
somes. The MLPA or BoBs technologies are a reliable
method of searching for microchromosomal rearrangementsfor the diagnosis of genetic syndromes for patients need
medical genetic counseling.
S. Deryabina: None. N. Nikitina: None. E. Shamans-
kaya: None. A. Konoplev: None. O. Lagutina: None. M.
G. Sumina: None.E-P11.63
Clinical assesment importance in an asymmetrical
overgrowth case in the context of New Generation Testing
F. Nedelea1, I. Iordanescu2, A. Mocanu2, T. Huseyinoglu1,M .
Bari1, C. Bohaltea2, G. Peltecu1
1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania,2Clinical
Hospital Pantelimon, Bucharest, Romania
Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) uses Next
Generation sequencing technology (NGS) to identifymutations in all the coding regions of an individuals ’gen-
ome. WES is useful when an individual is presenting
multiple phenotypical characteristics that are not suggestivefor a speci ﬁc syndrome. We present a case of a six-year-old
boy presenting with upper limb asymmetry, hemangioma of
the distal phalanx of the index ﬁnger on the left hand,
hemihypertrophy and extended hemangioma of the left
hemithorax. The abnormal vascularization pattern of the left
hemithorax was observed in the third trimester of preg-nancy. Based on the clinical presentation, our suspicion was
of Proteus syndrome.
Material and Method: Due to genetic heterogeneity of
Proteus syndrome, WES was performed for genetic
conﬁrmation.
Results: The WES analysis was unable to con ﬁrm
Proteus syndrome or other cause for the child ’s phenotype,
due to possible somatic mosaicism or technical limitation of
the method. Noteworthy two incidental ﬁndings responsible
of long QT syndrome and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
were reported.
Conclusion: A very important issue in communicating
WES results are incidental ﬁndings. They represent
mutations discovered by WES that can be associated with
diseases which can affect the individual throughout his life.In our case, although the test didn ’t identify a genetic cause
for the patient ’s phenotype, the incidental ﬁndings suggest
that cardiological monitoring could be life-saving. Alsofamilial genetic testing of above mentioned mutations is
adviced.
Acknowledgements: The probe was analised at Cento-
gene Laboratory.
F. Nedelea: None. I. Iordanescu: None. A. Mocanu:
None. T. Huseyinoglu: None. M. Bari: None. C.
Bohaltea: None. G. Peltecu: None.
E-P11.64
Unexpected phenotype in a frameshift mutation of PTCH1
B. Beltrami1, G. Tolva1, E. Prada1, G. Scuvera1, R. Silipigni2,D .
Graziani3, G. Bulfamante3, P. Marchisio1, D. Milani1Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 9991Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of
Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Milan, Italy,2Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca´ Granda, Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy,3Department of Human
Pathology, Cytogenetic and Molecular Pathology, ASST SantiPaolo e Carlo, Milan, Italy
Gorlin syndrome, also known as Basal cell nevus syndrome
(BCNS #109400), is a rare autosomal dominant genetic
disorder. The penetrance of BCNS is complete and the
expressivity is variable. The most characteristic clinicalmanifestation is the development of multiple basal cell
carcinomas at a young age; other common ﬁndings are:
odontogenic keratocysts, calci ﬁed falx cerebri, skeletal
anomalies, palmoplantar pits, macrocephaly and dys-
morphisms. BCNS is mainly caused by mutations in
PTCH1 gene, the “protein patched homolog ”gene: an
onco-suppressor gene that maps at 9q22.32 region. Other
genes that can be involved in the disease are SUFU and less
commonly PTCH2 . Those genes participate in the “sonic
hedgehog ”(SHH) signaling pathway. A disease related to
BCNS is the 9q22.3 microdeletion syndrome. This syn-
drome has an overlapping clinical phenotype with theBCNS, but it can also present other possible ﬁndings in
addition: metopic craniosynostosis, pre and post-natal
overgrowth, obstructive hydrocephalus, developmentaldelay, intellectual disability and seizures. This condition is
caused by the deletion of a genome region containing the
PTCH1 and the FANCC genes. Here we report the case of a
11 years old girl that came to our attention for overgrowth,
dysmorphic features of the face and craniosynostosis, but
with a normal intellectual and motor development. Wepresent this case because it is the ﬁrst one with a PTCH1
mutation (p.Val502Glyfs*13) and a 9q22.3 microdeletion
syndrome phenotype. This ﬁnding may strengthen the
importance of the role of the PTCH1 gene especially
regarding the metopic craniosynostosis.
B. Beltrami: None. G. Tolva: None. E. Prada: None. G.
Scuvera: None. R. Silipigni: None. D. Graziani: None. G.
Bulfamante: None. P. Marchisio: None. D. Milani: None.
E-P11.65
Phenotype characterization in patients with Noonan
syndrome
E. Sukarova-Angelovska1, M. Kocova1, R. Kacarska1, B. Lee2
1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of,2Medical Genetics Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic
ofRASopathies are group of autosomal dominant disorders
that are phenotypically similar. They are caused mostly by
mutations in the RAS/MAP kinase signaling pathway.
According to the clinical presentation and speci ﬁc mutation,
they are distributed in several subgroups. Phenotypic
changes include facial dysmorphism, short stature, cardiacdefects, haematological disturbances and variable neu-
ropsychiatric problems. The mutations in PTPN11 gene are
most commonly presented, followed by mutations in othergenes - KRAS, HRAS. SOS1, etc. We present ten patients
with clinical phenotype of Noonan syndrome. Phenotypic
presentation is consistant with the diagnosis and includeshort stature, variable cardiac defects, skin and hair changes,
genital anomalies in some. Facial changes include hyper-
telorism, antimongoloid eye slanting, long philtrum, dentalmaloclusion, low set ears, pterigia, etc.Two of the patients
had hearing impairment. Molecular analysis was performed
by the NGS method including genes: NRAS, ROT1,SCHOC2, HRAS, CBL, KRAS, PTPN11, SPRED1,
MAP2K1, NF1 and MAP2K2. In 60% of evaluated patients
mutations in PTPN11, RAF1 and KRAS genes were found.In four patients with typical NS features no mutations were
found so far. Intelectual disability varies in all patients,
ranging from minor to profound. Our ﬁndings indicate that
mutation distribution in RASopathies are similar to those in
other studies. Further molecular evaluation is needed in
order to reveal all mutations in patients with NS. Althoughsimilar in clinical presentation, patients with RASopathy
syndromes reveal some distinctive phenotype features that
can direct the diagnostic procedure.
E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. Kocova: None. R.
Kacarska: None. B. Lee: None.
E-P11.66
Complex constitutive rearrangement involving
chromosome 15 in a girl with postnatal growth anddevelopmental delay
L. B. Minasi1, I. P. Pinto1, R. M. Pinto1,2, J. F. da Silva1,D .M .
Cunha1, C. L. Ribeiro1, C. C. da Silva1,3, A. D. da Cruz1,3
1Ponti ﬁcal Catholic University of Goiás, School of Agricultural
and Biological Sciences, Genetics Master ’s Program, Replicon
Research Group, Goiânia, Brazil,2Federal University of
Goias, Health Science PhD Program, Goiânia, Brazil,3Human
Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Secretary of
Goias State for Public Health, Goiânia, Brazil
Introduction: Rearrangements affecting chromosome 15
are rare and affected patients show a variety of nonspeci ﬁc
features, including complex congenital malformations,growth de ﬁciency, and developmental delay.1000 J. del PicchiaMaterial and Methods: Here, we reported a 2 years old
girl with postnatal growth delay, short stature, brachydac-
tyly, triangular face, and facial dysmorphisms with
prominent forehead, hypertelorism, bulbous nasal tip, long
philtrum, thin upper lip, and micrognathism. Physical
examination revealed height of 71 cm (<4rd) and weightof 7000 g (<3rd). G-banding analysis at a band resolution of
>550 was performed, followed by FISH using probes
15q11-13 (SNRPN) for Prader-Willi/Angelman and15q26.3 for internal control.
Results: The karyotype showed a constitutive chromo-
somal aberration, 46,XX,r(15)[64]/46,XX,r(15)dup(15)[16]/47,XX, +r(15)[5]. FISH analysis con ﬁrmed the karyo-
type results and showed two more different cell lines 46,XX
[9]/45,XX,-15[6]. In r(15) was detected the absence of the15q26.3 signal resulting in a genetic material loss, region
that harboring IGF1R gene responsible for biological
activity of IGF1.
Conclusions: Ring chromosome results from breakage in
both arms of a chromosome, with fusion of the points of
fracture and loss of the distal fragments. In this context, aring induces chromosomal instability, which in turn
generates a diversity of cell lines harboring different
chromosome con ﬁgurations. In the case described here,
we hypothesized that a 46,XX zygote acquired a r(15)
leading to the instability subjacent to the other cell lines that
had ring duplication, monosomy 15, trisomy 15, whichincluded r(15), most likely due to different approaches to
restore balanced genome in the cells, such as trisomy rescue
and UPD.
L.B. Minasi: None. I.P. Pinto: None. R.M. Pinto: None.
J.F. da Silva: None. D.M. Cunha: None. C.L. Ribeiro:
None. C.C. da Silva: None. A.D. da Cruz: None.
E-P11.67
Ring X chromosome In a male with short stature andhypospadias
K. Al Fayez, H. Elghezal, A. Almazyad, M. Alshedoukhy, S. Al
Ghamdi, A. Al Jasser, M. Al amro
Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Ring X is a rare chromosomal anomaly mainly seen in
females with turner syndrome. In males it is extremelyrare because nullisomy for X chromosome material is not
compatible with survival and induce an early abortion.
Only two cases of male with ring chromosome X andpresenting a short stature as the only phenotypic
abnormality (Ogata et al. 1990 and Ellison et al. 2002)
were previously reported. We report here a new case of atwo years old male with ring chromosome X characterized
using Karyotype, FISH and 180K array ComparativeGenomic Hybridization and presenting a short stature and
hypospadias, without dysmor phic features or any psycho-
motor developmental delay. Molecular investigations
showed that ring X chromosome in this patient presents a
terminal deletion of 923 Kb including SHOX gene and
totally located on the pseud oautosomal region 1 (PAR1)
and an inverted duplication of 2.3 Mb proximal to STS
gene. The non-loss of X chromosome material outside the
PAR region explain the compatibility with survival in ourcase because the absence of functional nullisomy. Loss of
SHOX gene is presumably common with the two pre-
viously reported cases and is the cause of short stature.However, hypospadias was not reported in the previous
reported cases and may be due to the associated dupli-
cation outside PAR1 region and including particularlyPRKX gene coding for a protei n involved in urogenital
system morphogenesis.
K. Al Fayez: None. H. Elghezal: None. A. Almazyad:
None. M. Alshedoukhy: None. S. Al Ghamdi: None. A.
Al Jasser: None. M. Al amro: None.
E-P11.68
Variant in RNF113A gene, links neurodevelopmental
pathway and dna repair pathways to severe congenitalmalformations
M. Tessarech1, M. Gorce1, F. Boussion1, S. Triau1, S. Khiati1,2,
M. Charif1,2, A. Guichet1,2, A. Ziegler1,2, C. Fallet-Bianco3,H .
Salhi4, D. Bonneau1,2, E. Colin1,2
1CHU d'Angers, Angers, France,2UMR CNRS 6015, INSERM
U1083, Angers, France,3CH de Saint Anne, Paris, France,
4APHP - Cochin Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France
RNF113A is an intronless gene that encodes a protein with a
Ring type Zinc ﬁnger domain that seems to be involved in
DNA repair pathway. So far, RNF113A has only been
implicated in one family with intellectual disability and
trichothiodystrophy (TTD), which is a group of rare auto-somal recessive disorders that variably affect a wide range
of organs derived from the neuroectoderm. In this report,
we describe two related fetuses with a phenotype withdysmorphic features, microcephaly, callosal and cerebellar
malformations, absent testis and micropenis. WES was
performed on one of the fetuses and both parents, and led tothe identi ﬁcation of a nonsense variant in the highly con-
served RNF113A gene (c.901 C>T, p.Q301*). Sanger
sequencing analysis con ﬁrmed the variant was present in
both fetuses and inherited from the mother.Our report pro-
vides two new cases with a RNF113A variant. This fur-
nishes more consistent evidence of a role of RNF113A in
neurodevelopment with functional studies that suggest a
role in DNA repair pathway.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1001M. Tessarech: None. M. Gorce: None. F. Boussion:
None. S. Triau: None. S. Khiati: None. M. Charif: None.
A. Guichet: None. A. Ziegler: None. C. Fallet-Bianco:
None. H. Salhi: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Colin: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; novartis pharma SAS.
E-P11.69
Two novel ROR2 mutations in Robinow syndrome
E. K ırat1, H. Mutlu Albayrak2, K. Karaer1
1Dr. Ersin Arslan Research and Training Hospital, Gaziantep,
Turkey,2Cengiz Gokcek State Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey
Introduction: Robinow syndrome is a genetically hetero-
geneous skeletal dysplasia, is due to mutations in the ROR2
(MIM: 268310), WNT5A (MIM: 180700), DVL1 (MIM:
616331) and DVL3 (MIM: 616894) genes. ROR2 muta-tions exhibit autosomal recessive inheritance pattern
whereas WNT5A, DVL1, DVL3 mutations segregate as
autosomal dominant trait. Robinow syndrome is character-ized by skeletal abnormalities encompass mesomelic or
acromesomelic limb shortening, brachydactyly, distinctive
facial features and genital hypoplasia.
Materials and Methods: We diagnosed three cases (two
of whom siblings) of Robinow syndrome with typical
clinical features. All coding exons and the ﬂanking intronic
regions of the ROR2 gene ampli ﬁed by PCR and performed
bidirectional direct sequencing. Variations were detected by
comparing the reference sequences and interpreted by insilico predictive programs.
Results: Two novel mutations [(c.1386 +1G>A),
(c.784_785insCGAGGTGCTGGAGAGCG, p.D262Afs*189)] were identi ﬁed in ROR2 gene. The ﬁrst
mutation (c.1386 +1G>A) is located in the spice donor site
of the intron 8 that affects the protein structure by damagesplicing. The other mutation is occurred in exon 6 by
inserted 17 base that lead to disrupt the amino acid
sequence. In silico analysis predicted both of the novelmutations to be pathogenic.
Conclusions: This study revealed the ﬁrst ROR2 gene
splice-site mutation and expanded the database for ROR2mutations in patients with Robinow syndrome.
E. K ırat: None. H. Mutlu Albayrak: None. K.
Karaer: None.
E-P11.70
Extending the critical regions for mutations in thenoncoding gene RNU4ATAC in another patient with
Roifman syndrom
J. Graf, A. Hallermayr, A. Laner, B. Schönfeld, A. Benet-Pagès,
E. Holinski-FederMGZ, Munich, Germany
Introduction: Roifman Syndrome (RFMN; OMIM
#616651) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease char-
acterized by growth retardation, humoral immunode ﬁ-
ciency, intellectual de ﬁcit, distinctive facial features and in
some individuals retinal dystrophy. This syndrome is
caused by compound heterozygosity in the gene RNU4A-
TAC, coding for the snRNA U4atac, which is an essential
component for minor intron splicing.
Material and Methods: Here we describe a female ﬁve
year old patient presenting with growth retardation,recurrent infections, organ anomalies and developmental
delay. The patient´s DNA was tested before by microarray
analysis. No causative results could be detected. Due togenetic heterogeneity a trio analysis was performed on
clinical exome sequencing using the Illumina TruSight One
sequencing panel. The focus of our analysis lay on genesassociated with multiple congenital anomalies and / or
developmental delay.
Results and Conclusions: Compound heterozygosity of
two SNVs could be detected in the gene RNU4ATAC . The
paternally inherited substitution n.13C>T in the stem II
region had been described previously, while the maternallyinherited substitution n.116A>C affecting a highly con-
served nucleotide in RNU4ATAC had not been described
before. We propose that these variants are the likely causeof the patient ’s phenotype, thereby extending the spectrum
of pathogenic variants in RNU4ATAC .
1J. Graf: None. A. Hallermayr: None. A. Laner: None.
B. Schönfeld: None. A. Benet-Pagès: None. E. Holinski-
Feder: None.
E-P11.71
Three Cases of Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome with Novel de
Novo cAMP binding protein-BP (CREBBP) Mutations
A. Bak ır1, B. Çavdarl ı2, V. Topçu2
1Zekai Tahir Burak Education and Research Hospital,
ANKARA, Turkey,2Ankara Numune Education and Research
Hospital, ANKARA, Turkey
Introduction: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; OMIM
#180849) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic condition
with a prevalence of 1 in 125,000-720,000. RSTS is char-
acterized by broad thumbs and halluces, facial dysmorph-ism, short stature and a variable degree of intellectual
disability. Pathogenic variants in CREBBP and EP300
genes cause RSTS in 50-60% and 5-8% of cases, respec-tively. The majority of the cases occur as a result of de novo
heterozygous mutations.1002 J. del PicchiaMaterials and Methods: We suspected RSTS based on
particular clinical ﬁndings and dysmorphic features of the
patients. Patient DNA samples were extracted from the
peripheral blood, followed by CREBBP whole gene
sequencing.
Results: In one patient two novel heterozygous missense
variants were detected: c. 5034C>G and c.5047C>T. In
other two patients, we found novel heterozygous frameshift
mutations: c.3250_3250 +3delAGTA and c.4599-4599delT,
respectively. In silico analyses predicted these mutations as
deleterious/disease-causing alterations. Parental mutation
analyses of patients were normal and con ﬁrmed the de novo
occurrence of the variants.
Conclusions: We have identi ﬁed four novel CREBBP
variants in three patients demonstrating clinical featuresof RSTS.
A. Bak ır:None. B. Çavdarl ı:None. V. Topçu: None.
E-P11.72
Co-occurrence of SHOX region (Xp22.3) rearrangements
and 15q25.2 duplication in a girl with short stature, genitaldefects and bone anomalies
D. Babu1, A. Fanelli1, A. Monzani2, S. Mellone1, G. Stress1,G .
Genoni2, S. Bellone2, F. Prodam2, M. Giordano1
1Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Health Sciences,
University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy,2Division of
Pediatrics, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy
The presence of multiple genomic unbalances in the same
patients co-operate to cause complex phenotypes. Here wedescribe a 9-year old girl, diagnosed with short stature with
growth hormone de ﬁciency and precocious puberty. She
had agenesis of right tibia and ﬁbula, a supernumerary digit
of the left foot, dorsal scoliosis, short neck, upturned nose,
hypotelorism and arterial hypertension. MRI showed uterus
didelphys with double vagina. An array CGH analysisrevealed the presence of two distinct duplications ﬂanking
theSHOX gene within the PAR1 region (Xp22.3) and an
additional duplication of 1.6-2.5 Mb at 15q25.2. Theduplicated region on 15q25.2 contains 13 genes, some of
them have been associated to well de ﬁned disorders but not
included in the clinical features observed in our patient. Theparents were not available to establish the origin of the
duplications. The extreme short stature of the girl might be
the result of the co-occurrence of growth hormone de ﬁ-
ciency and the rearrangements in the SHOX region. Mole-
cular defects of SHOX and/or its regulatory region explain
60-80% of cases with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 7-15% of cases with idiopathic short stature and are associated
to hypoplasia/aplasia of the ulna and ﬁbula. Few previouslydescribed patients carrying duplication at 15q25.2 presented
some clinical features resembling those observed in our
patient such as anomalies of the foot digits, hypertension,
and short neck. In conclusion, the complex phenotype of
our patient is likely to represent the result of a never
described co-occurrence of unbalances in the SHOX region
and on 15q25.2.
D. Babu: None. A. Fanelli: None. A. Monzani: None. S.
Mellone: None. G. Stress: None. G. Genoni: None. S.
Bellone: None. F. Prodam: None. M. Giordano: None.
E-P11.73
IGF2 mutation causing Silver-Russell syndrome in an
Aboriginal Australian girl
C. J. Poulton1, D. Azmanov2, L. Ewans3, D. Gration4, L. Dreyer4,
S. Broley4, G. Baynam4
1Department of Paediatrics, Perth, Australia,2Department of
Diagnostic Genomics, Perth, Australia,3Genome one, Perth,
Australia,4Genetics Services of Western Australia, Perth,
Australia
Introduction: Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS OMIM
180860) is a rare disorder characterised by severe intrau-
terine and postnatal growth retardation with additional
clinical criteria. It remains a clinical diagnosis with amolecular cause identi ﬁable in 60-70%. We present a 4-
year-old Aboriginal Australian girl with an SRS phenotype
who was extensively investigated prior to referral to ourUndiagnosed disease program through which IGF2 was
investigated as candidate gene based on clinical inter-
disciplinary panel assessment.
Materials and Methods: Trio whole genome sequencing
was performed by Genome.One on extracted DNA on the
Illumina HiSeq X instruments using a TruSeq Nano DNALibrary Preparation kit. Trusight One sequencing was
applied simultaneously. cDNA sequencing was performed
to investigate variant function detected thereby.
Results: Simultaneously, both platforms identi ﬁed a
heterozygous intronic substitution c.157 +3A>C. This was
absent from in-house and population databases and Alamutpredicted splice site abolition. Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed
de novo status, cDNA studies show skipping of the exon
containing the initiation codon. Cumulatively, studiesconﬁrmed the variant was on the paternal allele and
pathogenic.
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed a novel IGF2 splice site
variant causing a SRS phenotype in an Australian
Aboriginal girl. We compare and contrast clinical ﬁndings
with reported patients to increase the IGF2 knowledge base,
including noting the frequency of cardiac, neurodevelop-
mental and limb phenotypes across different ethnic groups;Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1003and to promote engagement of other Australian Aboriginal
families in genomic medicine.
C.J. Poulton: None. D. Azmanov: None. L. Ewans:
None. D. Gration: None. L. Dreyer: None. S. Broley:
None. G. Baynam: None.
E-P11.74
Cri-du-chat syndrome mimics Silver-Russell syndrome
depending on the size of the deletion
J. Errea-Dorronsoro1, Y. Vado1, I. Llano2, N. Gorria3,A .
Pereda1, B. Gener2, G. Perez de Nanclares1
1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National
Health Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain,2Service of Genetics,
BioCruces National Health Institute, Barakaldo, Spain,
3Service of Paediatric Neurology, BioAraba National Health
Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain
Introduction: Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS) is a rare
growth-related genetic disorder in which patients showintrauterine (IUGR) and postnatal growth retardation
(PNGR), relative macrocephaly at birth, body asymmetry,
facial dysmorphic features and feeding dif ﬁculties and/or
low BMI. Approximately 50% of the clinically diagnosed
SRS patients present alterations at 11p15.5, mainly hypo-
methylation at H19/IGF2 :IG-DMR, whereas 10% of them
show UPD(7)mat. For the remaining 40% negative SRS
patients, molecular karyotyping is advised.
Materials and Methods: We present a 22 months old girl
with clinical suspicion of SRS (IUGR, PNGR, prominent
forehead, triangular face, psychomotor delay, transient
neonatal hypoglycaemia, mild hypotonia and single umbi-lical artery). She also presented corpus callosum hypoplasia,
mild ventriculomegaly, Arnold-Chiari malformation and
high-pitched voice. Methylation and CNVs at chromosomes11 and 7 were studied by MS-MLPA (MRC Holland,
ME030-C3 and ME032-A1, respectively). Molecular kar-
yotyping was performed (aCGH, Agilent 400K).
Results: After no alterations were detected by MS-MLPA
at the analysed DMRs, the aCGH identi ﬁed a deletion at
5p15.33p15.2 (arr[hg19] 5p15.33p15.2(25,942-11,644,645)x1). Deletions at 5p are commonly associated with Cri-du-
chat syndrome (CdC).
Conclusions: The absence of some CdC features in our
patient could be due to the fact that their critical responsible
regions are not included within the identi ﬁed deletion. The
common clinical aspects of CdC and SRS (impaired growth,developmental and intellectual delay) alongside the macro-
cephaly and the triangular face, typical of SRS, led to the
initial clinical misinterpretation.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III, the European
Regional Development Fund (PI16/00073) and theDepartment of Health of the Basque Government
(GV2017/111040).
J. Errea-Dorronsoro: None. Y. Vado: None. I. Llano:
None. N. Gorria: None. A. Pereda: None. B. Gener:
None. G. Perez de Nanclares: None.
E-P11.75
Duplication of 15q24.1q26.2 and terminal deletion of
15q26.2q26.3 in a female child with severe growthimpairment
H. Numabe1,2, Y. Morishima1, N. Inagaki1, M. Wakai1,Y .
Kanbara2, C. Takeuchi2, H. Kawashima1, T. Kunikata3
1Clinical Genetics Centre, Tokyo Medical University Hospital,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan,2Tokyo Metropolitan Kita Medical
and Rehabilitation Center for the Disabled, Kita, Tokyo,
Japan,3Center for Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, Iruma, Saitama, Japan
The patient was the ﬁrst child of unrelated 27-year-old
parents. Her mother suffered from immunoglobulin A
(IgA) nephropathy but the rest of her family history was
unremarkable. Pregnancy was complicated by foetalgrowth restriction and bree ch presentation. She was born
at 37 weeks and 5 days of gestation by caesarean section.
Her birthweight was 1647 g (-3 .2 SD), length was 40.5 cm
(-3.1 SD), and head circumference was 30.0 cm (-2.1 SD).
She had facial features charac teristic of micrognathia. G-
Banded karyotyping identi ﬁed interstitial duplication of
chromosome 15q with the karyotype 46,XX,dup(15)(q22-
24q26.2). At the age of 4 years and 7 months, the child
was referred to the Tokyo Metropolitan Kita Medical andRehabilitation Center for th e Disabled for her develop-
mental disability. Her height of 82.1 cm (-5.3 SD) sug-
gested a growth factor de ﬁciency. To identify the precise
chromosomal breakpoint, we pe rformed single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array analysis at the Tokyo Medical
University Hospital. The SNP array identi ﬁed arr[hg19]
15q24.1q26.2(73,922,340-98,178,660)×3, 15q26.2q26.3
(98,179,896-102,429,112)×1. It revealed that not only did
she have duplication of 15q24.1q26.2 as previouslyreported, but also terminal deletion of 15q26.2q26.3. In
the deleted region 15q26.2q26.3, the insulin-like growth
factor-1 receptor gene ( IGF1R ) was involved. This dele-
tion was thought to be the cause of her severe growth
impairment.
H. Numabe: None. Y. Morishima: None. N. Inagaki:
None. M. Wakai: None. Y. Kanbara: None. C. Takeuchi:
None. H. Kawashima: None. T. Kunikata: None.1004 J. del PicchiaE-P11.76
SNParray diagnostic yield in children with intellectual
disability with and without malformations in a Romanian
population
M. Puiu1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, A. Mihailescu1, P. Tutac1,
D. Micle2, C. Zimbru1, A. Chirita-Emandi1
1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy “Victor Babes ”, Timisoara, Romania,2University
of Medicine and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hatieganu", Cluj-Napoca,
Timisoara, Romania
Microarray analysis currently represents one of the ﬁrst line
genetic assessment tool for patients with intellectual dis-ability, dysmorphic features and/or malformations.
Aim: We evaluated the diagnostic yield of SNParray in a
Romanian population with this phenotype spectrum.
Method: We used HumanCyto SNP BeadChip Kit
(Ilumina). Data analysis was performed using DECIPHER
(Wellcome Sanger Institute) and UCSC Genome Browser(University of California).
Results: The cohort included 78 paediatric patients (39
females; 6 +/-5,6 years) presenting intellectual disability
with or without cranio-facial dysmorphism, malformations
or developmental. In some cases, karyotyping and ﬂuor-
escent in situ hybridization were used to identify chromo-somal rearrangements. A pathogenic copy number variation
was identi ﬁed in 24,3%(19/78) of cases (microdeletion or
microduplication syndromes) and 11.5% had possiblypathogenic or uncertain variants. The pathogenic copy
number variants included 15 microdeletions (chromosomes
1,3,11,12,15,17,18 and X) and 4 microduplications (chro-mosomes 15,13,16). The patogenic variants con ﬁrmed the
syndromic phenotypes. For uncertain variants (all duplica-
tions chromosomes 1,5,21), parental SNPmicroarray testinghad been used to elucidate inheritance. Average size of
deletion was 12,6Mb(range 1,1-40Mb).Uncertain variants
had size range between 1-5,4Mb. CONCLUSSION Thediagnostic yield in our cohort was relatively good, however
it included cases that were already diagnosed using
karyotype and SNParray provided additional accuracyregarding size and genes involved in the copy number
variant. Nonetheless, a good clinical selection is crucial for
efﬁciency of genetic testing. Unsolved cases require further
molecular testing.
Funding: Development of Existing Infrastructure and
Creation of New Infrastructure POSCCE-A2-O2.2.1-2013-1, Center of Genomic Medicine of the University of
Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Victor Babes ’Timisoara.
M. Puiu: None. N. Andreescu: None. S. Farcas: None.
A. Mihailescu: None. P. Tutac: None. D. Micle: None. C.
Zimbru: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None.E-P11.77
A newborn with Sotos syndrome and renal polycystosis
G. Pierquin, S. Bulk
Centre of Genetics, CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium
We report the case of a female newborn with Sotos syn-
drome and renal polycystosis.Before birth,renal poly-cystosis was already diagnosed on echographies.At birth,
she was hypotonic and dysmorphic and she had big dif ﬁ-
culties to drink.Cardiac echography has shown an aorticstenosis Renal polycystosis was con ﬁrmed.CGH-array has
revealed a deletion of 1863,4 kb in the region 5q35.2-q35.3
involving the NSD1 gene,hereby con ﬁrming Sotos syn-
drome.The search for mutation in PKD1,PKD2,ARPKD
and in a panel of genes for renal polycystosis was negative.
We will discuss the possibility of implications of othergenes deleted and the particular characteristics of Sotos
syndrome in a newborn with renal polycystosis.
G. Pierquin: None. S. Bulk: None.
E-P11.78
As a rare case of chromosomal anomaly, 49, XXXXYsyndrome
F. Duymus, B. E. Cavdartepe, N. Yasa, N. Kocak
Selcuk University Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey
49, XXXXY syndrome is characterized by the presence of
three extra X chromosomes, and this syndrome is described
as the rarest sex chromosomal aneuploidy syndrome.Classical ﬁndings include mental retardation, hypogonad-
ism, and radioulnar synostosis. There are a limited number
of cases reported in the literature. It is sometimes referred toas a variant of Klinefelter syndrome, but differs from Kli-
nefelter syndrome in many ways and is more severe. Severe
varying degrees of learning dif ﬁculty and mental rotation
are encountered; Some patients have deteriorated with age.
The patient was referred to our polyclinic with dyslexia,
speech delayed, micropenis, microorchidism, atypical faceappearance, hypertelorism, broad nasal root, short philtrum,
radioulnar stenosis. The patient's mother and father were not
relatives. There is no evidence in the patient's family his-tory. Chromosome analysis was applied to the patient and
his parents. Because the patient's karyotype was determined
as 49, XXXXY, the patient's ﬁndings were identi ﬁed as 49,
XXXXY syndrome. parents' karyotype results were normal.
Our case was carrying the cardinal clinical ﬁndings of the
49, XXXY syndrome, which had been previously reported.In our patient, mental retardation has been shown to worsen
with age, as seen in some patients with this syndrome.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1005F. Duymus: None. B.E. Cavdartepe: None. N. Yasa:
None. N. Kocak: None.
E-P11.79
The multiple faces of TMEM231
E. Chervinsky1, S. Shalev1,2, R. Spiegel3,2, T. Ben-Josef2
1The Genetic Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel,
2Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel,
3Pediatric Department B ’, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel
Pathogenic variants in the TMEM231 gene (OMIM 614949)
have been reported to cause a spectrum of phenotypes,
including Joubert syndrome, Meckel-Gruber syndrome andOro-facial-digital 3 syndrome. We evaluated three sibs from
a consanguineous family affected with a spectrum of phe-
notypes which included retinal degeneration, intellectualdisability and renal abnormalities. All three had early
childhood onset of retinal degeneration, however, clinical
features were different between them to a great extent. Theproband's facial gestalt included down-slanting palpebral
ﬁssures, convex and high nasal bridge, short philtrum and
prominent incisors, slender palms, truncal obesity, shortstature and hypogonadism, raised a suspicion of Cohen
syndrome. His older sister had severe developmental delay
and profound intellectual disability, and his younger onehad borderline learning disabilities and nephronophthisis
diagnosed in adolescence. Using exome sequencing we
identi ﬁed a homozygous c.511T>G (p.L171V) novel var-
iant in the TMEM231 gene (GeneBank accession number
NM_001077418.2) which is fully segregated in the family.
To date, at least 13 different pathogenic variants ofTMEM231 have been reported. These variants are spread
throughout the gene and associated with several partially
overlapping, yet distinct phenotypes, with no cleargenotype-phenotype correlation. Moreover, we report sig-
niﬁcant phenotypic heterogeneity within the same family.
Theﬁnding expands the phenotypes that can be caused by
pathogenic variants TMEM231 , which should be considered
in learning disabilities associated with retinal degeneration
and Cohen syndrome-like phenotype, and strongly suggestthe existence of additional environmental and/or genetic
factors which modify the phenotype induced by TMEM231
variants.
E. Chervinsky: None. S. Shalev: None. R. Spiegel:
None. T. Ben-Josef: None.
E-P11.80
Long-time follow-up and hearing impairment in four
patients with Treacher Collins syndromeI. Resmerita1, S. Cozma2, R. Popescu1, M. Panzaru1,L .
Butnariu1, C. Rusu1
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T. Popa ”Iasi
- Medical Genetics Department, Iasi, Romania,2University of
Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T. Popa ”Iasi - ENT
Department, Iasi, Romania
Treacher Collins syndrome is a rare disorder of craniofacial
development that affects ﬁrst and second branchial arches.
The estimated incidence is 1/50,000 live births. Mutations
inTCOF1 (5q32) (78%-93%) and POLR1C orPOLR1D
(8%) cause the disease. 40%-50% of individuals have
conductive hearing loss attributed to malformation of the
ossicles and hypoplasia of the middle ear cavities. Wedescribe 4 patients to discuss the frequency of clinical
features and audiological data, illustrate evocative/particular
features and evolution in time. All cases have been sporadicand result from uneventful pregnancies. Case 1 (male, 10
years): IUGR, microcephaly, downslanting palpebral ﬁs-
sures, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, dental malposition,cleft palate, deformed/lowset ears, bilateral auricular tags,
mild-severe bilateral conductive hearing loss; epilepsy;
hiatal hernia. Case 2 (male, 11 years): triangular face,mildly asymmetric, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, lower
eyelids coloboma, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, micro-
retrognathia, dysplastic ears, bilateral severe conductivehearing loss. Case 3 (male, 15 years): triangular face, mildly
asymmetric, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, lower eyelids
coloboma, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, deformed/lowsetears, severe bilateral conductive hearing loss. Case 4 (male,
18 years): microcephaly, triangular face, downslanting
palpebral ﬁssures, everted lower eyelids, sparse lashes,
dental malposition; tympanosclerosis; aortic coarctation;
epilepsy. Apart of epilepsy (worse in time), the clinical
picture has been constant. Clinical features at different ageswill be illustrated. In conclusion, we present the evolution
in time and the importance of a multidisciplinary approach
in the managament of the patient. Early detection of hearingloss in these patients is of great importance in order to
reabilitate hearing impairment.
I. Resmerita: None. S. Cozma: None. R. Popescu:
None. M. Panzaru: None. L. Butnariu: None. C.
Rusu: None.
E-P11.81
A Novel TCOF1 Gene Mutation In A Turkish Family With
Treacher Collins Syndrome
A. Subasioglu
Medical Genetics Department, Izmir Katip Celebi University,
Ataturk Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey1006 J. del PicchiaIntroduction: Treacher Collins Syndrome (TCS), also
known as Mandibulofacial Dysostosis is an autosomal
dominant disorder of craniofacial development and presents
variable expressivity and mainly caused by mutations in the
TCOF1 gene. The major features are commonly include
otologic, ophthalmic and dental malformations and midfacehypoplasia, micrognathia, microtia, conductive hearing loss
and cleft palate can be seen. Treacher Collins Syndrome
occurs with an incidence of 1 in 50000 live births. Pheno-types caused by mutations in the gene POLR1D and
POLR1C have similar clinical features with different
inheritance patterns.
Materials and Methods: A 32 years old man applied to
our clinic with characteristic facial dysmorphism with
bilateral and symmetrical hypoplasia of the malar bones.He had antimongoloid slant of the palpebral ﬁssures, ear
abnormalities and hearing loss. Both of his son were died
because of the respiratory distress and they were both havemalar hypoplasia, malformation of auricle, hearing loss,
downslanting palpebral ﬁssures and partial absence of lower
eyelashes. His father also has mild antimongoloid slant ofthe palpebral ﬁssures. For mutation analysis, the coding
region of TCOF1 gene was sequenced.
Results: The molecular analysis showed the presence of
heterozygous mutation, c.4394C>T / p.Ser1465Leu in exon
25 of the TCOF1 gene in the proband and his father. To our
knowledge, the mutation has never been reported.
Conclusion: Both variable expressivity and reduced
penetrance must be considered in and also it is very
important that; healthcare providers must be careful not tomiss the mild ﬁndings especially of autosomal dominant
diseases.
A. Subasioglu: None.
E-P11.82
A novel mutation in the TCOF1 gene in a patient withTreacher Collins syndrome
B. Eser Çavdartepe, N. Koçak, N. Ya şa, T. Çora, F. Duymu ş
Selçuk University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical
Genetics, Konya, Turkey
Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS), is a rare autosomal
dominant congenital disorder characterized by various cra-niofacial malformations. The estimated incidence is 1/
50000 live births. There are bilaterally symmetric anomalies
of the structure within the ﬁrst and second branchial arches.
The characteristic facial dysmorphism includes bilateral and
symmetrical hypoplasia of the malar bones and mandible.
This syndrome most commonly results from the TCOF1gene mutations. Here we report a ﬁve-year-old female
patient who has a syndromic appearance and hearing loss.The patient had various facial dysmorphic features includ-
ing downward-slanting eyes, malar hypoplasia, micro-
gnathia, ﬁshlike mouth with a high arched palate and absent
lower eyelid eyelashes. There were also malformed bilateral
pinnae and left ear microtia. According to the clinical fea-
tures, we suspect from TCS and sequence analysis ofTCOF1 gene was performed. A heterozygous new mutation
c.1722_1731delCATCCTCCAG in exon 12 of the TCOF1
gene was detected. It has been determined that this mutationis pathogenic according to the in silico prediction tools. The
current study further expands the TCOF1 mutation
spectrum.
B. Eser Çavdartepe: None. N. Koçak: None. N. Ya şa:
None. T. Çora: None. F. Duymu ş:None.
E-P11.83
Rare case of triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome
in combination with congenital heart disease
O. V. Melnik, A. M. Zlotina, T. S. Loevets, A. A. Kostareva, T. L.
Vershinina, E. S. Vasichkina, T. M. Pervunina
Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Russian Federation
<META NAME ="author" CONTENT ="Ольга
Седенко ">
Introduction: Triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syn-
drome (TPT-PS) caused by LMBR1 mutations is a well-
deﬁned autosomal dominant disorder not commonly
associated with heart defects. There is only one report on
a patient with TPT-PS and Tetralogy of Fallot, however,
harboring an additional 22q11.21 deletion. Here we presenta 3-month-old girl with prenatally established double outlet
right ventricle (DORV). Additionally, the patient had
asymmetric preaxial, postaxial polydactyly with TPT-PS(4-5 digits). Similar phenotype of upper and lower limbs
was reported along ﬁve generations in 9 affected family
members with no history of congenital heart disease.
Materials and Methods: The investigation was approved
by the local ethical committee. Informed consent was
obtained from patient's parents. Genetic analysis wasperformed using Sanger sequencing and array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH-array) with
Agilent 60K platform.
Results: Target sequencing of the TBX5 gene to exclude
Holt-Oram syndrome, NKX 2-5 , intron 5 of the LMBR1 did
not reveal any known pathogenic variants/variants ofunknown signi ﬁcance. Array-CGH allowed to identify the
only duplication at 7q36.3 region (~ 277 kb), encompassing
LMBR1 gene.
Conclusions: LMBR1 is a causative gene leading to TPT-
PS but it has not previously been associated with DORV.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1007Further analysis of possible association of LMBR1 duplica-
tion with cardiac defects should include sequencing of
broad spectrum of genes (GDF1, CFC1, ZFPM2) or even
exome sequencing approach to exclude possible combina-
tion of two independent genetic abnormalities as a cause of
the combined malformation pathologies.
This work was ﬁnancially supported by Russian Science
Foundation (RSF), Grant №17-75-10125.
O.V. Melnik: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Russian Science Founda-
tion (RSF), Grant №17-75-10125. A.M. Zlotina: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Russian Science Foundation (RSF),Grant№17-75-10125. T.S. Loevets: None. A.A. Kostar-
eva: None. T.L. Vershinina: None. E.S. Vasichkina:
None. T.M. Pervunina: None.
E-P11.84
Homozygote TTN gene variant associated with lethal
congenital contracture syndrome
M. Khayat1, E. Chervinsky1, S. Soltsman2, H. Habiballa3,O .
Elpeleg4, S. Shalev1,5
1Genetics Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel,
2Maternal Fetal Medicine outpatient clinic, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baruch Padeh Medical Center,
Poriya, Israel,3Sherutei Briut Clalit, Sick Fund, Bena-Nujedat,
Israel,4The Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of
Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical
Center, Jerusalem, Israel,5Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the TTN gene have
been reported to cause various cardiomyopathies and a
range of skeletal muscle diseases, collectively known as
titinopathies.
Materials and Methods: Eight affected individuals
presented with lethal congenital multiple contractures
belong to a large family of Moslem Bedouin origin, livingin the northern part of Israel, were studied. Exonic
sequences from three patients' DNA samples were enriched
with the SureSelect Human All Exon 50 Mb V.5 Kit
Results: A homozygous c.36122delC (p. P12041Lfs*20)
variant in exon 167 of the TTN gene, which is only
expressed in the fetal IC isoform, was detected in allpatients.
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings provide evidence for the
causative role of TTN gene in the severe lethal form of
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita. The ﬁnding expands the
phenotypes that can be caused by pathogenic variants inTTN gene, which should be considered in lethal congenital
contracture syndromes, arthrogryposis multiplex congenita,
congenital myopathies and hydrops fetalis.
Supporting grant: Abraham & Sonia Rochlin Family
Foundation.
M. Khayat: None. E. Chervinsky: None. S. Soltsman:
None. H. Habiballa: None. O. Elpeleg: None. S.
Shalev: None.
E-P11.86
Synemin expression pro ﬁle during tissue-speci ﬁc
differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells con ﬁrms its
possible involvement in heart-hand syndrome
A. Zlotina1, A. Kiselev1, A. Sergushichev2, E. Parmon1,A .
Kostareva1,3
1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation,2ITMO University, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation,3Karolinska Institute,
Department of Women's and Children's Health, Center forMolecular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden
Introduction: «Heart-hand» syndromes represent a group
of rare congenital conditions where patients in addition to
cardiac pathology demonstrate various abnormalities of
limb skeleton. To date, genetic basis of such phenotypes isonly partly characterized. In the present study, we report on
a 30-year-old woman with a clinical picture closely
resembling ulnar-mammary syndrome. The patient washospitalized due to frequent episodes of non-sustained
ventricular tachycardia and presented with symmetrical ﬁfth
ﬁnger anomalies, mammary gland hypoplasia with inverted
nipples, speci ﬁc face features, squint and abnormal teeth.
Here we aimed to extend knowledge on molecular
mechanisms underlying the complex congenital disorder.
Materials and Methods: Genomic screening was carried
out by whole-exome sequencing (WES), Sanger sequencing
and array-based comparative genome hybridization.
Results: No genetic defects were revealed in TBX3 ,t h e
only gene associated with ul nar-mammary syndrome to
date, as well as in other genes responsible for commonheart-hand syndromes. Based on WES data analysis, we
took notice of a novel missense variant in SYNM gene
(exon 1, p.A58V), encoding an intermediate ﬁlament
protein synemin. Experi mental cell study con ﬁrmed high
expression of synemin in mesenchymal stromal cells
(MSCs) during tissue-speci ﬁc differentiation, thus, point-
ing to a possible role of synemin in the congenital
malformations.
Conclusions: Here we present a nontypical clinical case
of ulnar-mammary syndrome with no association with
TBX3 mutation. We suggest that the genetic variant in1008 J. del PicchiaSYNM could contribute to the complex phenotype, but
further comprehensive functional studies are required.
This work was ﬁnancially supported by Russian Science
Foundation (RSF), Grant №17-75-10125.
A. Zlotina: None. A. Kiselev: None. A. Sergushichev:
None. E. Parmon: None. A. Kostareva: None.
E-P11.87
Combined Partial Trisomy 7q and Partial Monosomy 21qin a 6 Year Old Male Patient Phenotypic and Genotypic
Findings
e. i. atli1, h. gurkan1, e. atli1, y. ozen1, i. gorker2, d. eker1,c .
akurut1
1Trakya University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetic, Edirne, Turkey,2Trakya University Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Child and Adolescent MentalHealth and Diseases, Edirne, Turkey
Proband is 6 years old male with dysmorphic features and
examined by psychomotor retardation pre-diagnosis. The
boy was born after uneventful pregnancy at term with
normal growth parameters. In infancy, he had feeding dif-ﬁculties. His mother noticed that eye colors were different
from each other when he was 1 month old. The patient
underwent surgery for inguinal hernia at 14 months and 2years of age. When he was 1 year old underwent surgery
due to in his right eye tension. He was able to sit without
support and hold his head after 1 year of age. He can walkholding on to one place at the moment. At 5 years of age,
additional features were noted including brachycephaly,
beak nose structure, low set ears, upslanting palpebral ﬁs-
sure,retro micrognatia, ortognati, short ﬁltrum. Cytogenetic
analysis of cultured lymphocytes revealed a 46,XY,der(21)
(pter→q22::?) karyotype. Mother was normal, father ’s
karyotype 46,XY,t(7;21)(q32;q22). Array-CGH was per-
formed oligonucleotide array and showed 7q33q36.3 gain,
21q22.2q22.3 loss. Very often fetuses with completemonosomy 21 die before or shortly after birth; by contrast,
cases with partial deletion of chromosome 21, which occur
more often, have better survival expectancy and are het-erogeneous regarding their phenotypic severity. Although
duplications of the chromosome 7q are well known, these
are rare and their presence usually results in the apparitionof multiple congenital abnormalities and cognitive de ﬁcits.
We present the ﬁrst report of a patient with 21q22 deletion
and concomitant 7q33 duplication detected by CGH arrayand associated with dysmorphism, psychomotor retardation.
E.I. atli: None. H. gurkan: None. E. atli: None. Y.
ozen: None. I. gorker: None. D. eker: None. C.
akurut: None.E-P11.88
Novel bi-allelic POMGNT1 mutations detected by whole
exome sequencing causing dystroglycanopathy in a family
of Cypriot descent
E. Kritioti1,2,3, A. Alexandrou1, I. Papaevripidou1,A .
Theodosiou1, N. Nicolaou3, C. Sismani1,2, G. A. Tanteles3
1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus Institute
of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,2The Cyprus
School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Clinical Genetics
Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Congenital muscular dystrophies represent a clinically and
genetically heterogeneous group of inherited muscle dis-
orders. Affected infants typically present with hypotoniaand poor spontaneous movements. Progressive weakness,
joint contractures, spinal deformities and respiratory com-
promise may affect quality of life and life span. Cognitiveimpairment, structural brain and/or ocular abnormalities and
seizures are found almost exclusively in
dystroglycanopathies.
A cohort of undiagnosed Cypriot patients with multiple
congenital malformations was selected for whole exome
sequencing (WES) following extensive diagnostic workup.We report on a non-consanguineous family with two male
siblings, born following uneventful pregnancies. They
presented with a congenital muscular dystrophy phenotypewith features including infantile hypotonia, hyperCkemia
early hydrocephalus, severe developmental delay, epilepsy,
strabismus and cataracts. Family history was non-contributory. WES was performed on the Illumina Next-
Seq500 platform using the TruSeq DNA exome library kit.
Bioinformatics analysis was carried out using an in-housepipeline.
Two novel compound heterozygous variants were
identi ﬁed in POMGNT1 and con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequen-
cing. These included a nonsense mutation (p.Glu102*) in
exon 4 and a missense variant (p.Arg129Trp) in exon 5
which substitutes a conserved aminoacid within theinterleukin-like epithelial to mesenchymal tissue (EMT)
domain of POMGNT1 . Both variants are classi ﬁed as rare
and were not identi ﬁed in online databases. In-silico tools
predicted pathogenicity. Parental carrier status was
conﬁrmed.
In conclusion, two affected siblings carrying novel,
predicted pathogenic, bi-allelic POMGNT1 variants were
identi ﬁed. Other POMGNT1 mutations have been asso-
ciated with autosomal recessive dystroglycanopathiesexhibiting similar phenotypes. Further investigations to
measure the expression of the defective protein are ongoing.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1009E. Kritioti: None. A. Alexandrou: None. I. Papaevri-
pidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. N. Nicolaou: None.
C. Sismani: None. G.A. Tanteles: None.
E-P11.89
Williams-Beuren syndrome: clinical variability in a Nord-Eastern Romanian cohort
E. Gavril, R. Popescu, E. V. Gorduza, M. Gramescu, I.
Resmerita, L. Butnariu, M. Panzaru, S. Cozma, C. Rusu
”Gr. T. Popa ”University of Medicine and Pharmacy -
Department of Medical Genetics, Ia şi, Romania
Williams-Beuren (WS) syndrome (7q11.23 microdeletion),
is a syndrome with wide clinical variability. We have stu-
died 22 patients diagnosed with WS and followed-up for a
long time (average period 7 years) in Iasi Medical GeneticsCenter, aiming to describe clinical variability and the
changing picture in time. All cases were con ﬁrmed using
MLPA follow-up kit. We identi ﬁed cardiovascular disease
in 18/22 patients (72.22% supravalvar aortic stenosis),
characteristic dysmorphic faces in 19/22, intellectual dis-
ability in 19/22 (5 severe, 9 moderate, 5 mild) and con-nective tissue defects in 16 cases (40.95% presented hernia).
Less common features included: pre- and early post-natal
growth de ﬁciency (18/22), friendly personality (16/22),
speciﬁc cognitive pro ﬁle (13/22), strabismus and dental
anomalies (9/22), gastro-intestinal disturbances (9/22),
obesity (6/22), hypercalcemia (3/22) and hypothyroidism(1/22). Short stature and increased sensitivity to sound were
found in only 7 and 5 patients, and only 1 case presented
hearing loss and enuresis. Cryptorchidism, as well as renaldefects were identi ﬁed in 4 cases, anesthesia accidents in 2
and diabetes and hypoplastic abdominal aorta in one.We
didn’t detect non-social anxiety, speci ﬁc phobias or early
puberty. Other features identi ﬁed in our patients include:
brachydactyly (5/22), autism spectrum disorder (4/22),
dysmenorrhea (2), hypogonadism (3/22), scoliosis (2/22),marked microcephaly and psoriazis (1/22) and ischemic
stroke (1/22). The changing phenotype in time will be
illustrated for cases with long term follow-up. In conclu-sion, this study emphasizes the wide phenotypic variety
from one case to another, and within the same patient at
different ages.
E. Gavril: None. R. Popescu: None. E.V. Gorduza:
None. M. Gramescu: None. I. Resmerita: None. L.
Butnariu: None. M. Panzaru: None. S. Cozma: None. C.
Rusu: None.
E-P11.90
Xia-Gibbs syndrome presenting with craniosynostosis,
tethered cord and Chiari I malformationE. Tønne1, H. Bærø2, T. Prescott3, K. Tveten3, Ø. L. Holla3,L .H .
Sunde1, B. Due-Tønnessen4, K. Heimdal1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway,2Department of Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital,
Kristiansand, Norway,3Section of Medical Genetics,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Telemark Hospital,
Skien, Norway,4Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Xia-Gibbs syndrome (MIM 615829), a multisystem dis-
order ﬁrst described in 2014, is caused by heterozygous
variants (including nonsense variants) in AHDC1 that
encodes the AT hook DNA-binding motif containing 1
(AHDC1) protein. All 15 individuals reported to date havehad global development delay. Other frequent features
include hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, laryngomalacia,
short stature, microcephaly, obstructive sleep apnea, herniasand corpus callosum hypoplasia.
Studies in mice and drosophila suggest that AHDC1 is an
epigenetic regulator of embryonic brain development.Pathogenic AHDC1 variants may act via a dominant-
negative mechanism.
We present a 5 year old boy with moderate developmental
delay, a large omphalocele, metopic craniosynostosis, short
stature, dysmorphic features, hypotonia and chronic snor-
ing. Snoring improved after bilateral adenotonsillectomy.Brain and spinal cord imaging revealed metopic craniosy-
nostosis and a tethered cord, both of which were treated
surgically, as well as Chiari I malformation and a shortenedcorpus callosum. The only variant of interest detected on
whole exome trio sequencing was de novo heterozygous
NM_001029882.3( AHDC1) c.2772del p.(Arg925Glufs*).
Metopic and bicoronal craniosynostosis was reported
previously in a single individual with Xia-Gibbs syndrome.
Our case suggests a tentative extension of the phenotype toinclude craniosynostosis, tethered cord, Chiari I malforma-
tion and omphalocele.
E. Tønne: None. H. Bærø: None. T. Prescott: None. K.
Tveten: None. Ø.L. Holla: None. L.H. Sunde: None. B.
Due-Tønnessen: None. K. Heimdal: None.
E-P12 Cancer genetics
E-P12.10
Impact of MTHFR C677T variant on the susceptibility of
acute leukemia in Tunisia
R. Frikha1, M. Elloumi2, T. Rebai3
1Department of Medical genetics, Hedi Chaker University
Teaching Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia,2Department of hematology,1010 J. del PicchiaHedi Chaker University Teaching Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia,
3Laboratory of histology, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia
Introduction: The association between the 5,10-methyle-
netetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) variants; mainly the
C677T; and the risk of acute leukemia (AL) was largelyinvestigated and enrolled in a meta-analysis. However, the
results were inconsistent.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship
between the C677T variant of the MTHFR gene, and
susceptibility to acute leukemia in a cohort of Tunisian
patients with AL.
Materials and Methods: A case-control study was
conducted among 37 patients with AL and 35 controls.
Genotyping of MTHFR C677T was performed by poly-
merase chain reaction-restriction fragment length poly-
morphism (PCR-RFLP).
Results: The frequency of MTHFR 677T was signi ﬁ-
cantly different between AL patients and controls (21.6%
and 0% respectively), independent of the gender [p =0.58;
OR=1.56 (0.31-7.78)]. The risk of AL with the 677T allele
carrier was elevated by 2.2 times (p =0.001).
Conclusions: The present result highlights the impact of
MTHFR C677T variant on the susceptibility of acute
leukemia in Tunisian patients. Thus, MTHFR C677T
polymorphism may be a promising AL biomarker and
further study with larger numbers of participants worldwideare required before de ﬁnitive conclusions can be drawn.
References
1. Li, S.Y., et al., Association between MTHFR C677T
polymorphism and risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a
meta-analysis based on 51 case-control studies. Med Sci
Monit, 2015. 21: p. 740-8.
2. Qin, Y.T., et al., Association between MTHFR
polymorphisms and acute myeloid leukemia risk: a meta-
analysis. PLoS One, 2014. 9(2): p. e88823.
R. Frikha: None. M. Elloumi: None. T. Rebai: None.
E-P12.15
Apoptotic Effects of Myrtus communis L. Essential Oil on
A549 Cells
N. Bilgic1, G. Gulbol Duran2, A. D. Kaya3
1Mustafa Kemal University, Health Sciences Institute, Hatay,
Turkey,2Mustafa Kemal University, Medicine Faculty, Hatay,
Turkey,3Mustafa Kemal University,Agriculture Faculty,
Hatay, Turkey
Introduction: Myrtus communis L. (MC) is an important
aromatic and medicinal plant. Understanding of the mole-cular mechanism of apoptotic cell death in cancer studies
has great importance. In this study, we aimed to investigatewhether the essential oils of MC induce apoptosis on A549
cells, and if it is induced, which pathway leads the cells to
apoptosis.
Materials and Methods: A549 cells were exposed to
various concentrations from 31.25 to 2500 μg/ml of the
essential oils. The cytotoxicity was measured by MTT assayand IC
50values were determined. Then, the essential oil was
administered at the concentrations of 312.5 μg/ml for
24 hours. The expression levels of caspase 3, 8 and 9, Bcl-2and P21 genes were evaluated by qRT-PCR method.
Results: Our results showed that 625 μg/ml and above
concentrations of the essential oils signi ﬁcantly suppressed
cell viability. Expression levels of caspase 3 and 9 genes
which are mediators of intrinsic pathway were signi ﬁcantly
increased at a concentration of 312.5 μg/ml of essential oils(p=0.0129 and p =0.0180 respectively). However, when
the expression levels of the caspase-8 gene, an important
mediator of extrinsic apoptosis pathway, were comparedwith the control group, no difference was found. It was
found that, the p21 and the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 genes were
not different when compared with the control group.
Conclusions: As a result, the essential oils of MC induce
apoptosis through the intrinsic pathway. In this regard, we
think they may be new hope for non-cytotoxic drugresearches in the treatment of cancer.
N. Bilgic: None. G. Gulbol Duran: None. A.D.
Kaya: None.
E-P12.16
Evaluation of a novel BAP1 mutation found in a familywith high cancer burden
W. Sjursen1,2, B. Bodil Gilde1, L. Lavik1, I. Bjørnevoll1,H .
Hov1,2, L. Engebretsen1
1St. Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway,
2Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway
BAP1 tumour predisposition syndrome (BAP1TPS) is a
recently described cancer syndrome associated with various
types of cancer such as melanoma (eye and skin), malignantmesothelioma, renal clear cell carcinoma, basal cell carci-
noma and atypical Spitz tumour (benign). BAP1 (BRCA1-
associated protein 1) is a tumour suppressor gene thatencoding ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase. This
enzyme regulates cell growth, cellular differentiation, tran-
scription and DNA repair. Mutation on both alleles can leadto rapid and uncontrolled cell growth. The germline muta-
tion in BAP1 gene is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner.
The proband in a family with high burden of renal clear
cell carcinoma and one case with mesothelioma, wasAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1011offered gene panel testing. The gene panel used consisted of
19 renal cancer associated genes. The only suspicious
variant detected, was a missense variant in the BAP1 gene,
c.325G>A, p.(Gly109Arg). This variant has not been
published as a BAP1TPS predisposing variant before, and
because of lacking information it was classi ﬁed as a variant
of uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance. The family history and
further analyses of blood and tumor samples from family
members, and how this contributed in the reclassi ﬁcation of
the variant will be presented.
W. Sjursen: None. B. Bodil Gilde: None. L. Lavik:
None. I. Bjørnevoll: None. H. Hov: None. L.
Engebretsen: None.
E-P12.17
Screening of Polish patients for novel BRCA1/2 mutations
as underlying factors of ovarian/breast cancer
K.Łacna1, A. Bia łek-Pro ścińska1, M. Przyborska1,J .
Muszy ński1, K. Matuszewska1,2, N. Badzi ąg-Leśniak1,R .
Glazar1, M. Stawicka-Nie łacna3, G. Koczyk1,4, A. Dawidziuk1,D .
Popiel1, M. Piechota1, A. Jamsheer1,2
1Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Pozna ń, Poland,3University Hospital of
Lord ’s Trans ﬁguration-Partner of Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,4Institute of Plant Genetics
of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Pozna ń, Poland
Introduction: A strong genetic predisposition towards
breast and ovarian cancers is frequently tied to mutations in
BRCA1 andBRCA2 . Women with pathogenic mutations in
either BRCA1 orBRCA2 have about ﬁve times higher risk
of breast cancer and ten to thirty times higher risk of ovarian
cancer, but not all changes confer the same risks. While themost common genetic determinants are known, in high-risk
patients novel loss-of-function mutations can contribute a
signiﬁcant risk.
Materials and Methods: Screening of 806 samples over
the 2016-2017 period has con ﬁrmed the prevalence of
founder mutations: c.5266dupC, c.4035delA, c.181T>G,c.3700_3704delGTAAA and c.68_69delAG in BRCA1
(NM_007294.3). In cases lacking the above, full Next
Generation Sequencing was performed using IonTorrent S5platform. The DNA library was prepared using AmpliSeq
BRCA1/BRCA2 Panel (ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁc). The
presence of pathogenic mutations was con ﬁrmed by Sanger
sequencing on GA3500 (Applied Biosystems).
Results: In one case, (63y.o. female with breast cancer
and suspected ovarian cancer) a novel BRCA2:c.3215T>A(p.L1072*) mutation was detected. The likely loss-of-
function follows due to heavily truncated protein product.Additionally, we detected several rare but previously
described mutations with predicted deleterious impact.
Conclusions: In high-risk cases with negative screening
results for common founder mutations, there is a strong
cause for extended analysis of whole BRCA1/BRCA2
genes. Such an approach allows to detect new/atypicalunderlying changes in ca. 22% of affected patients. Routine
sequencing of key oncogenes is thus validated as a tool of
choice for informed therapies in breast/ovarian cancertreatment.
K. Łacna: None. A. Bia łek-Pro ścińska: None. M.
Przyborska: None. J. Muszy ński: None. K. Matus-
zewska: None. N. Badzi ąg-Le śniak: None. R. Glazar:
None. M. Stawicka-Nie łacna: None. G. Koczyk: None. A.
Dawidziuk: None. D. Popiel: None. M. Piechota: None.
A. Jamsheer: None.
E-P12.18
Detection of BRCA1/BRCA 2 gene mutations in ovarian
cancer by next- generation sequencing
B. Grahovac1, M. Katunari ć1, E. Babarovi ć2, M. Kraevi ć2
1Medical Faculty University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia,
2Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty University of
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia
Introduction: Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes
lead to an increased risk of developing breast or ovarian
cancer. In high-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOC) thefrequency of BRCA1/2 germline and somatic mutations
ranged from 18 % to 26% (Alsop et al. 2012; Ledermann
et al. 2011). Identi ﬁcation of mutations in BRCA1/2 genes
could facilitate targeted therapy with selective PARP1
inhibitor.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated
from 101 HGSOC patients who underwent surgical
resection between 2013 and 2016 (47 microdissected FFPE
tumor tissues and 54 peripheral blood samples used whenquality of DNA from FFPE tissue was not satisfactory.
BRCA 1/2 mutation analysis was performed by targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS), using the ONCOMI-NE
TMBRCA1/BRCA2 Research Assay (Life Technologies,
USA) covering all exons and intron-exon boundaries.
Multiplex PCR, DNA library preparation and enrichmentwere performed according to manufacturer`s instructions.
Sequencing was carried out on Personal Genome Machine
(PGM) sequencer (Ion Torrent, USA). The sequence data,including alignment to the hg19 reference genome and
variant calling was done using Torrent Suite Software v4.6
and Ion Reporter
TMSoftwere (Life Technologies, USA).
Results: Pathogenic BRCA 1/2 mutations were found in
28,7% HGSOC patients (29/101); in 17 FFPE and 12 blood1012 J. del Picchiasamples. 26 mutations were located in BRCA1 gene and 3
in BRCA2 gena. The mutations were SNV and short indel
introducing frameshift or stop codon. No large deletions or
insertions were detected in our study group.
Conclusion: Detection of BRCA1/2 mutations in FFPE
tumor tissues using NGS method is feasible.
B. Grahovac: None. M. Katunari ć:None. E. Babar-
ović:None. M. Kraevi ć:None.
E-P12.20
Genetic susceptibility to cancer: is it time to delegate testing
prescription to oncologists and breast/gynecologicalsurgeons? A pilot project
P. R. Benusiglio1, J. Gligorov2, V. Byrde2, M. Warcoin1,E .
Guillerm1, S. Richard2, S. Zilberman2, L. Zelek3, L. Carbillon4,
A. Bricou4, N. Chabbert-Buffet2, F. Coulet1
1Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière APHP, Paris, France,
2Hôpital Tenon APHP, Paris, France,3Hôpital Avicenne,
Bobigny, France,4Hòpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France
Introduction: Cancer genetics clinics struggle to cope with
steady increases in referrals. Indeed, awareness among thegeneral public and medical professionals is rising, tumour
proﬁling is becoming commonplace with its incident dis-
covery of cancer susceptibility mutations, and PARP-inhibitors might soon be approved for indications other
than relapsing serous ovarian carcinoma. One must there-
fore explore alternative modes of genetic counseling andnovel approaches to testing, a task all the more challenging
in France where only cancer geneticists (CG) have been
prescribing genetic tests. Objectives . We are starting a pilot
project involving CG, oncologists and breast/gynecological
surgeons (O +OBGS) from a Paris University Hospital and
its af ﬁliated suburban partner, and studying the feasibility
and acceptability of a partnership allowing O +OBGS to
prescribe genetic tests.
Methods: All patients with breast/ovarian cancer will
receive a family questionnaire. O +OBGS will evaluate
whether testing is indicated using a modi ﬁed Manchester-
Scoring-System (MSS3). They will explain the principles ofgenetic susceptibility to cancer, give an explanatory lea ﬂet,
obtain consent and prescribe BRCA1/2, PALB2 , and
RAD51C/D analysis. CG will receive a medical report, the
family questionnaire and a copy of the MSS3. If they
suspect Li-Fraumeni or think a multigene panel is indicated,
they will ask to see the patient face-to-face. CG will returnall results during an individual consultation. Outcomes will
be compared to patients seen exclusively by CG. Perspec-
tives . We will present preliminary observations at ESHG-
2018. Our novel approach should allow us to cope withreferral increases, and free up time for consultations
requiring real cancer genetics expertise.
P.R. Benusiglio: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak-
ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Astra
Zeneca, BMS. J. Gligorov: None. V. Byrde: None. M.
Warcoin: None. E. Guillerm: None. S. Richard: None. S.
Zilberman: None. L. Zelek: None. L. Carbillon: None. A.
Bricou: None. N. Chabbert-Buffet: None. F.
Coulet: None.
E-P12.22
Characterizing of ﬁve common BCR-ABL kinase domain
mutations (T315I, F359V, E255V, E255K, Y253H) in
Bulgarian patients with chronic myeloid leukemia
preliminary results
H. Y. Ivanov1, A. Linev1, I. Zheliazkov2, H. Ivanova3,V .
Goranova-Marinova3, V. Stoyanova1
1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical
University Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,2University Hospital St.
George, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,3First Department of Internal
Medicine, Clinic of Hematology, Medical University Plovdiv,
Plovdiv, Bulgaria
Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) arises
from the fusion of the BCR and the ABL1 genes due toreciprocal chromosome translocation forming the Philadel-
phia Chromosome (Ph). Mutations in the Bcr-Abl kinase
domain may cause, or contribute to, resistance to tyrosinekinase inhibitors (TKIs) in chronic myeloid leukemia
patients. The aim of our study is to detect ﬁve common
mutations (T315I, F359V, E255V, E255K, Y253H) in theABL1 kinase domain (harboring on acquired) in patients
with CML.
Materials and Methods: The study was performed on 30
patients with CML. We used Allele-speci ﬁc ampli ﬁcation to
detect the mutations in the ABL1 kinase domain.
Results: In our study T315I mutation was detected in one
patient and in the same patient E255K mutation was present
as well. We did not detect E255V, F359V and Y253H
mutations in the patients. The patient is a 79 years old male,diagnosed in CML - chronic phase in April 2017. The
patient was treated with Nilotinib, followed by Dasatinib.
Not even hematological response has been achieved so far.
Conclusions: The patient with mutations in ABL kinase
domain showed treatment failure based on 2013 ELN
recommendations for management of CML. One of thestudy limitations was limited number of samples. Research
on larger number of patients is suggested to obtain more
reliable results. Identi ﬁcation of ABL kinase domain
mutations may be used as a proper and useful method for
improving therapeutic strategies, avoiding delay inAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1013treatment and excessive expenditure in CML patients with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors resistance.
H.Y. Ivanov: None. A. Linev: None. I. Zheliazkov:
None. H. Ivanova: None. V. Goranova-Marinova: None.
V. Stoyanova: None.
E-P12.24
Fibronectin type III domain containing 5(FNDC5) gene
expression level in colorectal cancer cell lines
F. Ghazvini Zadegan, F. Seyed Frotan, K. Ghaedi, M. Nasr
Esfahani
Department of Reproductive Biotechnology. Reproductive Bio-
medicine Research Centre, Royan Institute for Biotechnology,ACECR, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of
Metabolic activities are altered in cancer cells relative to
normal cells, which provide a selective advantage during
tumorigenesis, and support the acquisition and maintenance
of malignant properties. Precisely how metabolism becomesreprogrammed in cancer cells, whose functions or malig-
nant properties are enabled by these activities, help to
exploit metabolic changes for suitable therapeutic bene ﬁt.
On the other hand, reprogrammed metabolism refers to the
ability of cancer cells supporting the increased energy
request due to continuous growth, rapid proliferation, andother characteristics typical of neoplastic cells. FNDC5/
Irisin, a novel hormone in the regulation of energy balance,
is involved in metabolic homeostasis. Energy imbalancewere shown to be associated with colorectal cancer.
Therefore, FNDC5 expression level was assessed in two
colorectal cancer cell lines i.e. Caco-2, HT29 and humanﬁbroblast as a control group by quantitative real-time PCR.
Our results indicated that FNDC5 expression level is
increased signi ﬁcantly in HT29 colorectal cancer cell line
compare to Caco-2 colorectal cancer cell line and control
group. A positive association with FNDC5 expression and
metastatic colorectal cell line(HT29) suggested the potentialrole of this gene as one of energy metabolism regulator in
metastatic colorectal cancer cells.
F. Ghazvini Zadegan: None. F. Seyed Frotan: None.
K. Ghaedi: None. M. Nasr Esfahani: None.
E-P12.25
The effect of helicobacter pylori cagA gene on autophagy
pathway in human gastric cancer cells
A. A. Azzawri1, H. Acar2
1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey,2Diagen Biotechnological
Systems Healthcare Automation, Ankara, TurkeyLung cancer is the leading cancer killer of both men and
women throughout the world. Notably, KRAS accounts for
90% of RAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Recent
literature has reported a strong association between KRAS
mutation and survival in non-small cell lung cancer and
approximately 97% of KRAS mutations in NSCLC involvecodons 12 or 13. Molecular mechanisms that are mediating
tumor ’s initiation, invasion, metastases, recurrence and
resistance to the therapy in lung cancers remains largelyunknown. One of the target sequences of miRNA Let-7
complementary site within the 3'untranslated region of
KRAS gene (named is 3 ’-UTR LCS6 sequence). LCS6
mutation may lead to metastases, development of cancer,
relapse and treatment resistance in many cancers. In this
project, it was aimed to carry out the effect of LCS6mutation on metastatic functions and AKT and ERK path-
ways, by using lung cancer A549, NCI-H441 cells and
BEAS-2B (control) cell carrying pLenti-KRAS-CDSmLCS6n, pLenti-KRAS-CDSm-LCS6m plasmids. The
results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations have sig-
niﬁcant different effects among A549 and NCI-H441 cell
groups. the mutation of LSC6 region increases the cell
migration and proliferation in NCI-H441 cells, while in
A549 cells a slight decrease occurred in migration andproliferation levels. Both G12V and LCS6 mutations
increase the cell invasion level in A549 and NCI-H441
cells. As for the target genes, both Western and qPCRresults showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations induced
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and RAF/MEK/ERK pathways in A549
and NCI-H441 cells, induce these pathways were higher inA549 cells.
A.A. Azzawri: None. H. Acar: None.
E-P12.26
Human malignant glioma: implementation of the
adjunctive therapy by transferring the CRISPR/AsCpf1system-induced tumor suppressor genes insertion and
oncogenic suppression of Bcl2L12 via the CRISPR/
ddAsCpf1 system for in vivo engineering of chromosome 19q-arm
A. Abak, E. Sakhinia, A. Abhari
Tabriz university of medical sciences, Tabriz, Iran, IslamicRepublic of
Glioblastoma multiform (GBM) is the most prevalent
intracranial primary brain tumor in adults which can cause astrikingly complex process by altering various genes and
molecular biomarkers. These research indicated that chro-
mosome 19q harbors many tumor suppressor genes that areintegral to glioblastoma carcinogenesis . These genes
localized the common region of deletion to the distal long1014 J. del Picchiaarm, 19q13.2-13.4. EML2 is one of the tumor suppressor
genes that is situated on 19q13.32. Also, this loci can be
considerably methylated in GBMs by CpG island promoter
hypermethylation. Interestingly, miR-330 encoding gene is
lies inside the intron of EML2, and this miRNA also acts as
oncosuppressor-miR in glioblastomas. Importantly, miR-519d encoding gene which is situated on 19q13.42 also
downregulated in GBMs. Moreover, NOP53 (also desig-
nated GLTSCR2/PICT-1) is localized within the dis-tinguished 1.4 Mb tumor suppressive region of
chromosome 19q13.33. Additionally, Bcl2L12, a protein
belonging to the Bcl-2 protein family which is located on19q13.33, is upregulated in glioblastoma multiform (GBM)
and plays a role in tumor cell development and tumor cell
resistance to apoptosis. Our hypothesis is that a program-mable CRISPR/AsCpf1-based genome engineering strategy
can be used to attach these sizeable chromosomal fragments
of tumor suppressor genes as an essential part of the chro-mosome 19 q-arm with the aim of chromosomal treatment.
Besides, we can simultaneously employ CRISPR-ddAsCpf1
system for speci ﬁc Inhibition of Bcl2L12 as an oncogene in
glioma cells. In this research cancer-derived exosomes-
associated scAAV9 is utilized as a convenient delivery
platform of CRISPR/AsCpf1 and CRISPR/ddAsCpf1 systems to GBM cells.
A. Abak: None. E. Sakhinia: None. A. Abhari: None.
E-P12.27
Molecular alterations in Bulgarian patients with
Glioblastoma multiforme
E. Nikolova1,2, D. Ferdinandov3,4, T. Todorov1, V. Mitev2,A .
Todorova1,2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Clinic of Neurosurgery, St. Ivan Rilski University Hospital,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Neurosurgery, Medical
University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
Introduction: Central nervous system tumors are char-
acterized by invasive nature and dif ﬁculties to resect sur-
gically all neoplastic cells with frequent relapses.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), classi ﬁed as World
Health Organization (WHO) grade IV in ﬁltrative glioma, is
the most common primary brain tumor in adults and the
most lethal subtype of gliomas. The molecular hetero-geneity in gliomas is extremely complex. There are several
genes involved in critical signaling pathways like receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK), p53 pathway and retinoblastoma(RB) pathway. Somatic copy number variations in these
genes are supposed to contribute to the glioblastomadevelopment and prognosis. In the present study, we
examined the presence of genetic aberrations in a small
group of Bulgarian patients.
Materials and Methods: Fresh brain biopsy tissues were
analyzed with multiplex ligation - dependent probe
ampli ﬁcation (MLPA).
Results: Simultaneous genetic alterations were found:
EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) ampli ﬁcation,
CDKN2A (cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A) deletionand TP53 (tumor protein p53) deletion.
Conclusion: This is an initial study on signaling
regulators genetic aberrations in Bulgarian glioblastomapatients. Detected genetic variations are correlated with
differentiation of primary and secondary gliomas and
disease outcome but more analyses are needed to assesstheir prognostic role. The study was partially supported by
Medical University So ﬁa, Bulgaria
E. Nikolova: None. D. Ferdinandov: None. T.
Todorov: None. V. Mitev: None. A. Todorova: None.
E-P12.28
Does Theranekron affect the pathway of apoptosis &
endoplasmic reticulum stress in head-neck cancer cell
T. Cora, T. Duran, V. B. Ucar, N. Kocak
Medical Faculty, KONYA, Turkey
Introduction: Tarantula cubensis venom ( Theranekron )i s
used as a homeopathic medicine. Many therapeutic effectsof Theranekron, such as antitumor, necrotizing action and
wound healing have been demonstrated in clinical studies.
ER stress has a role in development of in ﬂammation and
cancer. Therefore, ER stress has been suggested as a pro-
mising target for tumor cell death and cancer therapy.
Effectiveness of theranekron as an anti-cancer chemical hasbeen demonstrated in limited human cancer cells. However,
a study related to the effect of theranekron on head cancer is
not available in the literature. Therefore, in this study, weaimed to investigate the effect of theranekron on ER stress
and apoptosis on HNSCC.
Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron
(80 μl) in the study were determined by MTT analysis. Cells
were treated with 80 μl theranekron for 6 hours. Total RNA
was isolated using TRIzol reagent. Synthesis of cDNA fromthe total RNA was carried out using Transcriptor High
Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression levels of genes
(GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1) associated with endoplasmicreticulum stress and genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2) associated
with apoptosis were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes
were calculated by the ΔCT method. The statistical
signiﬁcances were analyzed applying two-tailed student ’s
t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA).Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1015Results: As a result, we found a difference in the
expression levels of genes associated with ER stress and
apoptosis in theranekron-treated HNSCC cells compared to
the untreated group. This suggests that theranekron effects
the pathways associated with ER stress and apoptosis.
T. Cora: None. T. Duran: None. V.B. Ucar: None. N.
Kocak: None.
E-P12.30
Assessment of JAK2 V617F mutation in Tunisian patients
with essential thrombocythemia
M. Belhiba1, H. Bellaaj2, L. Keskes1, R. Frikha3
1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
Sfax, Tunisia,2Department of Hematology, Hedi Chaker
University Teaching Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia,3Department of
Medical genetics, Hedi Chaker University Teaching Hospital,Sfax, Tunisia
Introduction: Essential thrombocythemia (ET) is a mye-
loproliferative neoplasm characterized by thrombocytosis
with a tendency to thrombosis and hemorrhage. Acquired
single point mutation in the JAK2, the V617F, has beendescribed as a frequent genetic event in patients with ET
(approximately 50-60 %).
In this study, we have investigated the JAK2V617F
mutation in Tunisian patients with ET, to establish the
correlation between phenotype and genotype.
Materials and Methods: Mutation screening for JAK2
V617F in patients was performed by allele-speci ﬁc PCR in
12 newly diagnosed ET patients in Tunisia. Clinical and
biological data were recorded.
Results: JAK2 V617F mutation was found in 2 patients
with an overall frequency of 16.7%.A particular history of
thrombosis was recorded.
Conclusions: Despite the limitation of our study, the
JAK2 V617F mutation seems to be not frequent in Tunisian
patients with ET. Moreover, genotyping of patientssuspected of a myeloproliferative neoplasm for JAK2
v617F would be useful to assess the risk of complications.
Larger studies are mandatory.
References:
1.Cetin, G., et al., Evaluation of clinical and laboratory
ﬁndings with JAK2 V617F mutation as an independent
variable in essential thrombocytosis. Mol Biol Rep, 2014.
41(10): p. 6737-42.
2.Al Assaf, C., et al., Analysis of phenotype and outcome
in essential thrombocythemia with CALR or JAK2 muta-
tions. Haematologica, 2015. 100(7): p. 893-7.
M. Belhiba: None. H. Bellaaj: None. L. Keskes: None.
R. Frikha: None.E-P12.31
Effects of kras gene lcs6 mutation on metastasis pathways
in human lung cancer
A. A. Azzawri1, T. Cora1, H. Acar2
1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey,2Diagen Biotechnological
Systems Healthcare Automation, Ankara, Turkey
Lung cancer is the leading cancer killer of both men and
women throughout the world. Notably, KRAS accounts for
90% of RAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Recentliterature has reported a strong association between KRAS
mutation and survival in non-small cell lung cancer and
approximately 97% of KRAS mutations in NSCLC involvecodons 12 or 13. Molecular mechanisms that are mediating
tumor ’s initiation, invasion, metastases, recurrence and
resistance to the therapy in lung cancers remains largelyunknown. One of the target sequences of miRNA Let-7
complementary site within the 3'untranslated region of
KRAS gene (named is 3 ’-UTR LCS6 sequence). LCS6
mutation may lead to metastases, development of cancer,
relapse and treatment resistance in many cancers. In this
project, it was aimed to carry out the effect of LCS6mutation on metastatic functions and AKT and ERK path-
ways, by using lung cancer A549, NCI-H441 cells and
BEAS-2B (control) cell carrying pLenti-KRAS-CDSmLCS6n, pLenti-KRAS-CDSm-LCS6m plasmids. The
results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations have sig-
niﬁcant different effects among A549 and NCI-H441 cell
groups. the mutation of LSC6 region increases the cell
migration and proliferation in NCI-H441 cells, while in
A549 cells a slight decrease occurred in migration andproliferation levels. Both G12V and LCS6 mutations
increase the cell invasion level in A549 and NCI-H441
cells. As for the target genes, both Western and qPCRresults showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations induced
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and RAF/MEK/ERK pathways in A549
and NCI-H441 cells, induce these pathways were higher inA549 cells.
A.A. Azzawri: None. T. Cora: None. H. Acar: None.
E-P12.32
A PHENOTYPIC CONTINUUM FROM LYNCH
SYNDROME TO CMMRD
M. Alvarez-Barona1, C. Fernandez-Rozadilla1, A. Dacal2,C .
Calviño-Costas3, J. Amigo1, X. Bello1, B. Sobrino1, A. Lopez-
Novo1, J. Cameselle-Teijeiro4, A. Carracedo1, M. Muleris5,C .
Colas6, K. Wimmer7, C. Ruiz-Ponte1
1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS,
Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, IDIS, Santiago de1016 J. del PicchiaCompostela, Spain,2Servicio de Gastroenterología, Hospital
Universitario Lucus Augusti, IDIS, Lugo, Spain,3Servicio de
Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti, Lugo, Spain,
4Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Clínico
Universitario, USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
5Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de recherche Saint-
Antoine, Paris, France,6Department of Genetics Institut Curie,
Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne Université,
Paris, France,7Division of Human Genetics, Medical
University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is extremely rare below the age of
25 years even in Lynch syndrome (LS), which is caused by
heterozygous germline mutations in the mismatch repair
(MMR) genes ( MLH1 ,MSH2 ,MSH6 andPMS2 ). On the
other hand, biallelic germline mutations in one of these
MMR genes are responsible for the Constitutional Mis-
match Repair De ﬁciency (CMMRD) syndrome character-
ized by an early-onset CRC with a high childhood
cancer risk.
We present a very early-onset CRC in a 12 year-old boy
belonging to a LS family with a germline pathogenic variant
in the MSH2 gene. His CRC showed MSH2/MSH6 protein-
complex loss, microsatellite instability, and the second -hit
mutation in MSH2 . Due to his early-onset a CMMRD was
suspected, but the absence of another detected germline
alteration in the MMR genes together with the resultsobtained in the gMSI /(ev)MSI and the methylation
tolerance assays
1discarded the CMMRD diagnosis.
Our hypothesis is that another germline variant occurring
in the affected child could contribute in addition with the
causative MSH2 variant to his early-onset CRC. Whole-
exome-sequencing and trio analysis were carried out.
Preliminary results showed no genetic alterations in
actionable genes related to hereditary colorectal cancer
syndromes or in genes involved in DNA repair pathways(NER, BER, HR). Further analyses are still undertaking.
These data support the existence of a severe and early-
onset LS phenotype mimicking CMMRD. Although thegenetic mechanisms underlying this clinical continuum are
largely unknown, we will discuss possible scenarios of a
postulated genetic continuum.
1Bodo _Gastroenterology 2015
Funding: CNAG-300-exomes Rare-Diseases
M. Alvarez-Barona: None. C. Fernandez-Rozadilla:
None. A. Dacal: None. C. Calviño-Costas: None. J.
Amigo: None. X. Bello: None. B. Sobrino: None. A.
Lopez-Novo: None. J. Cameselle-Teijeiro: None. A.
Carracedo: None. M. Muleris: None. C. Colas: None.
K. Wimmer: None. C. Ruiz-Ponte: None.E-P12.34
Detection of mitochondrialDNA copy numbers in the
plasma of ovarian cancer patients
J. S. Keser ű1, B. Soltész1, J. Lukács2, R. Póka2, B. Nagy1
1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,2Institute of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, Universityof Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
Introduction: Mitochondria are the key organelles in the
energy production, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Copy
number variations were connected to different pathological
conditions. It was suggested that it is contributing factor todifferent cancer development. We decided to measure the
mtDNA copy numbers in the plasma in ovarian cancer
patients and healthy controls.
Materials and Methods: We involved 24 healthy
controls (average age 54.00±14.57 years) and 24 ovarian
cancer patients (average age 61.33±12.72 years) in thestudy. Blood was drawn into EDTA tubes and plasma was
separated by centrifugations. MtDNA copy numbers were
determined by Human Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)Monitoring Primer Set kit (Takara, Japan) with real-
time PCR.
Results: The mtDNA copy number was 48±17.34 in the
healthy control group. We divided the ovarian cancer
patients group according to their FIGO classi ﬁcation, the
copy numbers were the followings FIGO I. 32±8.38; FIGOIII. 33±5.66; FIGO IV. 42±18.87. There is not signi ﬁcant
difference in the plasma cell-free mtDNA copy numbers.
Conclusion: We determined the cell-free mtDNA copy
numbers in the plasma of ovarian cancer patients and
healthy controls and did not found signi ﬁcant difference.
We plan to extend the study to exosome encapsulatedmtDNA measurements.
J.S. Keser ű:None. B. Soltész: None. J. Lukács: None.
R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None.
E-P12.36
Expression quantitative trait loci analysis ofnasopharyngeal carcinoma
W. Su1, J. Zhang1, K. Chang2
1Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan,2Department of Otolaryngology, Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou, Taoyuan, Taiwan
The discovery of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) of
speciﬁc tissue can help to reveal genetic component of
complex diseases. To identify eQTLs responsible forAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1017nasopharyngeal carcinoma risk behind the loci identi ﬁed in
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), we conducted
eQTL analyses using 25 tumor and 5 adjacent normal tis-
sues. The cis- and trans- eQTLs were identi ﬁed by inte-
grating whole genome genotyping data with RNA-Seq gene
expression data. After analysis, there were 18,375 SNP-mRNA eQTL pairs passed P < 1.00E-05 criteria. Then the
eQTLs were combined with NPC GWAS loci and found
HLA-B ,HLA-DQ andTNFRSF19 were with putative NPC
susceptibility eQTLs.
W. Su: None. J. Zhang: None. K. Chang: None.
E-P12.39
Investigation of the effect of theranekron on endoplasmic
reticulum stress in human pancreatic cell line BXPC-3
V. B. Ucar, T. Duran, N. Kocak
Selcuk University, Department of Medical Genetics, Konya,
TURKEY, KONYA, Turkey
Introduction: Tarantula cubensis venom ( Theranekron®)i s
used as a homeopathic medicine which has shown anti-
tumor effects in veterinary medicine. The aim of this studywas to assess effect of Tarantula cubensis on apoptotic cell
death of human cancer cell lines. ER stress has also a key
role in development of in ﬂammation, obesity and cancer.
Thus, ER stress has been suggested as a promising target for
tumor cell death and cancer therapy. Effectiveness of ther-
anekron as an anti-cancer chemical has been demonstratedin various human cancers. However, a study related to the
effect of theranekron on pancreas cancer is not available in
the literature. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to inves-tigate the effect of tunicamycin-induced ER stress on
BXPC-3 cell line.
Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron
(2μg/ml) in the study were determined by MTT analysis.
Cells were treated with 2μg/ml theranekron for 6 hours.
Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent. Synthesis ofcDNA from the total RNA was carried out using
Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression
levels of genes (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1, ATF4, ATF6,XBP1) associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress were
analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes were calculated by the
ΔCT method. The statistical signi ﬁcances were analyzed
applying two-tailed student ’s t-test and analysis of variance
(ANOVA).
Results: As a result, We found a difference in the
expression levels of ER stress related genes in theranekron-
treated BXPC-3 cells compared to the untreated group. This
suggests that theranekron effects the pathways associatedwith ER stress.
V.B. Ucar: None. T. Duran: None. N. Kocak: None.E-P12.40
Can Theranekron be an agent for inducing apoptosis and
ER stress in human pancreatic cells
N. Koçak1, T. Duran1, V. B. Ucar1, S. Nergiz1, I. Yildirim2
1Selçuk University, Selçuklu Medical Faculty,The Department
of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey,2Dicle University, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Genetics, Diyarbak ır,
Turkey
Introduction: Tarantula cubensis venom ( Theranekron )i s
used as a homeopathic medicine. Many therapeutic effects
of Theranekron, such as antitumor, necrotizing action and
wound healing have been demonstrated in clinical studies.ER stress has a role in development of in ﬂammation and
cancer. Thus, ER stress has been suggested as a promising
target for tumor cell death and cancer therapy. Effectivenessof theranekron as an anti-cancer chemical has been
demonstrated in limited human cancer cells. However, a
study related to the effect of theranekron on pancreas canceris not available in the literature. Therefore, in this study, we
aimed to investigate the effect of theranekron on ER stress
and apoptosis on PANC-1.
Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron
(10 μl) in the study were determined by MTT analysis. Cells
were treated with 10 μl theranekron for 4 hours. Total RNAwas isolated using TRIzol reagent. Synthesis of cDNA from
the total RNA was carried out using Transcriptor High
Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression levels of genes(GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1) associated with endoplasmic
reticulum stress and genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2) associated
with apoptosis were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changeswere calculated by the ΔCT method. The statistical
signiﬁcances were analyzed applying two-tailed student ’s
t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Results: As a result, we found a difference in the
expression levels of genes associated with ER stress and
apoptosis in theranekron-treated PANC-1 cells compared tothe untreated group. This suggests that theranekron effects
the pathways associated with ER stress and apoptosis.
N. Koçak: None. T. Duran: None. V.B. Ucar: None. S.
Nergiz: None. I. Yildirim: None.
E-P12.41
Does Tarantula cubensis venom have antipoliferative &
endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibitor activity on skin
cancer cells?
T. Duran, N. Kocak, V. B. Ucar, T. Cora, S. Nergiz
Selcuk University Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey1018 J. del PicchiaTarantula cubensis venom ( Theranekron ) is used as a
homeopathic medicine which has shown anti-tumor effects
in veterinary medicine. ER stress has also a key role in
development of in ﬂammation, obesity and cancer. Thus, ER
stress has been suggested as a promising target for tumor
cell death and cancer therapy. Effectiveness of theranekronas an anti-cancer chemical has been demonstrated in limited
human cancer cells. However, a study related to the effect of
theranekron on pancreas cancer is not available in the lit-erature. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to investigate the
effect of theranekron on ER stress and apoptosis on SK-
MEL-30 cell line.
Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron
(20 μl) in the study were determined by MTT analysis. Cells
were treated with 20 μl theranekron for 24 hours. TotalRNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent. Synthesis of
cDNA from the total RNA was carried out using
Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expressionlevels of genes (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1, ATF4, ATF6,
XBP1) associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress and
genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2, BAD) associated with apoptosiswere analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes were calculated
by the ΔCT method. The statistical signi ﬁcances were
analyzed applying two-tailed student ’s t-test and analysis of
variance (ANOVA).
Results: As a result, we found a difference in the
expression levels of genes associated with ER stress andapoptosis in theranekron-treated SK-MEL-30 cells com-
pared to the untreated group. This suggests that theranekron
effects the pathways associated with ER stress andapoptosis.
T. Duran: None. N. Kocak: None. V.B. Ucar: None. T.
Cora: None. S. Nergiz: None.
E-P12.43
Association of rs944289 polymorphism and differentiatedthyroid cancer: a pilot study in Thai population
P. Yeetong1, S. Mitbunchanarong2, A. Laipiriyakun3,B .
Satayaban3, S. Ausavarat4
1Division of Human Genetics, Department of Botany, Faculty
of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand,
2Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand,3Nuclear Chemistry
Laboratory, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of
Radiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand,4Department of Clinical
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand
Introduction: Many single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) have been shown to be associated with differentiatedthyroid cancer (DTC) in Caucasoid and Asian populations.
Among those reported, the rs944289 seems to had a sig-
niﬁcant association in Asians. Here we investigated the role
of rs944289 as a pilot study in Thai population.
Materials and Methods: 179 patients with con ﬁrmed
thyroid cancer and 98 healthy individuals as control groupwere enrolled. Genotypes were identi ﬁed using PCR-RFLP
methods. Results were analyzed by SPSS.
Results: The risk T allele of rs944289 polymorphism was
not associated with risk of thyroid cancer, with odds ratio of
0.97 (95% CI 0.68-1.38) in Thai population. These result
revealed that the rs944289 polymorphism is not a main riskfactor for thyroid cancer in Thai.
Conclusions: The rs944289 SNP, however, may not play
a primary role in the development of DTC in Thaipopulation. Further studies would include more samples
and extend to other reported variants to create a pro ﬁle
polymorphisms for thyroid cancer susceptibility in Thaipopulation.
P. Yeetong: None. S. Mitbunchanarong: None. A.
Laipiriyakun: None. B. Satayaban: None. S.
Ausavarat: None.
E-P13 Basic mechanisms in molecular and cytogenetics
E-P13.02
Different origin of chromosome 15 CNVs
Z. G. Markova, M. Minzhenkova, N. Shilova
Federal state budgetary institution «Research centre formedical genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: The 15q11-q13 region contains many low
copy repeats, is well known for its genomic instability andis substrate for CNVs formation. CNVs may be detected by
aCGH and NGS. But these methods provide information
only about copy number variations (deletion, duplication,triplication).
Materials and Methods: We studied CNVs of chromo-
some 15 detected by aCGH in 4 cases and by NGS - in onecase. FISH analysis was performed on interphase and
metaphase chromosomes with CEP and LSI DNA-probes
on chromosome 15.
Results: In two cases, the copy number gains
(dup15q11.2q11.3 and dup15q11.2) were caused by inter-
stitial duplication detected by FISH analyses.
In two other cases (triplication15q11.2q13/duplica-
tion15q13.2q13.3 and duplication15q11-q13) FISH-
analysis showed inv dup 15 supernumerary markerchromosome.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1019In one case, with the deletion of 15q11.2q13.3 (8,7Mb) an
unbalanced translocation - der(13)t(13;15)(q11.1,13.3) was
found. The genomic imbalance detected by CMA was due
to an unbalanced segregation product of a paternal balanced
translocation.
Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that although aCGH
and NGS may be should be the ﬁrst-tier test for clinical
diagnosis of genomic imbalance, but only chromosome
analysis or FISH provides the chromosomal structuralinformation associated with these copy number changes.
Some of these copy number changes are associated with
additional chromosomal structural rearrangements that canonly be de ﬁned by FISH analysis with targeted DNA-
probes. Identi ﬁcation of chromosomal structural rearrange-
ments is indispensable for genetic counseling of the family.
Z.G. Markova: None. M. Minzhenkova: None. N.
Shilova: None.
E-P13.03
A rarely seen 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefelter
syndrome: Case report
A. Kalayci Yigin, U. Gumus, M. Seven
İstanbul University, Cerrahpa şa Medical Faculty, Department
of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey
A rarely seen 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefelter
syndrome: Case report
Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome is one of the most
common human sex chromosome anomalies. Males with
Klinefelter syndrome may have one or more extra copy of
the X chromosome in each cell (47,XXY/48,XXXY/49,XXXXY) or may have the extra X chromosome in only
some of their cells. This condition is described as mosaic
(47,XXY/46,XY). 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefel-ter syndrome is very rare and aproximately 10 cases have
been reported so far in the literature.
Clinical case: We report here a case of a mosaic 47,
XXY/46,XX infertile male in whom referred to our
department with infertility history for 5 years. His sperm
analysis revealed azoospermia. The cytogenetic analysiswith GTG-banding karyotype lymphocytes from peripheral
blood samples showed 47,XXY[57]/46,XX[43]. Also FISH
analysis with X centromere probe con ﬁrmed the mosaicism.
Conclusion: We have demonstrated 47,XXY/46,XX
mosaicism of Klinefelter syndrome which is extremely rare
genetic disease and therefore we thought to contribute to theliterature with the present study.
Keywords: 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism, Klinefelter syn-
drome, rare disorders.
A. Kalayci Yigin: None. U. Gumus: None. M.
Seven: None.E-P13.06
Molecular cytogenetic survey of alterations to cell cycle
pathway in neuropsychiatric diseases
S. G. Vorsanova1,2, Y. B. Yurov1,2, M. A. Zelenova1,2,O .S .
Kurinnaia1,2, I. A. Demidova1,2, A. D. Kolotii1,2, K. S. Vasin1,2,V .
S. Kravets1,2, N. S. Shmitova2, V. O. Sharonin2, I. Y. Iourov1,2,3
1Academician Yu.E. Veltishchev Research Clinical Institute of
Pediatrics, N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation,
Moscow, Russian Federation,2FSBSI «Mental Health
Research Center», Moscow, Russian Federation,3FSBEI FPE
«Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education» of the
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow,Russian Federation
Introduction: Chromosome and genomic rearrangements
are a frequent cause of abnormal brain functioning resulting
in neuropsychiatric diseases. Despite a wide variety of
available data, speci ﬁc biological processes underlying
abnormal neurodevelopment remain to be unmasked. Here,
we have used molecular cytogenetic data to analyze speci ﬁc
pathways leading to neuropsychiatric diseases in children.
Materials and Methods: Conventional and molecular
karyotyping was used to evaluate 427 patients with
idiopathic intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy, andcongenital malformations. An original bioinformatic tech-
nique based on candidate process prioritization (Iourov
et al., 2014; Yurov et al., 2017) was applied to pathwayenrichment among these patients.
Results: Molecular cytogenetic analysis has shown
CNVs relevant to a pathway functional change in 397children (93%). The highest enrichment rates (gene
percentage among all the prioritized candidate genes/
processes) were found for the following pathways: cellcycle (4.68%), MAPK signaling (6.56%), pathways in
cancer (11.94%), DNA replication (1.64%). All the children
exhibiting the genomic variations altering genes involved inthese pathways were found to present with chromosome
instability (mosaic aneuploidy, chromosome breaks/fragi-
lity, non-speci ﬁc structural chromosomal rearrangements),
whereas the remainder was not demonstrating de ﬁnable
chromosome instability.
Conclusions: Alterations to pathways associated with
genome/chromosome stability maintenance through the cell
cycle were shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of
neuropsychiatric diseases. The consequences of the altera-tions were found to be detectable at chromosomal level.
These data supports a previously proposed hypothesis
describing two-/multiple hits to genome stability as apossible mechanism of neuropsychiatric diseases (Iourov
et al., 2013). Supported by RSF (14-35-00060).1020 J. del PicchiaS.G. Vorsanova: None. Y.B. Yurov: None. M.A.
Zelenova: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. I.A. Demidova:
None. A.D. Kolotii: None. K.S. Vasin: None. V.S.
Kravets: None. N.S. Shmitova: None. V.O. Sharonin:
None. I.Y. Iourov: None.
E-P13.08DR
N. Nadine Jalkh1, Z. Haidar1, S. Corbani1, V. Delague2,A .
Mégarbané3, E. Chouery1
1Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon,2INSERM, UMR_S
910, Marseille, France,3Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris,
France
The frequency of genetic disorders among people reaching
adulthood is estimated to be equal 8%. Due to the clinical
and genetic heterogeneity of diseases, molecular diagnosiscan be very challenging. Whole-exome sequencing (WES)
have revolutionized the ﬁeld of genomics by allowing a
rapid and cost-effective diagnosis.
Here, we present data on the ﬁrst 172 probands referred to
us for genetic evaluation by WES. Patients presented with a
range of phenotypes suggesting potential genetic causes.
The molecular diagnostic rate observed in our study
is 43%.
This yield is higher than the positive rates of other genetic
tests, such as karyotype analysis (5 to 15%), chromosomal
microarray analysis (15 to 20%), and Sanger sequencing for
single genes.
WES provided a high diagnosis in people with deafness,
renal dysfunction, leukodystrophies and neuromuscular
disorders; suggesting that these groups of patients areparticularly good candidates for genetic evaluation by WES.
Undiagnosed cases may present large rearrangements or
mutations that are located in non-coding regions, such asregulatory or deep intronic regions, which can not be
detected by WES. Furthermore, technical limitations such
as poor coverage can also interfere with WES success.
In conclusion, the use of WES to analyze 172 clinical
cases yielded a diagnosis in 43% of these cases, which
supports the use of WES as a diagnostic test for patientswith nonspeci ﬁc or unusual disease presentations of
possible genetic cause and for patients with clinical
diagnoses of heterogeneous genetic conditions.
N. Nadine Jalkh: None. Z. Haidar: None. S. Corbani:
None. V. Delague: None. A. Mégarbané: None. E.
Chouery: None.
E-P13.10
The routes of r(13) instability in induced pluripotent stemcellsT. V. Nikitina1, A. A. Kashevarova1, A. G. Menzorov2,3,S .A .
Vasilyev1, M. M. Gridina2, A. A. Khabarova2, A. V. Churilova4,
O. L. Serov2,3, I. N. Lebedev1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk NRMC, Tomsk,
Russian Federation,2Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB
RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,4Tomsk State
University, Tomsk, Russian Federation
Introduction: The mitotic inheritance of ring chromosomes
in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) has acquiredspecial interest after report, that iPSCs can eliminate ring
chromosome and restore a normal karyotype via uniparental
disomy (Bershteyn et al., 2014).
Materials and Methods: We obtained 3 iPSC lines from
ﬁbroblasts of patient with r(13) by using LeGO lentiviral
vectors, coding OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and C-MYC tran-scription factors. Cytogenetic analysis was performed using
G-banding and FISH.
Results: Fibroblasts were mosaic for variable level of r
(13), monosomy 13 and 46,XY,-13, +mar cells during
cultivation. iTAF6-6 iPSC line karyotype was 46,XY,r(13)
in 80% and 45,XY,-13 in 20% of cells at passage 13 (P13).iTAF6-13 line had 95% of 46,XY,-13, +mar cells at P11,
whereas the ring chromosome was not registered at all.
Perhaps, this clone originated from a cell with the markerchromosome or fragmentation of r(13) took place during
reprogramming or at early passages. In iTAF6-4 line the
proportion of cells with r(13) signi ﬁcantly decreased from
18% to 5%, at the same time the proportion of cells with
marker chromosome signi ﬁcantly increased from 73% to
86% (at P5 and P12 respectively) with a small number ofmonosomic cells.
Conclusions: r(13) was instable during reprogramming or
at early passages in iPSCs. However, spontaneous correc-tion of the 46,XY,r(13) karyotype to normal has not been
registered in any of the cell lines. This study was supported
by Russian Science Foundation, grant 16-15-10231.
T.V. Nikitina: None. A.A. Kashevarova: None. A.G.
Menzorov: None. S.A. Vasilyev: None. M.M. Gridina:
None. A.A. Khabarova: None. A.V. Churilova: None. O.
L. Serov: None. I.N. Lebedev: None.
E-P13.13
Chromosomal damage in Individuals with radiofrequency
eposure as Measured by Personal Exposimeter
R. Ramanpreet, G. Gandhi
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, IndiaAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1021Introduction: Communication and information technolo-
gies rely on electromagnetic radiations and the increased
dependency on these technologies has resulted in an insi-
dious build-up of radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁeld (RF-
EMF) in the environment. The RF radiation exposure may
pose to be health-hazardous and, therefore, requiresassessment.
Materials and Methods: In the present study, chromo-
somal damage was assessed using the Buccal MicronucleusCytome (BMCyt) assay as a function of radiation exposure
after Institutional Ethics Committee clearance of the study
and written voluntary informed consent from the partici-pants. For this, 24 hour-personal exposimeter measurements
(PEM) were recorded for unrelated 60 healthy adults (40
cases residing in the vicinity of mobile phone base stationssince their installation and 20 controls residing in areas with
no base stations).
Results: The PEM in cases (149.28±8.98 mV/m)
revealed signi ﬁcantly higher (p =0.000) electric ﬁeld
strength compared to the recorded value (80.40±0.30 mV/
m) in controls. The cases (n =40; 23-90 years) and the
controls (n =20; 19-65 years) matched for alcohol drinking,
smoking habits, and mobile and cordless phone usage. The
frequencies of micronuclei (1.86X, p =0.007), nuclear buds
(2.95X, p =0.002) and cell death parameter (condensed
chromatin cells) were signi ﬁcantly (1.75X, p =0.007)
elevated in cases compared to that in controls probably asa function of radiofrequency radiation exposure in the
absence of other exposure(s).
Conclusions: The long- term exposure to low intensity
electromagnetic microwaves as emitted continuously by
mobile phone base station may provoke ill health effects
which may further lead to cancer development. However,studies on a larger sample size are required for more
insights.
R. Ramanpreet: None. G. Gandhi: None.
E-P13.14
ﬁshing with the ring
S. DIMASSI1, Y. Halleb2, N. Kahloul3, W. Gafsi4, A. Jalloul1,H .
Hadj Abdallah1, L. Boughammoura3, S. Mougou-Zerelli1,A .
Saad1
1service de cytogénétique et de biologie de la reproduction,
CHU Farhat Hached, SOUSSE, Tunisia,2Department of
Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached
University Teaching Hospital, SOUSSE, Tunisia,3service de
pédiatrie, CHU Farhat Hached, SOUSSE, Tunisia,4service de
pédiatrie, hôpital régional de Moknine, Moknine, Tunisia
Ring Chromosomes are rare cytogenetic abnormalities.
Teloremic deletion or fusion, disturbing chromosomestability, was the most incriminated mechanisms.We report
in this work, the case of a newborn (patient 1) presenting a
polymalformative syndrome (severe dysmorphic syndrome
and a cardiopathy) and a 16 years-old boy (patient 2) with
scoliosis, Madelung deformity and aortic stenosis.Patients
underwent a standard R-band blood karyotype and ﬂuor-
escence in-situ hybridization (FISH).Karyotype showed in
patient 2 the presence of a chromosome mosaic with a ring
7 chromosome present in 28% of mitoses and a derivativechromosome 7 (der (7)) present in 72% of mitoses. Der (7)
is a duplicated in 7q terminal. Patient 2 presents a chro-
mosomal mosaic associating a monosomy X and a ring Ychromosome. FISH con ﬁrmed the presence of the ring Y
chromosme in 90% of the analyzed nuclei. This Y ring
chromosome contains the SRY gene Instability of ring
chromosomes during mitotic divisions explains their mosaic
distribution. Phenotypes associated with ring chromosomes
are variable depending on the nature of the ring chromo-some, the mosaic rate and their genes content. Ring 7 and Y
chromosomes are chromosome abnormalities. During the
cell cycles, by an exchange effect between sister chroma-tids, ring chromosomes can undergo breaks, duplication, ⋯
These phenomena can lead to the formation of derivative
chromosomes associated with the ring.The haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency of SHOX gene in ring Y chromosome is responsible
for 70% of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Characterization
by CGH array of these ring chromosomes is in progress andmay explain their formation mechanism
S. Dimassi: None. Y. Halleb: None. N. Kahloul: None.
W. Gafsi: None. A. Jalloul: None. H. Hadj Abdallah:
None. L. Boughammoura: None. S. Mougou-Zerelli:
None. A. Saad: None.
E-P13.15
Impact of diet, household income and stress on telomere
length in a cohort of Colombian schoolchildren
E. D. Kidd1, A. Walley2, J. Buxton3, J. Le Page-Pezet4,D .D .
Cohen5,6, P. Lopez-Jaramillo5,6, A. I. F. Blakemore7,8,U .L .
Fairbrother1
1School of Human Science, London Metropolitan University,
North Campus, 166-220 Holloway Road, London, United
Kingdom,2Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and Clinical
Sciences Research Institute and Institute of Medical andBiomedical Science Education, St George ’s University of
London, St George ’s Hospital, Carlton Terrace, London,
United Kingdom,
3Department of Biomolecular Sciences,
School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and Chemistry, Kingston
University, London, United Kingdom,4School of Human
Science, London Metropolitan University, North Campus,166-220 Holloway Road, London, United Kingdom,
5Dirección de
Investigaciones, Fundación Oftalmológica de Santander1022 J. del Picchia(FOSCAL), Floridablanca, Santander, Colombia,6Facultad de
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Santander (UDES),
Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia,7Department of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom,8Department of Life Sciences,
College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University,London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Mean telomere length (TL) has been asso-
ciated with aging, cancer, diet and stress. In order to assess
the effects of diet and stress on TL, and minimise the effect
of age, the current study assessed school-age children with acomprehensive phenotyping approach.
Materials and Methods: Relative telomere length ratios
were determined in 375 subjects (age 9-14 years). Subjectswere recruited within the ACFIES (Association between
Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Muscular Strength and Body
Composition with Metabolic Risk Factors in ColombianChildren) study. Phenotypes were determined using stan-
dard tests and an extensive questionnaire. A composite
stress score was derived by adding together the number ofserious life events for each subject. Statistical analysis was
carried out using SPSSv25 (IBM Inc., USA).
Results: Consumption of 31 different foods was not
signiﬁcantly associated with TL (p>0.05). Uncorrected
associations were observed for dairy (p =0.014), fast food
(p=0.01) and fruit juice (p =0.049). Household income
was positively associated with consumption of dairy (p =
0.00005) and fruit juice (p =0.03) but not fast food
(p>0.05). It was negatively associated with a compositestress score (p =0.00003). In this study, neither household
income nor stress were associated with TL (p>0.05).
Conclusions: Interestingly, TL appears to be positively
associated with consumption of dairy products, possibly
due to the bene ﬁcial effects of increasing micronutrients
such as calcium in the diet for these children. The lack ofassociation with household income and stress may be due to
the relatively small cohort size, or their young age so that
long-term effects are yet to manifest.
E.D. Kidd: None. A. Walley: None. J. Buxton: None. J.
Le Page-Pezet: None. D.D. Cohen: None. P. Lopez-
Jaramillo: None. A.I.F. Blakemore: None. U.L.
Fairbrother: None.
E-P13.16
Gene expression pro ﬁles in response to MCM4
transcription silencing
A. Kuzevanova, P. Koshkin, P. Apanovich, D. Khmelkova, A.
Karpukhin, A. Alimov
RCMG, Moscow, Russian FederationTheMCM4 gene belong to the key proteins involved in the
replication licensing in a cell cycle. The gene expression
dysregulation was found in number of tumors. The aim of
this study was to investigate the particularities of gene
expression in cancer cells after МСМ 4gene silencing.
Experiment was carried out on the HT-29 cell line. Pro ﬁling
was made with the help of Affymetrix GeneChip 2.0. Data
were normalized by SSTR Multi-Chip Analysis algorithm
in TAC 4.0. The changes of MCM4 RNA levels were
determined through different time after siRNA transfection.
Control cells were transfected with siCON1. A comparative
analysis of siMCM4/siCON1 RNA samples showed thatMCM4 gene silencing leads to changes in 146 genes (gene-
level p-value < 0,05). The most of identi ﬁed genes are
involved into regulation of cell cycle process, G1/S transi-tion, DNA replication, anatomical structure development. In
particular, the expression of E2F7, Cdc6, CCNE2 cell-cycle
genes were suppressed and expression of CDK8 gene was
increased. The CDK8 is a part of mediator complex that
allowed suggest activation of multiple transcription pro-
grams as response to gene silencing. Of signi ﬁcance is the
increased expression of TNFSF10 gene, which activates
cancer cell death through the extrinsic apoptotic pathway.
Both TNFRSF10 (A/B) receptors constitutionally express
into HT-29 cells. The data may suppose the activation of
apoptosis through an external cell mechanism under МСМ 4
silencing. Grant: №0517 - 2017-0017, FASO Russia.
A. Kuzevanova: None. P. Koshkin: None. P. Apano-
vich: None. D. Khmelkova: None. A. Karpukhin: None.
A. Alimov: None.
E-P13.17
The two faces of WTX gene
D. Formicola1, A. La Barbera1, A. Provenzano1, A. Gambale2,P .
Reho1, L. Quaglietta3, V. Palazzo4, E. Bosi1, L. Dosa4,R .
Artuso4, A. Iolascon2, S. Giglio1,4
1Medical Genetics Unit, Dpt. Experimental and Clinical
Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy,2Department of
Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University
Federico II of Naples (Italy) and CEINGE AdvancedBiotechnologies, Naples, Italy,
3Department of Pediatric
Hematology & Oncology, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon,
Naples, Italy,4Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's
University Hospital, Florence, Italy
Abnormalities in WNT signaling are implicated in a broad
range of developmental anomalies and in tumorigenesis.
WTX is expressed during embryonic development and is
somatically inactivated in 20-30% of Wilms tumors;germline mutations are also observed in both familial and
sporadic forms of a X-linked dominant disorder, theAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1023osteopathia-striata congenital with cranial sclerosis(OSCS).
We reported two unrelated male probands: the ﬁrst affected
by OSCS (his mother present mild phenotype) and a second
with familial Wilms tumor. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) of both revealed two novel missense germinal
mutations: c.401>G/T (OSCS) and c.477T>G (Wilms);additionally, WES on tumor tissue revealed a second hit in
CTNNB1 gene. Both germline mutations in males were
found with a minor allele frequency <1% in Caucasianpopulation. The histidine at 134 and the phenylalanine at
159 position in WTX were conserved in phylogenetic tree,
thus suggesting a causative role. These variants are locatedin exon2 encoding an important Phosphatidylinositol(4,5)-
bisphosphate binding domain to localize WTX to the
plasma membrane. Most deleterious mutations in thisdomain correlate with fetal or neonatal lethality in affected
males. We hypothesized that c.401G>T mutation is
responsible of the “mild”male phenotype of OCSC, prob-
ably because of the change of a basic on hydrophobic amino
acid (p.H134P) doesn ’t promote dramatically conforma-
tional change in the WTX. Furthermore, we reported in thesecond patient the ﬁrst evidence of germinal predisposing
mutation in WTX in familial Wilms tumor. We also hypo-
thesized that gain-of-function or loss-of-function mutationsat the same domain could cause very distinct clinical
diseases.
D. Formicola: None. A. La Barbera: None. A.
Provenzano: None. A. Gambale: None. P. Reho: None.
L. Quaglietta: None. V. Palazzo: None. E. Bosi: None. L.
Dosa: None. R. Artuso: None. A. Iolascon: None. S.
Giglio: None.
E-P14 New diagnostic approaches, technical aspects &
quality control
E-P14.01
The effects of the different centrifugal gravities on the cell
viability
A. Asik, N. Ozates Ay, C. Kayabasi, B. Ozmen Yelken, F.
Sogutlu, R. Gasimli, C. Celebi, E. Tayfur, S. Yilmaz Susluer, C.Biray Avci, C. Gunduz
Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Biology, Izmir, Turkey
Cell culture is based on the principle of replicating cells
under controlled conditions. Cell culture studies are an
important part of today's popular research topics and are
frequently used as models in vitro cancer research. The goalin cell and tissue culture is to keep the cells alive and to
reproduce the cells and to freeze them for reusing whennecessary. One of the most important points to note in
experiments for cell culture studies is the amount of living
cells used. While the quali ﬁcation of the cell medium and
the amount of the carbon dioxide and/or temperature of the
incubator with CO
2are include during passaging, the sub-
stance and/or method used are include among factorsaffecting cell viability during the freezing process. In
addition to these factors, there is no de ﬁnite information as
to whether there is a relationship between centrifugationgradient and cell viability. We used eleven different cell
lines, seven of which were monolayer (U-87MG, U-
118MG, LN-18, PC-3, DU145, LNCaP, WI-38) and four ofwhich were suspension (K-562, HL-60, CCFR-CEM, NCI-
BL2171). We exposed cells to centrifugation with different
time (5 and 10 min) and centrifugal gravity/rpm (600rpm/40g, 1200rpm/232g, 2400rpm/638g and 4800rpm/2550g)
after passaging. Then, we evaluated dead and living cells by
the Cedex XS analyzer. We found signi ﬁcant differs in cells
viability for each cells after centrifugation process in par-
allel to time and centrifugal gravity. In conclusion, this
study revealed differences in viability rates of cell lines incell culture studies, depending on the centrifugation
gradient.
A. Asik: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. C. Kayabasi:
None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. F. Sogutlu: None. R.
Gasimli: None. C. Celebi: None. E. Tayfur: None. S.
Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci: None. C.
Gunduz: None.
E-P14.02
Coverage analysis of targeted next generation sequence
data among 204 primer immune de ﬁciency patients
E. Pariltay, A. Aykut, A. Durmaz, O. Cogulu
Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey
Introduction : Next-generation sequencing is changing
clinical routine of molecular diagnosis. As well as wholegenome and exome sequencing targeted gene panels are
getting increasingly used for diagnostic assays. Ampli ﬁca-
tion imbalances is one of most common the limitations ofmulti-amplicon targeted sequencing.
Materials and Methods : We sequenced 204 primer
immune de ﬁciency diagnosed patients by community
designed ready to use “Ampliseq Primary Immune
Deﬁciency Research Panel v2 ”using 530 chip and Ion
S5™next-generation sequencer. Panel covers 264 gene and
5241 amplicons using two pools (2627 and 2614 amplicons
respectively).
Results: Mean on target read was 97,86% and mean read
depth was 340,98 where mean uniformity was 86,83%. We
could not able to get any usable read from 42 of the 52411024 J. del Picchiaamplicons (mean read count <0). Amplicon read count
analysis revealed, 1844 and 3164 amplicons had at least one
read count below threshold 10 and 20 read respectively.
Ampli ﬁcation faults was not accumulated in speci ﬁc genes
and heterogeneously distributed.
Conclusions: Target based gene panels are helpful for
genetic disorders where multi gene targets are needed to be
sequenced. Because of analytic pipeline DNA enrichment is
required. Biochemical nature of ampli ﬁcation is not a
perfect process. While reporting multi gene panels clin-
icians have to consider the possibility of uncovered regions
and using alternative methods for diagnosis. Here we sharepreliminary coverage analysis of primer immune de ﬁciency
panel sequencing data.
E. Pariltay: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None.
O. Cogulu: None.
E-P14.03
Large rearrangements in the CFTR gene: Data from
patients of Greek origin
M. Poulou, H. Fryssira, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, M. Tzetis
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Department
of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece
Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) (MIM#219700) is the
second most common autosomal recessive disorder in
Greece after thalassemias. The carrier frequency is esti-
mated approximately at 4-5% of general population with anincidence of about 1 in 2500-3500 live births. Some
patients, after sequencing the whole coding region and the
exon - intron boundaries, have only one of the causativemutations identi ﬁed. These patients carry on the other allele
a large rearrangement that cannot be detected with con-
ventional methods.
Materials and Methods: The study population was 45
patients, presenting with typical cystic ﬁbrosis symptoms,
with only one identi ﬁed pathogenic mutation. We screened
these patients for abnormal copy numbers (deletions and
duplications) using MLPA ®(SALSA MLPA P091 CFTR
probemix, MRC Holland). Positive ﬁndings were con ﬁrmed
using a custom made array CGH, speci ﬁc for CFTR gene,
platform 8x60K, G3 CGH +SNP microarray (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
Results: A large rearrangement in the CFTR gene was
detected in 28 out of 45 patients. Using a custom made
aCGH we were able to map the exact breakpoints[GRCh37- 7q11.21].Rearrangement No of patients Size (Kb) Start End
Dup10_12 10 41.499 117,186,717 117,228,215
Del2 6 7.822 117,138,471 117,146,292
Del4-8 5 10.695 117,169,806 117,180,500
Del2_22 2 130.63 117,139,946 117,270,575
Dup22 2 5.398 117,267,448 117,272,845
Del18_20 1 6.807 117,246,136 117,252,942
Del_upstream_9 1 76.283 115,913,429 117,196,552
Whole gene del 1 188.739 117,120,005 117,308,744
Conclusions: In Greece, as in other Mediterranean
populations, CFTR mutations show great heterogeneity. In
our study the frequency of large rearrangements is estimatedto be approximately 2%. In conclusion we suggested that
screening for such rearrangements should be included when
screening patients with typical CF and when aiming toachieve a high detection rate.
M. Poulou: None. H. Fryssira: None. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli:
None. M. Tzetis: None.
E-P14.04
Design and application of an expanded newborn screeningNGS panel: ﬁrst Argentinian experience
C. Fernandez, S. Menazzi, M. Fabbro, D. Lorenzi, M. Bilinski,
M. Galain, P. Nicotra, J. Hamer, F. Nodar, S. Papier
Novagen, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Introduction: The aim of newborn screening (NBS) pro-
grams is to identify serious conditions that require earlydetection and urgent pre-symptomatic treatment in order to
avert serious clinical harm. NBS in Argentina is mandatory
for only 6 inborn errors of metabolism. NGS-based tech-nologies allow laboratories to test multiple genes, thus
enabling detection of several conditions simultaneously.
Our aim was to develop the ﬁrst expanded NBS panel in
Argentina to offer a broad and rapid molecular diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: Guided by national and
international NBS programs and recommendations frommedical societies (ESHG, ACMG, AAP) for genetic testing
in asymptomatic minors and interpretation of sequence
variants, we selected severe childhood-onset disorders withavailable treatment that, if implemented early, would result
in clinical bene ﬁts for the patient. An in-house pipeline for
bioinformatic analysis was developed and a focusedguideline for classi ﬁcation and report of variants was
elaborated, as well as an algorithm for con ﬁrmatory tests.
Results: The current panel includes 96 genes for 50
diseases: 10 organic acid disorders, 8 fatty acid oxidation
disorders, 8 lysosomal storage disorders, 6 aminoacidAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1025disorders, 3 types of hyperammonemias, 2 immunode ﬁ-
ciencies, 2 hemoglobin disorders, 1 endocrine disorder and
10 miscelaneous conditions.
Conclusions: Currently, NBS by NGS should only be
considered an add-on to traditional screening programs.
However, it is a promising genetic test that may reduce falsepositives and negatives, shorten times required for diagnosis
and enable genetic counseling, but many issues should be
taken into account and properly discussed when designingthe panel.
C. Fernandez: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. S. Menazzi: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Novagen. M. Fabbro: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. D. Lorenzi:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen.
M. Bilinski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Novagen. M. Galain: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. P. Nicotra: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. J. Hamer: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. F. Nodar: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. S.
Papier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Novagen.
E-P14.05
How to measure loss of chromosome Y
M. Danielsson, J. Halvardson, B. Torabi Moghadam, H. Davies,
J. Dumanski, L. A. Forsberg
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala,
Sweden
Recent discoveries show that mosaic loss of chromosome Y
(LOY) in leukocytes is associated with increased risks of
cancer, Alzheimer ’s and cardiovascular disease. More than
15% of men older than 70 show some degree of LOY and
these men survive on average only half as long as men
without LOY. But how is LOY measured today and whatwould be the best method for the future?
Genome wide arrays are most commonly used in LOY-
studies, but other methods have also been used: wholegenome sequencing (WGS), gene targeted qPCR or droplet
digital PCR (ddPCR). We have compared and evaluated
arrays, WGS and ddPCR targeting a homologous genelocated on the X and Y chromosome for LOY-studies. The
cheap and easy ddPCR method gives very similar results as
the expensive and precise WGS, when using whole bloodfor detecting LOY.
However, the sensitivity of all these methods are limited,
leaving low frequencies of LOY undetected. These methodsrequire high amounts of DNA input from hundreds of
thousands of cells, but LOY is a binary event on the singlecell level. The clonal expansion of rare LOY cells could
have important clinical implications. Therefore, we aim to
combine LOY and cell type detection in a clinically
applicable single cell assay. This would bene ﬁt both
individual patients as well as the health care system and
the society at large. The project is funded by an ERC-StG aswell as other sources.
M. Danielsson: None. J. Halvardson: None. B. Torabi
Moghadam: None. H. Davies: None. J. Dumanski: E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Cray innovation AB. L.A.
Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Cray
innovation AB.
E-P14.06
Implementing Epic, a next generation electronic health
record (EHR) at the clinical genetics department,Rigshospitalet Denmark
L. Nicolaisen, B. R. Diness
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark
When working with implementing a next generation elec-
tronic health record as Epic, the establishment of new work
ﬂows has been a key strategy. The Epic system is in itself an
integration of more than 30 different data systems and
devices and the implementation not only requires the hos-
pital staff to adopt new work ﬂows, but also requires patient
participation, in order to facilitate their initial enrollment
into the patient webportal system. Accordingly, to max-
imize patient enrollment at the clinical genetics department,we aimed to create new meaningful work ﬂows and foster
strong support for the system. We prioritized our efforts on
theﬁrst patient contact, creating a functioning work ﬂow
around the administrators. During the initial enrollment
period the administrators communicated that they were
hesitant to provide patients with the instructional informa-tion pamphlet needed to enroll in EPIC, as they had con-
cerns that it was not up to date and that the necessary
functions were not working in Epic. Through implementingweekly meetings with the administrators we were able to
consistently correct ongoing problems within the system
and make sure that the instructional information given out,corresponded to what the patients met when they accessed
the system. Creating this feedback loop ensured a general
quality control and maintenance of professional integrity.The potential of using this approach in a managerial or
clinical context is apparent.
L. Nicolaisen: None. B.R. Diness: None.1026 J. del PicchiaE-P14.07
Comparison of nucleic acids extraction to direct
ampli ﬁcation of punches processed by the CPA200 ™
system from NUCLEIC-CARD ™blood and saliva samples
G. Paselli
Euro ﬁns Genoma Group, Milano, Italy
Introduction: Molecular investigation is important for the
detection of clotting defects. The NUCLEIC-CARD ™
WHITE (NCW) for blood and COLOR (NCC) for buccalswabs (BS) and the CPA200 ™a semi-automated punch-
system to process NUCLEIC-CARD ™(NC) (Copan Italia).
The study ’s objective was to compare nucleic acids
extraction (NAE) to direct punches ampli ﬁcation (DPA)
processed by the CPA200.
Methods: For this study, 10 bloods and BS, were used to
standardize the procedure and 35 specimens to validate it.
Samples were tested by NAE, and punches, processed by
the CPA200 from blood on NCW and BS on NCC, byDPA. Nucleic acid was extracted from blood and BS with
the QIAamp
®DNA Mini Kit; punches were washed with
200ul sterile water and dried. Extracts and punches wereampli ﬁed with in-house PCR assays using primers speci ﬁc
for 14 clotting factors (apo e, AGT, FGB, factorV-Y,
FACTOR II, FACTOR V LEIDEN, MTHFR677,MTHFR1298, FACTOR V CAMBRIGE, ACE, HPA,
PAI, FACTOR XIII, APOB) followed by mini-sequencing
reaction and EC on 3500 ABI System.
Results: In the 10 blood and BS all 14 markers were
detected using NAE and DPA. In the 35 bloods tested only
for FACTOR-II, FACTOR-V-LEIDEN, MTHFR677 andMTHFR1298, were detected by both methods with 100%
results correlation.
Conclusions: Data obtained in this study demonstrated
that direct punches ampli ﬁcation can detect all 14 clotting
markers from NCW punches of blood on NCW and of BS
on NCC. The NUCLEIC-CARD ™and CPA200 ™in
combination with direct punches ampli ﬁcation are facilitat-
ing specimens testing work ﬂow for bleeding disorders.
G. Paselli: None.
E-P14.08
biuxx
B. Kim
Uijeongbu St. Mary's hospital, Uijeong Bu-Si, Gyeonggi-Do,
Korea, Republic of
In 2016, the Korean government released 46 genes and
related 12 phenotypes for direct to consumer (DTC) service.We tested cholesterol markers to make the best prediction
model based on our DTC service (GeneStyleTM) results. In
this study, we describe the testing results from 647 samples.
The customers agreed the written con ﬁrmed and we col-
lected the buccal swab DNA samples and disease history
questionnaire. Among the DTC genes, we examined cho-lesterol gene markers ( SORT1,HMGCR,ABO,ABCA1,
MYL2,LIPG,CETP ) and self-reported hyperlipidemia his-
tory with controlling age, sex, smoking, alcohol drinking,family history as the covariates. The single marker asso-
ciation with hyperlipidemia history did not show any
association tendencies. Therefore, we combined the sevengene marker genotypes and calculated the genetic risk
scores(GRS) based on the number of risk allele and the
multiple regression effects size to hyperlipidemia. Interest-ingly, the combined index of the GRS was signi ﬁcantly
associated with the questionnaire cholesterol history (OR
2.492 (95% CI 1.179-5.266), P=0.017). Using this GRS,
we estimated the risk prediction accuracy by ROC curve,
and the area under cover was 58.8%. Because the most of
the DTC markers were studied for the quantitative traits, thepredictive power might be weakening. Conclusively, the
DTC service genes are well selected by the Korean gov-
ernments, and the companies should improve the predictionaccuracy based on the practical tests.
Keywords: Hyperlipidemia, Genetic
polymorphism, DTC
B. Kim: None.
E-P14.10
Vanadium in the blood of SCA2 patients as potential
biomarker of the disease
S. Squadrone1, M. C. Abete1, P. Brizio1, C. Mancini2, L. Orsi3,A .
Brusco2
1Istituto Zoopro ﬁlattico Sperimentale, Department of
Chemistry, Turin (Italy), Turin, Italy,2University of Torino,
Department of Medical Sciences, 10126 Torino, Italy, Turin,Italy,
3Department of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Città
della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy,
Turin, Italy
Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is a
neurological disorder characterized by cerebellar dysfunc-tion. The association between metals and neurodegenerative
diseases is under constant investigation, for their involve-
ment in oxidative stress and their potential role as bio-markers of these pathologies. Redox active metals, like
vanadium (V), undergo redox-cycling reactions in cells and
can produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in biologicalsystems (Valko et al., 2005).Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1027Materials and Methods: The whole blood of 20 SCA2
patients and of 18 healthy individuals was subjected to V
quanti ﬁcation by inductively coupled plasma mass spectro-
metry (ICP-MS).
Results: Vanadium concentrations were signi ﬁcantly
higher (p< 0.05) in patients (6.5 ±1.0 micrograms L-1)
compared to controls (3.7 ± 0.8 micrograms L-1).
Conclusions: Neurodegenerative processes have been
related to metal imbalances, with altered levels of differentelements in serum or blood samples. V species and, in
particular, the oxido-vanadium cation VO(
2+) have been
previously reported to be involved in the annihilation andformation of reactive oxygen species (Rehder, 2013). The
presence of higher levels of V in cells of SCA2 patients may
lead to the increase of ROS, and probably to the upregulation of the antioxidant enzymes system to counteract
the oxidative stress. In fact, the presence of oxidative stress
and a signi ﬁcant increase of superoxide dismutase (SOD1
and SOD2) in SCA2 has been extensively documented
(Guevara-Garcia et al., 2012; Cornelius et al., 2017). We
suggest that vanadium level in the blood of SCA2 patientsis of special interest as potential biomarkers of this disease.
S. Squadrone: None. M.C. Abete: None. P. Brizio:
None. C. Mancini: None. L. Orsi: None. A.
Brusco: None.
E-P15 Personalized/Predictive Medicine and
Pharmacogenomics
E-P15.03
Antiepileptics-induced serious cutaneous adverse reactions
and HLA-B alleles with lymphocyte activation tests in 6Korean patients
E. Kim1, J. Ghim1, E. Cha2, J. Kim3, J. Shin2
1Inje University Busanpaik Hospital, Busan, Korea, Republic
of,2Inje University College of Medicine, Busan, Korea,
Republic of,3Pukyong National Unversity, Busan, Korea,
Republic of
<META NAME ="author" CONTENT ="김은영">
Introduction: Antiepileptic drugs (AED) have been
known to induce serious cutaneous adverse reactions(SCAR) such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis. Despite of studies for examining the
mechanism associated with HLA, the association betweenAED-induced SCARs and HLA alleles is still unclear. We
investigated HLA-B alleles in AED-induced SCARs.
Material and Methods: Six AED-induced SCAR patients
were requested for evaluating the causality. Four patients of
them were treated with carbamazepine due to pain control.One of the rest was treated with phenytoin, and the other
was treated with valproic acid for seizure prevention after
cranial haemorrhage operation. All recovered from SCARs
after stopping AED treatment and intensive care. HLA-B
alleles were performed using PCR-sequence-based typing
method and lymphocyte activation test (LAT) was con-ducted for con ﬁrming the culprit drug of the SCARs.
Results: Demographic ﬁndings (gender, age), culprit
AEDs, and HLA-B alleles of the 6 patients listed in Table 1.LAT results were positive for the culprit drugs except one
(F/59). Expression of HLA-B*51:01 and HLA-B*15:11
alleles were detected in three (50.0%) and two (33.3%),respectively. Two patients had homozygous HLA-B*55:01
andHLA-B*15:11/*55:01 alleles, respectively.
Conclusions: The result suggests that Korean individuals
with the HLA-B*51:01 allele, 8.35% in general population,
may be susceptible to AED-induced SCARs. Further
investigations are necessary to con ﬁrm these ﬁndings.
Table 1. HLA-B alleles in patients.
Gender/Age AEDs HLA-B
F/59 carbamazepine *15:11/*51:01
M/60 phenytoin *51:01/*51:01
F/48 carbamazepine *35:01/*51:01
M/40 valproate *15:11/*40:06
F/64 carbamazepine *46:01/*59:01
M/67 carbamazepine *07:02/*58:01
E. Kim: None. J. Ghim: None. E. Cha: None. J. Kim:
None. J. Shin: None.
E-P15.05
Factors in ﬂuencing patients ’willingness to take predictive
breast cancer genetic test: a qualitative study of women inan Asian setting
S. Sun
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore,Singapore
Reluctance to take hereditary cancer genetic tests is reported
among Asian women. This study aims to understand patientfactors in ﬂuencing the take-up rate of the genetic tests. A
total of twenty-four participants were recruited, participants
were women with a personal/family history of breast and/orovarian cancer. shared about the factors that motivated or
hindered them from taking the genetic test. Participants
were inclined to take the test due to ﬁve different reasons -
for personal awareness, to create awareness for family, to
ascertain their risks of cancer due to a strong family history,1028 J. del Picchiafamily support and lastly to heed the advice of medical
professionals. However, concerns with regards to cost and
the perceived lack of ability to cope with the genetic results
deterred participants from taking up the test. Additionally,
the lack of information about genetic tests was cited by
participants as a factor that hindered them from making adecision of whether to take the test.
S. Sun: None.
E-P15.06
Comparison of seven contemporary pharmacogenetic
assays with the PharmGKB database
L. Tilleman, D. Deforce, F. Van Nieuwerburgh
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium
Genotyping of pharmacogenetic (PGx) genes can provide
informed personalized drug therapy and can prevent com-
mon adverse drug reactions. Today, there are several testscommercially available to genotype individual Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in PGx genes. In this
study seven modern SNP genotyping assays were comparedwith the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB)
database to determine what proportion of the currently
known pharmacogenetic effects is measured by theseassays. These seven assays are the “Ion AmpliSeq
TM
Pharmacogenomics Panel ”, the “VeraCode ®ADME Core
Panel ”, the “iPLEX ®PGx Pro Panel ”,“DMETTMPlus”,
“PharmcoScanTM”,“Living DNA ”, and “23andMe ”. The
PharmGKB database contains 3474 clinical annotations,
which describe a variant-drug interaction. 94% ofPharmGKB ’s clinical annotations can be determined with
SNP assays. The other part can be determined with haplo-
types and copy number variations. Of PharmGKB ’s clinical
annotations, 76%, 68%, and 44% can be determined by
PharmacoScan
TM, Living DNA, and 23andMe respectively.
The other described assays, are designed to test only spe-ciﬁc subset of PGx SNPs.
Grant: L.T. was funded by the Institute for the Promotion
of Innovation through Science and Technology in Flanders(IWT-Vlaanderen) (Grant no. 150042)
L. Tilleman: None. D. Deforce: None. F. Van
Nieuwerburgh: None.
E-P16 Omics/Bioinformatics
E-P16.01
Alu elements as source of microRNA sites in the humangenomeT. P. Shkurat, D. Romanov, M. Shkurat
Southern Federal University, Rostov-on Don, RussianFederation
Alu sequences are the most abundant short interspersed
repeated elements in the human genome. These sequences
are the most abundant mobile elements in the human gen-
ome, representing 10.6% of nuclear DNA. The aim of thestudy was to carry out a full-genomic bioinformational
search for microRNA motifs localized in human Alu
sequences. Genomic sequences were extracted from theNCBI database using the E-utilities suite of utilities. The
micro-RNA sequences were taken from the mirRBase
database, release 21. The search was performed using themiRanda and GLAM2Scan software suite. About 80-90%
of the miR-619 miR-619, miR-5585, miR-5095, and miR-
5096 microRNA binding sites were detected within the Aluelements. The presence of binding sites for certain micro-
RNAs within Alu elements also explains the high con-
servatism of the distances between sites. The sequencesmiR-1273g and miR-1285-1,2 were found inside the Alu
elements, but lying on the opposite chain. The pre-Mir-
1273g sequences were detected within the Alu-elements,which makes the latter a prospective source of the mature
miR-1273g. miR-5196 and miR-466 were not found inside
the Alu elements, but they are also widely represented in thehuman genome. The study was supported by the Ministry of
education and science of the RF, project №6.6762.2017.
T.P. Shkurat: None. D. Romanov: None. M.
Shkurat: None.
E-P16.02
Discovering potential causative mutations in human coding
and noncoding genome with the interactive software
BasePlayer
R. Katainen1, I. Donner1, T. Cajuso1, E. Kaasinen1, K. Palin1,V .
Mäkinen1, L. A. Aaltonen1, E. Pitkänen2
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2European
Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany
Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is routi-
nely applied in life sciences and clinical practice, whereinterpretation of the resulting massive genomic data has
become a critical challenge. The genome-wide mutation
analyses enabled by NGS have had a revolutionary impactin revealing the predisposing and driving DNA alterations
behind a multitude of disorders. The work ﬂow to identify
causative mutations commonly involves phases such asquality ﬁltering, case-control comparison, genome annota-
tion and visual validation, which require multipleAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1029processing steps and usage of various tools and scripts,
often available only in Linux environments. To this end, we
introduce an interactive and user-friendly multi-platform
software, BasePlayer, which allows scientists, regardless of
bioinformatics training, to carry out variant analysis in
disease genetics settings.
Materials and Methods: The software can be run on
Windows, macOS and Linux systems with the Java
Runtime Environment 1.7 or newer installed. All annotatedreference genomes available at the Ensembl database are
supported and can be downloaded and installed through the
BasePlayer user interface. Additional annotation ﬁles for the
human reference genome (GRCh37), such as gnomAD
variant control data, ENCODE regulatory regions and
predicted transcription factor binding sites are available atthe BasePlayer website. The source code is available at
https://github.com/rkataine/BasePlayer .
Results: The unpublished version of BasePlayer has
already been utilized in at least 18 publications by several
disease genetics research groups. The software has now
been made publicly available, and developed to be moresuitable for a wider audience. BasePlayer can be freely
downloaded at https://baseplayer. ﬁ.
R. Katainen: None. I. Donner: None. T. Cajuso: None.
E. Kaasinen: None. K. Palin: None. V. Mäkinen: None.
L.A. Aaltonen: None. E. Pitkänen: None.
E-P16.03
Protein composition characterization of circulating
nucleoprotein complexes
M. Belenikin1,2, S. Tamkovich3,2, P. Laktionov3
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State
University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation,2Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Institute of
Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, SB of RAS,
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
Background: Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulated in
bloodstream being packed into membrane coated structures
like apoptotic bodies or complexes with biopolymers likehistones or DNA-binding plasma proteins [1]. Blood plasma
deoxyribonucleoprotein complexes (DNPCs) were isolated
by af ﬁnity chromatography with antihistone antibodies
immobilized on Sepharose 6B; the proteins were separated
by 10-20% SDS-PAGE, then the proteins were identi ﬁed by
MALDI-TOF [2,3].
The aims of study: Studying the protein content in
DNPCs circulating in the blood plasma of healthy females
(HFs)(5 samples) vs primary breast cancer patients (BCPs)(5 samples) by analysis of different protein signatures aswell as Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. The analyzed
currently MALDI-TOF data were obtained previously [2].
Results: Our results assumed extracellular histone-
containing proteins are involved in binding with circulating
cfDNA for BCPs over HFs states. HFs: 176 proteins/
peptides joined with 195 GO terms were characterized; 45proteins with no any predicted GO; BCPs: 167 proteins/
peptides joined with 168 GO terms were characterized; 39
proteins with no any predicted GO. The most differentproteins were characterized by next GOs: GO:0005515
(Ontology:Molecular Function:protein binding):25 proteins
for HFs, 33 for BCPs; GO:0006355 (Ontology:BiologicalProcess:regulation of transcription, DNA-templated):8 pro-
teins for HFs, 16 for BCPs; GO:0055085 (Ontology:
Biological Process:transmembrane transport):1 proteins forHFs, 5 for BCPs.
References: [1].Bryzgunova OE and Laktionov PP
(2014). Generation of blood circulating DNAs: Sources,features of struction and circulation. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S1990750814030020
[2].Tamkovich SN, et al (2015). Identi ﬁcation of proteins
in blood nucleoprotein complexes. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S1068162015060163
[3].Tamkovich SN, et al (2016). Protein Content of
Circulating Nucleoprotein Complexes. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-42044-8_26 .
M. Belenikin: None. S. Tamkovich: None. P.
Laktionov: None.
E-P16.04
Epigenetic regulation of NET in postural tachycardia
syndrome
A. El-Osta
Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia
Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) is
characterized by the clinical symptoms of orthostatic
intolerance, light-headedness, fatigue and near syncope on
upright posture. Abnormal sympathetic nervous systemactivity suggests dysfunction of the norepinephrine trans-
porter (NET) with evidence the gene responsible is under
tight epigenetic control. We show the Let7i miRNA is
associated with NET gene suppression in POTS subjects
using genome wide RICh-Seq (RNA of Isolated Chromatin
combined with Sequencing). MeCP2 binding is mediatedbyLet7i and subject to pharmacological HDAC inhibition,
restoring speci ﬁc epigenetic modi ﬁcations associated with
NET gene expression in POTS subjects. We demonstrate
that in POTS subject ’s pharmacological histone deacetylase1030 J. del Picchiainhibition restores epigenetic control and expression of
norepinephrine transporter.
A. El-Osta: None.
E-P16.05
First in-house NGS and bioinformatic analysis of expandedcarrier screening in Argentina
M. Fabbro, D. Lorenzi, M. Bilinski, S. Menazzi, C. Fernandez,
M. Galain, P. Nicotra, V. Chekherdemian, F. Nodar, S. Papier
Novagen, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Introduction: Initially, gene-by-gene carrier screening tests
were offered to couples with high risk of having a child witha recessive disorder. The advent of next generation
sequencing (NGS) has enabled the development of expan-
ded carrier screening tests that analyze multiple genessimultaneously, allowing the consideration of alternative
reproductive options and early intervention strategies.
Here we describe the bioinformatic analysis of an
expanded carrier screening panel for 688 autosomal and
X-linked recessive disorders.
Material and Methods: DNA was extracted from 120
blood samples. NGS of targeted-exons of 483 genes was
performed on a Nextseq 550 and sequence data analysis was
achieved using an in-house bioinformatic pipeline.
Brieﬂy, data was demultiplexed, converted to Fastq
format and low-quality data was removed. Reads were
aligned against the reference genome hg19 using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner and Genome Analysis Toolkit was used to
call variants. Then, variants were annotated and coverage
and functional impact ﬁlters were applied using a custom-
made script. Filtered variants were classi ﬁed according to
ACMG guidelines.
Results: A mean of 4742 raw variants per sample were
found. After ﬁltering, a mean of 355 variants were detected
and after variant classi ﬁcation 83 pathogenic/likely patho-
genic variants (0.7 per sample) were identi ﬁed. About one
third of the patients were carriers of at least one pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variant.
Conclusions: Local development of a bioinformatic
pipeline has allowed our laboratory to set up an NGS-
based expanded carrier screening test, which could
potentially help identify couples at risk and reduce theincidence of severe recessive disorders.
M. Fabbro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Novagen. D. Lorenzi: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. M. Bilinski: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. S. Menazzi:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. C.
Fernandez: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Novagen. M. Galain: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. P. Nicotra: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. V. Chekherdemian: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Novagen. F.
Nodar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Novagen. S. Papier: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Novagen.
E-P16.06
Enhancing speci ﬁcity in genotyping by using a novel two
enzyme chemistry
S. D. Rose
Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, United States
Here we present an improved SNP genotyping method that
combines the hybridization and allele speci ﬁc extension
beneﬁts into a single assay format with universal ﬂuorescent
reporter probes. rhAmpTMSNP chemistry relies on the
actions of two enzymes, an endoribonuclease (RNase H2)
and a mutated DNA polymerase. The rhAmp SNP assayprimers contain a single RNA base and are 3 ’end blocked.
In addition, the allele speci ﬁc primers have a non-target
complimentary tail. Rapid de-blocking of the primers by theenzyme RNase H2 only occurs upon hybridization to the
perfectly matched target. Once deblocked by RNase H2, the
SNP site is then interrogated by a novel DNA polymerasewith enhanced allelic discriminating abilities. Upon recog-
nition of the correct base-pairing, extension by the modi ﬁed
polymerase occurs from the perfect match primer. Recentadvancements in the technology include: 1) expansion of
the design algorithm to design assays against indels, 2)
development of a 4-color single tube format and 3) theability to incorporate degenerate bases in the allele speci ﬁc
primers to compensate for nearby polymorphisms. Those
polymorphisms can result in poor assay performance due to:no ampli ﬁcation, weak ampli ﬁcation, or allelic biased
detection leading to incorrect genotyping results.
S.D. Rose: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Integrated DNA Technologies.
E-P16.09
Research projects focused Laboratory Information
Management System
M. Lichvar1, R. Hekel1,2, J. Budis1,2,3, D. Smolak1,4,J .
Radvanszky1,4,5, T. Szemes1,4,6
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Slovak Centre of
Scienti ﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia,
3Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Mathematics,
Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava,
Slovakia,4Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty ofAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1031Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia,
5Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical
Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Slovakia,6Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava,
Slovakia
Introduction: Multi-project research-focused laboratories
like core facilities may face challenge to register, track,
integrate and monitor samples and their analyses. Thesedata contain personal information, so secure storage and
access has high priority, also due to new European legis-
lation. To face these challenges, we have developed a web-based Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS)
optimized for multi-project laboratories.
Results: LIMS is designed as 3-layer web-application,
which enhances security and restricts accessibility to
potential attackers. Additional computational cluster pro-
vides bioinformatic analyses over anonymized genomicdata without personal identi ﬁers. Summary analysis reports
are immutable to change, but with the possibility of
repeated reanalysis in case of upgrades of computationalpipelines.
One instance of LIMS can be used to manage several
independent projects, with ability to assign user roles foreach project separately. This restricts user to access only
those projects, samples and analysis, which they are
assigned to. Thus, we can collect a large genomic data setsin a single system, which allows to perform wide-scale
population studies that are based on aggregation analyses
over large cohort of individuals.
LIMS has mechanism to de ﬁne genealogy relationships
between samples, which is utilized in genetics analyses of
families' anamneses. Implementation of suggested diseasesbased on phenotypes terms from HPO database may further
assist physicians in decision process.
Conclusions: LIMS is web-based application for facil-
itate storage and bioinformatic analysis of genomic data
with emphasis on security of genomic and personal
information. The system is easily extensible over newtypes and versions of data analysis pipelines.
M. Lichvar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. R. Hekel: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.,
Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Budis: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. D.
Smolak: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Radvanszky: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.,
Bratislava, Slovakia. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia.E-P16.10
In silico assessment of leukemia: OSM gene and protein
analysis
M. Azarmi Aghajan1, A. Ahmadikhah1, M. Talebi Gharamaleki2
1Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2Iran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of
Introduction: Genetically, in leukemia as cancer with bone
marrow origin, oncostatin-M gene plays a crucial role in itsmanifestation. Leukemia inhibitory factor/oncostatin-M
encoded the protein as a secreted cytokine inhibits the
proliferation of a number of tumor cells.
Materials and Methods: FGENESH and Promoter Scan
were used to the coding sequence and promoter analysis
respectively. The encoded protein analyzed by ProtParamand ProtScale and hydrophobicity was assessed by the same
ProtScale. Domains were analyzed by CD-search and
InterProScan and possible post-translational modi ﬁcations
got evaluated by ScanProsite.
Results: The coding sequence, 759 bp, is located in 45 to
2961 nucleotides. Promoter sequence starts from 824 till877. Transcription start site is nucleotide number 868 and
its distance from ATG is 132bp. The encoded protein is
made up 231 acid amines. Arginine and leucine with 13%and selenocysteine and pyro-leucine with 0% were the most
and least common ones in protein structure respectively. It
is an unstable protein with 30 hours estimated half-life. Theprotein is hydrophobic in its N-terminal. It includes a
domain as 4_helix_cytokine-like_core in C-terminal and 13
post-translational modi ﬁcation sites in 6 different classes.
Four phosphorylation sites, three N-myristoylation sites,
two amidation sites, a site for leucine-zipper template, two
N-glycosylation sites, and a cAMP/cGMP dependentphosphorylation site.
Conclusions: The encoded protein cannot be located in
the cytoplasm due to its hydrophobicity and have anextracellular/non-cytoplasmic localization. On the other
hand, its instability index shows its time-speci ﬁc translation
which correlates with its function in anti-proliferationcancer cells activity.
M. Azarmi Aghajan: None. A. Ahmadikhah: None. M.
Talebi Gharamaleki: None.
E-P16.11
Network-based classi ﬁcation of neurodevelopmental
pathology according to cytogenomic data
I. Y. Iourov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, M. A. Zelenova1,2,O .S .
Kurinnaia1,2, K. S. Vasin1,2, Y. B. Yurov1,21032 J. del Picchia1FSBSI «Mental Health Research Center», Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Academician Yu.E. Veltishchev Research Clinical
Institute of Pediatrics, N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Ministry of Health of the Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation,3FSBEI FPE
«Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education» of theMinistry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow,
Russian Federation
Introduction: Regardless of signi ﬁcant progress in unco-
vering genomic mechanisms for neurodevelopmental dis-
orders, a large proportion of neurodevelopmental pathologycases remains to be idiopathic. In addition to commonly
used analyses of associations between genomic variations
and phenotypes, it appears that investigating candidatedisease processes by network-based classi ﬁcation according
to genomic data represents an intriguing alternative.
Materials and Methods: Genome-wide CNV scan was
performed in 545 individuals with neurodevelopmental
pathology using array CGH and SNP-array techniques.
Network-based classi ﬁcation of probable functional con-
sequences of genomic rearrangements was done according
to a previously described protocol (Yurov et al., 2017)
based on the fusion of genomic, epigenomic, proteomic/interactomic and metabolomic data.
Results: We found that the variomes (set of all CNVs in
an individual genome) of individuals with neurodevelop-mental pathology are enriched in DNA replication, DNA
damage/repair, nucleotide excision/mismatch repair, ATM-
pathway (DNA damage-ATM-p53-apoptosis pathway) aswell as p53-, MAPK-, ErbB-, PI3KAkt-signaling pathways.
Additionally, we found enrichment for pathway clusters or
combinations (e.g. MAPK-signaling with axonal guidance;DNA damage-ATM-p53-apoptosis with phagosome and
gap junction; p53-signaling with RNA transport and
pathways in cancer etc.). There were 12 distinct pathway/process clusters and 14 distinct pathway/process combina-
tions which were further used for classi ﬁcation of
neurodevelopmental pathology.
Conclusions: Network-based classi ﬁcation of neurode-
velopmental pathology according to cytogenomic data
appears to be an ef ﬁcient approach to determine candidate
processes for neurodevelopmental diseases. Furthermore,
our data indicate, for the ﬁrst time, that alterations to
process clusters and combinations of altered processescould be mechanisms for abnormal brain functioning.
Supported by RSF (14-15-00411).
I.Y. Iourov: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. M.A.
Zelenova: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. K.S. Vasin:
None. Y.B. Yurov: None.E-P16.13
Annotator: a novel custom tool for genomic variants
annotation and classi ﬁcation
D. Lemos1,2, P. Oliveira1,2, C. São José1,2,3, J. Carvalho1,2,C .
Oliveira1,2,4
1i3S - Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde, Porto,
Portugal,2IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and
Immunology, Porto, Portugal,3ICBAS - Instituto Ciências
Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal,4Department of
Pathology, Medicine Faculty of the University of Porto, Porto,Portugal
Introduction: Genome sequencing produces large amounts
of data that enable the discovery of genomic variants. Using
appropriate bioinformatics tools and public databases which
aggregate clinical information, it is possible to understandthe functional impact of such variants on human phenotypic
traits. Several bioinformatics tools already exist, however
with limitations such as, the license costs and the limitedchoice of public databases consulted. Therefore, our aim
was to implement an in-house tool that aggregates infor-
mation collected from selected public databases, allowingthe custom annotation of genomic variants and their clas-
siﬁcation in terms of pathogenicity.
Materials and Methods: We implemented a tool,
Annotator, which annotates and classi ﬁes genomic variants
using data from 5 renowned public databases (Uniprot,
OMIM, ClinVar, dbSNP, Pubmed). Annotator can alsointegrate keywords, de ﬁned according to sample character-
istics, for advanced data/text mining, in order to further
select collected data to best suit the clinical features of thesample under analysis.
Results: Annotator was used to analyze and classify a set
of 151 genomic variants, detected in 52 probands withFamilial Intestinal Gastric Cancer. These genomic variants
had already been analyzed/classi ﬁed using a commercial
software. The comparison of the results obtained with bothanalyses showed that Annotator was able to collect further
information for 7/42 somatic variants and 4/24 germline
variants, which were classi ﬁed as of unknown signi ﬁcance
for the commercial software.
Conclusion: Annotator is a valid tool for an accurate
annotation and ef ﬁcient classi ﬁcation of genomic variants
derived from sequencing experiments.
POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007274
NORTE-07-0162-FEDER-000118NORTE-07-0162-FEDER-000067
FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-015779
D. Lemos: None. P. Oliveira: None. C. São José: None.
J. Carvalho: None. C. Oliveira: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1033E-P17 Epigenetics and Gene Regulation
E-P17.01
Fresh garlic extract might trigger apoptosis trough down
regulation of miR-146a in A549 lung carcinoma cells
G. AKTEMUR1, N. DURCANO ĞLU1, S. YILDIRIM1,E .
ASLAN1, S. YILMAZ1, E. AKBA Ş1, &. AKALIN2
1İSTANBUL MEDEN İYET UNIVERSITY FACULTY OF
MED İCİNE, İSTANBUL, Turkey,2İstanbul Medeniyet
Un ıvers ıty Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical
Genetics, İSTANBUL, Turkey
Obective: Garlic (Allium sativum L.) has been used as
herbal drug since ancient ages for pulmonary and respira-
tory complaints. Its extract Ally methyl sul ﬁde (AMS) gives
characteristic odor on breath when taken orally and knownto have anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects on lung
carcinoma cell lines (A549). However, mechanism still
needs to be elucidated. Thus, we aimed to explore theapoptosis regulating miRNA expressions for apoptotic
effects of garlic extract on A549 cells.
Methods: A549 cells were incubated with fresh garlic
extract for 24 h. Total RNAs were extracted from cell
cultures with cell count of 1x10E5 in 6-well plates. 10
miRNAs regulation apoptosis were selected (miR-21_2,miR-31_1, miR-39_1, miR-133a_2, miR-143_1, miR-
146a_1, miR-155_2, miR-183_2, miR-210_1 and miR-
222_2) and expressions were analyzed by real time PCR(RotorGene Q, Qiagen).
Results: Fresh garlic extract treated A549 cells repre-
sented decreased expressions of miR-146a_1 (3,47 Folddecrease) as the apoptosis increased. However, proapoptotic
miR143 expressions were also downregulated.
Discussion/Conclusion: Our study was the ﬁrst to link
the apoptosis of lung carcinoma cell lines with miRNA
expressions in A549 cell line, up to the literature. According
to our results apoptosis might be triggered by upregulationof FasL due to down regulation of miR146a in garlic extract
treated A549 lung cancer cells. Down regulation of
proapoptotic miR143 might be a compensation mechanismand need to be investigated with further studies. REFER-
ENCE: Gruhlke MC, et al. Antioxidants (Basel). 2016 Dec
26;6(1)
G. Aktemur: None. N. Durcano Ğlu:None. S. Yildirim:
None. E. Aslan: None. S. Yilmaz: None. E. Akba Ş:None.
&. Akalin: None.
E-P17.02
Propolis might induce apoptosis through downregulation ofanti-apoptotic miRNAs on A549 human lung carcinoma
cellsN. Durcano ğlu1, G. Aktemur1, E. Aslan1,S .Y ıldırım1, E. Akba ş1,
S. Y ılmaz1, &. Akal ın2
1Istanbul Medeniyet University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul,
Turkey,2a dept of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey
Subject: Propolis is honey bee-derived apicultural product
that have been applied for human health for centuries in
traditional medicine besides food diets and supplementarynutrition. It has also attracted researchers ’attention due to
its apoptotic and anti-carcinogenic properties. Here, we
aimed to investigate the mechanism of apoptotic effects ofpropolis by means of apoptosis regulating miRNAs
expressions in human lung carcinoma cell lines (A549
cells).
Methods: Propolis extracts (beeMYHoney) were prepared
by ethanol (250 μg/mL). A549 cells were incubated with
propolis extracts for 24 h with different concentrations incell cultures of 6-well plates using 10x10E5 cells/well.
Total RNAs were extracted and 10 miRNAs expressions
were analyzed by real time PCR (RotorGene Q, Qiagen).
Results: The optimum apoptotic affects were achieved at
concentrations of 0,625 μg/mL. Propolis extract treated
A549 cells showed gradually increased expressions of miR-133a_2 and miR-143_1, and gradually decreased expres-
sions of miR-21_2, miR -146a_1, miR-155_2 and miR-
183_2 by increased dosages of 0,125 μg/mL to 0,625 μg/mL compared to non-treated tumor cells .
Conclusion: In our study, we for the ﬁrst time
represented the downregulation of apoptosis regulatingmiRNAs in lung cancer cell lines (A549) after treatment of
propolis extract, up to the literature. Hence, they may be a
role for propolis to induce apoptosis (as its anti-tumorigenicaffect) through epigenetic changes on Fas and FasL with/
without PTEN on the etrinsic pathway of programmed
cell death.
Reference:
Preventive and protective effects of Turkish propolis ….
Acta Biol Hung. 2011. 62(4):388-96.
Degradation of miR-21 induces apoptosis …Cancer Gene
Ther. 2015 Nov;22(11):530-5.
N. Durcano ğlu:None. G. Aktemur: None. E. Aslan:
None. S. Y ıldırım:None. E. Akba ş:None. S. Y ılmaz:
None. &. Akal ın:None.
E-P18 Genetic epidemiology/Population genetics/
Statistical methodology and evolutionary genetics
E-P18.01
The frequency of change of the nucleotide sequence in thegene TYR at albinism in Russia1034 J. del PicchiaV. V. Kadyshev1, A. V. Marakhonov1, T. A. Vasilyeva1,E .K .
Ginter1, A. V. Polyakov1, R. A. Zinchenko1,2
1FSBSI Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Albinism is a genetically heterogeneous
hereditary disease characterized by a reduced amount ofmelanin pigment in different structures of the body. Cur-
rently, the albinism is described in either an isolated form
affecting the only eye or eye and skin (11 clinical andgenetic variants), or syndromic pathology. According to the
literature, about 70% of cases account for the oculocuta-
neous form. In 5% of cases, a reduced amount of pigment isa symptom of a syndromic pathology.
Aim: To investigate the frequency and spectrum of the
mutations in the TYR gene in Russian patients with
albinism.
Materials and Methods: The laboratory of genetic
epidemiology, “RCMG, ”for the ﬁrst time in Russia
conducted a clinical and genetic study of patients with
albinism. The cohort size was 33 Russian patients. We used
clinical and molecular-genetic methods to con ﬁrm the
diagnosis.
Results: The molecular genetic study of DNA of the
patients revealed changes in the TYR, which is responsible
for oculocutaneous albinism type 1, are the prevalent cause
(63%). Frequent mutations were c.650G>A (frequency
0.42), c.1037-3C>G (0.15), c.140G>A (0.07). Changes ingeneОСА 2were observed in 9% cases (oculocutaneous
albinism type 2). In other 9 % of cases, isolated ocular
albinism associated with changes in GPR143 was con-
ﬁrmed. In the latter two types, no frequent mutations have
yet identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: Russian patients with albinism have the
high frequency of mutations in the TYR gene (63 %)
associated with oculocutaneous albinism type 1. The work
was partially supported by the RFBR grant 17-04-00288.
V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. T.A.
Vasilyeva: None. E.K. Ginter: None. A.V. Polyakov:
None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.
E-P18.03
Investigation of MCT1 rs1049434 , COL1A1 rs1800012 and
COL3A1 rs1800255 variants related to susceptibility to
injuries in professional football players
V. Gineviciene1, A. Jakaitiene1, I. Asmenaviciute1, A. Utkus1,L .
Tubelis21Vilnius university, Institute of Biomedical Science, Vilnius,
Lithuania,2Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences,
Vilnius, Lithuania
Introduction: Some variations in monocarboxylate trans-
porter ( MCT1 ) and collagen-encoding ( COL1A1 ,COL3A1 )
genes have been associated with speci ﬁc athletic perfor-
mance and susceptibility to injuries (e.g. musculoskeletal
soft tissue injuries). The aim of this case-control associationstudy was to investigate prevalence of risk alleles of MCT1
rs1049434, COL1A1 rs1800012, COL3A1 rs1800255 in
Lithuanian professional football players.
Methods: A total of 150 footballers (Caucasian male) and
150 controls (sedentary, healthy male) were genotyped
using TaqMan RT-PCR assay.
Results: The genotype distribution were in HWE for all
groups (P>0.05). There were no differences in genotype/
alleles frequency for COL1A1 rs1800012 and COL3A1
rs1800255 between the footballers and control groups. The
odds ratio (OR) of athlete harboring COL3A1 AA
genotypes (the risk allele A) compared to control was0.29 (95%CI: 0.08-0.89, p =0.04). Signi ﬁcant MCT1
genotype distribution were determined between the foot-
ballers and controls (TT/TA/AA: 45.3/44.7/10% vs 34.0/47.3/18.7%; p =0.04). The proportion of MCT1 risk allele
A, observed in controls (42.3%) was larger than in all
footballers (32.3%, p =0.07), speci ﬁcally, than in mid-
ﬁelders (26.7%; p =0.04). The OR of MCT1 TT genotype
and being a football player was 1.61 (95%CI 1.012-2.574,
p=0.045), while the OR of MCT1 AA genotype was 0.48
(95%CI 0.242-0.937, p =0.035).
Conclusions: MCT1 rs1049434 (T allele) associated with
football performance. Carrying the MCT1 TT genotype may
be protective against sport-related injury. The MCT1 AA
andCOL3A1 AA genotypes may in ﬂuence increased risk of
injury. Replication studies are needed to support our dataand to fully understand the relationship between predis-
position to injuries in football.
V. Gineviciene: None. A. Jakaitiene: None. I. Asme-
naviciute: None. A. Utkus: None. L. Tubelis: None.
E-P18.04
Identi ﬁcation of the genetic factors underlying comorbidity
between bronchial asthma and hypertension
E. Y. Bragina1, M. B. Freidin1, O. V. Saik2, O. Zolotareva3,I .A .
Goncharova1, V. A. Ivanisenko2, V. E. Dosenko4, R. Hofestaedt3
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk NRMC, Tomsk,
Russian Federation,2Institute of Cytology and Genetics,
Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk,Russian Federation,
3Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany,Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 10354Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, National Academy of
Science, Kiev, Ukraine
The phenomenon of comorbidity between diseases in an
individual patient is a global problem of contemporary
health care. The comorbidity between two phenotypes canbe explained by shared genetic variants predisposing to both
diseases. One of the features of the clinical course of
bronchial asthma (BA) is its signi ﬁcant comorbidity with
cardiovascular pathology. According to epidemiological
data, BA has a decisive in ﬂuence on the subsequent risk of
cardiovascular disease. Therefore, hypertension and BA canbe considered as an example of common comorbid diseases.
From the point of view of genetics, these two diseases are
well studied and many genes for BA and hypertension wereidenti ﬁed. We assume that their comorbidity is based on
shared pathophysiological changes for both BA and
hypertension associated with genes involved in the regula-tion of immune system, smooth muscle tone and vascular
remodeling. We set out to elaborate this hypothesis and
identify genes of this comorbidity. We prioritized genesusing several criteria based on gene network analysis
describing mechanisms of BA and hypertension comor-
bidity. The top list of candidate genes that can be involvedin convergent pathophysiological mechanisms leading to
comorbidity of BA and hypertension include TLR4, CAT,
IL10, CST3, ICAM1, IRF6, AKT1, NFKB1, PNP, SELL,CCL5, IL2RB, IDS, FOS, NT5C2 , and BHLHE40 . We also
identi ﬁed 96 eQTL SNPs for these genes and study them to
validate our hypothesis in cohorts of patients with BA,hypertension and individuals affected by both the diseases.
This work was funded by VolkswagenStiftung program
(grant№90335).
E.Y. Bragina: None. M.B. Freidin: None. O.V. Saik:
None. O. Zolotareva: None. I.A. Goncharova: None. V.
A. Ivanisenko: None. V.E. Dosenko: None. R.
Hofestaedt: None.
E-P18.05
The impact of prenatal diagnosis on congenital
malformations prevalence in Russia
N. Demikova1, M. Podolnaya1, A. Lapina1, A. Asanov2
1Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University,
Research Clinical Institute of Pediatric, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Aim of the study . The impact of prenatal diagnosis on
prevalence of congenital malformations (CM).
Materials and Methods: The materials of the study were
cases of CM among live births, stillbirths and inducedabortions registered in the regions of the Russia for the 2010
to 2014. The total number of births was 3030104. The
analysis includes: anencephaly - 138 cases, encephalocele -
106, spina bi ﬁda - 878, hydrocephalus - 1095, omphalocele
- 288, gastroschisis - 345, renal agenesis - 78, transposition
of the great vessels - 523, hypoplastic left heart - 324,diaphragmatic hernia - 564, bladder extrophy - 59, cleft lip -
2157, cleft palate - 1404, limb reduction defects - 1036,
esophageal atresia - 721, anorectal atresia - 708, hypospa-dias - 4141, epispadias - 30 and Down syndrome - 2842.
Results: The prevalence with and without elective
pregnancy terminations was detected for each defect. Thehigh level of pregnancy termination occurs for anencephaly,
encephalocele, bilateral renal agenesis. The rate of preg-
nancy termination for Down syndrome is 34%. As a resultof the including of induced abortion the rate of defects
varies greatly: for anencephaly (in 7.48 times), encephalo-
cele (3.18 times), renal agenesis (2.53 times), omphalocele(2.39 times). The Down syndrome rate in newborns
decreased by 1.5 times among livebirths.
Conclusion : The accounting of CM among newborns and
elective terminations allows to determine the true preva-
lence of congenital malformations and to assess the impact
of prenatal diagnosis on the level of the CM amongnewborns.
N. Demikova: None. M. Podolnaya: None. A. Lapina:
None. A. Asanov: None.
E-P18.07
The relationship between genomic damage and eatingbehavior in healthy middle-aged Koreans
K. Kim1, J. Kim2
1Gachon University College of Medicine, Incheon, Korea,
Republic of,2Eulji Medical Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of
Introduction: Cytokinesis-block micronucleus cytome
(CBMN-Cyt) is a quantitative index of DNA damage. Thepurpose of this study is to know the correlation between
DNA damage and eating habits in healthy middle-aged
Koreans.
Materials and Methods: DNA damage was evaluated by
the frequency of micronuclei (MNi), nucleoplasmic bridges
(NPBs), nuclear buds (NBUDs) with CBMN-Cyt assay intotally 300 healthy males and females aged 30-59 years.
There were no smokers nor problem drinkers. The
relationship between participants' eating behaviors andCBMN-Cyt assay parameters were analyzed by linear
regression model.
Results: In univariate analysis, in men, MNi frequencies
were higher with regular intake of vegetable, and lower with
regular intake of high animal fat and high sugar desserts1036 J. del Picchia(P<0.05). In women, NPBs frequencies were higher with
regular intake of vegetables, and NBUDs frequencies were
higher with regular intake of protein and diverse kinds of
food (P<0.05). After adjusting age, job and exercise
behaviors, although MNi and NBUDs frequencies were
not related of each eating behaviors, NPBs frequencies werehigher with regular intake of fried food or stir-fry
(P=0.020) in men. In women, while MNi and NPBs
frequencies were not related of each eating behaviors,NBUDs frequencies were higher with regular intake of
protein (P =0.034).
Conclusion: Generally, in 30-59-year-old healthy Kor-
eans with genomic healthy lifestyles, there were no
signiﬁcant relationships between DNA damage parameters
and eating habits, but the regular intake of fried food or stir-fry in men and regular intake of protein in women were
associated with the increase of DNA damage.
K. Kim: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Bio Research Complex
Co., Ltd., Korea. J. Kim: None.
E-P18.09
Allele frequencies of PAH gene mutations in patients with
hyperphenylalaninemia in Republic of North Ossetia
Alania (Russia)
R. A. Zinchenko1,2, P. Gundorova1, Z. K. Getoeva3,I .S .
Tebieva3, A. V. Marakhonov1,4, V. V. Kadyshev1,I .A .
Kuznetcova1, A. V. Polyakov1, E. K. Ginter1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for
Medical Genetics», Моscow, Russian Federation,2Pirogov
Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow,
Russian Federation,3Republican children`s clinical hospital
Repablic North Ossetia Alanya Ministry of health of theRussian Federation, Vladikavkaz, Russian Federation,
4Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny,
Russian Federation
Introduction: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is an inborn
metabolic condition, caused by mutations in the some genes(PAH, PTS, QDPR, GCH1, PCBD1, SPR ). That results in
decreased metabolism of phenylalanine (FA) and can lead
to the severe intellectual de ﬁciency.
Aims: To study the frequency of HPA in the Republic of
North Ossetia-Alania (NOA) according to the results of
newborn screening. To assess the frequency and thespectrum of the PAH mutations in unrelated patients
with HPA.
Materials and Methods: The number of newborns in the
NOA screened for the period 2007-2016 was 101005. 28
patients with HPA were identi ﬁed. The frequency and thespectrum of mutations in the PAH gene was studied in 14
unrelated individuals of HPA.
Results: The frequency of PKU according to the results
of newborn screening was 1:3607 newborns. A DNA study
conducted in 14 patients with HPA revealed 11 mutations.
Two mutations were detected with high frequencies: P281L(allele frequency 0.43), P211T (0.21). Mutation R261Q
(0.07) was found in two patients in the compound
heterozygous state with mutation P281L. The remaining 8mutations (V230I, A403V, R408W, F331S, E390G,
A300S, R261Q, M1R, I306V, R261Q) met once (allele
frequency 0.04).
Conclusions: Newborn screening revealed a high inci-
dence of HPA (1:3607 newborns) in NOA. The population
of NOA is characterized by a speci ﬁc spectrum of the PAH
mutations; frequent ones are P281L and P211T. This work
was partially funded by RFBR grant 18-15-00090.
R.A. Zinchenko: None. P. Gundorova: None. Z.K.
Getoeva: None. I.S. Tebieva: None. A.V. Marakhonov:
None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. I.A. Kuznetcova: None. A.
V. Polyakov: None. E.K. Ginter: None.
E-P18.10
Distribution of Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin G20210Aand MTHFR C677T mutations in ethnic Georgian,
Armenian and Azerbaijani Patients living in Georgia with
thrombosis or pregnancy complications
K. Kartvelishvili1,2, N. Pirtskhelani1,2, N. Kochiashvili2,L .
Makhaldiani3, N. Pargalava4
1Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Levan
Samkharauli National Forensics Bureau, Tbilisi, Georgia,3K.
Eristavi National Center of Experimental and Clinical Sergery,
Tbilisi, Georgia,4Bokhua Memorial Cardiovascular Center,
Tbilisi, Georgia
Introduction: Thrombophilia gene mutations are most
common genetic factors of thromboembolism and preg-nancy complications. The prevalence of these mutations
differs signi ﬁcantly in populations and ethnic groups.
Aim: Due to the fact that ethnic Georgians (86,6%),
Azerbaijanis (6,3%) and Armenians (4,5%) are living
together in Georgia and lack of data on the prevalence of
thrombophilia gene mutations among these ethnic groups,the aim of our study was to detect and compare distribution
of thrombophilia gene mutations in Georgian, Armenian
and Azerbaijani Patients with thrombosis or pregnancycomplications.
Materials and Methods: 548 Georgians, 56 Armenians
and 122 Azerbaijanis with venous thromboembolism orpregnancy complications and also 200 unaffected Geor-
gians were genotyped by PCR analyses.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1037Results: Our eight years studies con ﬁrm that distribution
of studied mutations in Georgians resembles upper data of
Caucasians and has impact on the development of
thrombosis and pregnancy complications. Prevalence of
studied mutations is different in these ethnic groups, with
highest rate in Armenians. Results are presented in table.
Distribution of mutations in ethnic groups of Georgia
Ethnic Groups of
GeorgiaFVL-
1691APr-
20210AMTHFR-
677T (homo)MTHFR-677T
(hetero)
Georgian
(patients) (548)11.5% 7.12% 9.85% 37.4%
Georgian
(control) (200)1% 3% 2% 35%
Armenian
(patients) (56)28.57% 17.86% 14.29% 42.86%
Azerbaijanis
(patients) (122)8.2% 3.28% 6.56% 39.34%
Conclusions: It is important to investigate whether this
highest rate of mutations in Armenians is due to thephenomenon of genetic isolates or the rate is the same as in
Armenian population. Following our results, large-scale
research of thrombophilia gene mutations in Armenian andAzerbaijani population is reasonable, because prophylaxis
and timely started treatment is very important for prevention
of thromboembolism and pregnancy complications.
K. Kartvelishvili: None. N. Pirtskhelani: None. N.
Kochiashvili: None. L. Makhaldiani: None. N.
Pargalava: None.
E-P18.14
Insight into genetic and social aspects of modern
communities of deaf people in Siberia for forecasting the
prevalence of hereditary deafness
O. L. Posukh1,2, M. S. Bady-Khoo3, G. P. Romanov4,5,N .A .
Barashkov4,5, A. A. Smirnova1, M. V. Zytsar1,2, E. A. Maslova1,2,
V. Y. Danilchenko1,2, O. V. Posukh6, S. A. Lashin1,2
1Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics,
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,2Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3Scienti ﬁc
Research Institute of Medical-Social Problems and
Management of the Republic of Tuva, Kyzyl, Russian
Federation,4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MK Ammosov
North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian
Federation,5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Yakut
Scienti ﬁc Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk,
Russian Federation,6Institute of Molecular and CellularBiology, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
Genetic deafness is heterogeneous disability with different
inheritance patterns and the most common form is recessive
deafness caused by mutations in gene GJB2 . High fre-
quency of GJB2 -caused deafness in some populations is
suggested by combined effects of assortative mating tradi-
tion among deaf people based on linguistic homogamy (sighlanguage) and relaxed selection against deafness (Nance
et al., 2000). We previously revealed GJB2 -caused deafness
proportion in some indigenous Siberian populations: 15.1%in Tuvinians (Republic Tuva), 17.5% in Altaians (Republic
Altai), 53.0% in Yakuts (Republic Sakha/Yakutia) while
sufﬁcient number of familial deafness cases remained
undiagnosed. This study presents the results of comparative
analysis of the survey data (marriage patterns, fertility,
communication mode, social interactions) of deaf indivi-duals from these Siberian regions. Assortative marriage
rates were 64.5% (Tuva), 72.9% (Altai), with signi ﬁcant
differences (p<0.05) between urban and rural residents -70.9% vs 57.7% (Tuva), 91.9% vs 58.3% (Altai), and
77.1% (Yakutia, urban residents). Fertility (mean children
number) of deaf individuals is slightly reduced compared totheir hearing siblings: 2.22±0.06 vs 2.40±0.05 (Tuva), 1.76
±0.10 vs 2.24±0.09 (Yakutia). Majority of respondents
indicate sign language as main communication mode andprefer contacts with deaf people whereas they feel embar-
rassed by misunderstandings with hearing people. We
developed an agent-based computer model to study thetrends of hereditary deafness prevalence in population tak-
ing into account obtained genetic and socio-demographic
data. Model is designed for single-locus control of deafnesswith possibility of extending for two or more loci. Work is
supported by ICG project #0324-2018-0016 and RFBR
(#15-04-04860_ а, #17-29-06016_o ﬁ_m).
O.L. Posukh: None. M.S. Bady-Khoo: None. G.P.
Romanov: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. A.A. Smir-
nova: None. M.V. Zytsar: None. E.A. Maslova: None. V.
Y. Danilchenko: None. O.V. Posukh: None. S.A.
Lashin: None.
E-P18.15
Blood glucose, BMI and telomere length in a cohort of
Colombian schoolchildren
U. Fairbrother1, E. Kidd1, J. Buxton2, P. Camacho3,4,J .L e
Page-Pezet1, D. Cohen3,4, P. Lopez-Jaramillo3,4,A .I .F .
Blakemore5,6, A. J. Walley7
1School of Human Science, London Metropolitan University,
North Campus, London, United Kingdom,2Department of
Biomolecular Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and1038 J. del PicchiaChemistry, Kingston University, London, United Kingdom,
3Universidad de Santander, Santander, Colombia,4Fundación
Oftalmológica de Santander, Santander, Colombia,
5Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom,6Department of
Life Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, BrunelUniversity, London, United Kingdom,
7St George's University
of London, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: A few studies have reported that mean tel-
omere length (TL) is associated with obesity and blood
glucose in children of European or Arab origin. The presentstudy was designed to assess whether BMI or blood glucose
is associated with TL in school-age children of South
American origin.
Materials and Methods: Relative telomere length ratios
were determined in 375 subjects (age 9-14 years). Subjects
were recruited within the ACFIES (Association betweenCardiorespiratory Fitness, Muscular Strength and Body
Composition with Metabolic Risk Factors in Colombian
Children) study. Phenotypes were determined using stan-dard tests and an extensive questionnaire. Statistical
analysis was carried out using SPSSv25 (IBM Inc., USA).
Results: Partial correlation analysis, controlling for the
effects of age, gender, PCR plate and BMI demonstrates a
robust negative correlation between TL and blood glucose
(r=-0.14, p =0.008). Using a univariate linear model
analytical approach, blood glucose is also signi ﬁcantly
associated with telomere length (p =0.011) with the same
variables in the model. No signi ﬁcant association with BMI
was detected.
Conclusions: TL is a potential biomarker: blood glucose
is negatively associated with TL in this cohort ofColombian schoolchildren and this effect does not appear
to be related to obesity. The lack of association with BMI
may be due to the difference in ethnicity or becauseprevious studies have had higher than normal proportions of
children with early-onset obesity. Further work to investi-
gate this relationship in larger cohorts may yield insightsinto the relationship of telomere attrition with pathological
processes in pre-clinical diabetes.
U. Fairbrother: None. E. Kidd: None. J. Buxton: None.
P. Camacho: None. J. Le Page-Pezet: None. D. Cohen:
None. P. Lopez-Jaramillo: None. A.I.F. Blakemore:
None. A.J. Walley: None.
E-P18.16
The study of CFTR mutations in the population of the
North Ossetia Alania Republic, Russian Federation
N. V. Petrova1, T. Vasilyeva1, N. Kashirskaya1, E. Kondratyeva1,
Z. Getoeva2, M. Dzhadzhieva2, O. Novoselova1, E. Ginter1,R .
Zinchenko1,31Federal state scienti ﬁc budgetary Institution «Research
Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Republican children`s clinical hospital. Ministry of health of
the Russian Federation. Medical genetic department,
Vladicavkas, Russian Federation,3Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF; OMIM #219700) is a
common autosomal recessive disease caused by mutationsin the CFTR gene. The prevalence of CFTR mutations
differs among various ethnic, demographic, and racial
groups. Peculiar distribution of CFTR mutations in Osse-tians was studied. The Republic of North Ossetia –Alania, a
part of the North Caucasus Federal region of RF, is located
on the Northern slope of the Greater Caucasus. The popu-lation is about 700,000 people. Ossetians make 64,5% of
the population of North Ossetia.
Materials and Methods: DNA of 6 Ossetian CF patients
from the Republic of North Ossetia –Alania was analyzed
for 33 common CFTR mutations and sequencing. DNA of
108 healthy Ossetians without CF family history was testedfor 13 CFTR mutations (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), F508del,
I507del, 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2183AA>G, 2184insA,
394delTT, 3821delT, L138ins, W1282X, E92K).
Results: Three CF patients were relatives: two ﬁrst
siblings and one second sibling. They had the same
genotype, F508del/W1282X. The genotypes of three otherunrelated CF patients were W1282X/W1282X, W1282X/
2184insA, 2184del4/1248 +1G>A. One heterozygous car-
rier of W1282X mutation was detected in 108 healthyOssetians.
Conclusion: The most common CF mutation in Ossetian
patients was W1282X (4 in 9 CF chromosomes). EarlierW1282X mutation was also revealed in some other
Caucasus populations (Karachay, Nogai). 1677delTA
mutation, common in autochthonous Caucasus ethnicgroups, such as Chechens, Ingush, Georgians, was not
identi ﬁed either in Ossetian CF patients or in healthy
persons. 2184del4 and 1248 +1G>A mutations are novel for
Russian Federation.
The research was supported by grant RSF 17-15-01051.
N.V. Petrova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. N. Kashirs-
kaya: None. E. Kondratyeva: None. Z. Getoeva: None.
M. Dzhadzhieva: None. O. Novoselova: None. E. Ginter:
None. R. Zinchenko: None.
E-P19 Genetic counselling/Education/public services
E-P19.01
Prenatal ﬁndings of 28 infants with Down syndrome: a two-
year retrospective evaluationAbstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1039H. Ilgin-Ruhi
Ankara University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey
Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is the most common
chromosomal disorder with the birth incidence 1:700-1000.The high risk of DS is evaluated by prenatal screening
programs during pregnancy. The aim of this study is to
summarize the prenatal ﬁndings of 28 infants with Down
syndrome investigated postnatally.
Materials and Methods: The study includes a retro-
spective data analysis of intrauterin periods of 28 babieswith DS. Conventional karyotypes from peripheral blood
samplings were performed to con ﬁrm DS diagnosis.
Results: The prenatal karyotype indications of the
families are shown in Table 1. Only three DS cases were
prenatally diagnosed.
Table 1. Indications for prenatal Down syndrome screen-
ing in the families
Maternal
ageIndications of prenatal karyotyping Indication
Ø
Maternal
age aloneFirst and/
or second
maternalserumscreeningUltrasound
anomaliesCombined*
<
35 years02 5 4 5
≥
35 years34 4 1 0
*Positive serum screening with abnormal ultrasound
ﬁndings
Among the 28 families, 23 (82%) were evaluated in the
high-risk group, 5 (18%) were in the low-risk group.However, only three families have had amniocentesis.
Major congenital malformations were detected postnataly in
22 DS infants (79%).
Conclusion: Prenatal and postnatal genetic counseling is
extremely important in Down syndrome. Prenataly detec-
tion of severe malformations is one of the most importantfactor affecting family decisions about whether or not to
continue the pregnancy.
H. Ilgin-Ruhi: None.
E-P19.02
Pre-eclampsia: Awareness of the life threating conditionPre-eclampsia: awareness of the life threating conditionPre-
eclampsia: Awareness of the life threating condition
P. Tulay, M. C. Ergoren, R. KalkanNear East University, Nicosia, Cyprus
Introduction: Pre-eclampsia is categorized as a hyperten-
sive disorder occurring during pregnancy. Mild forms of
preeclampsia generally do not possess any symptoms,
whereas the severe forms may cause headaches, renalinsufﬁciency and even fetal and maternal death. The inci-
dence of pre-eclampsia varies between 2% to 10% of
pregnancies globally. However, WHO reported that this rateis reported to be almost seven times more in the developing
countries. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the
knowledge, screening methods and the incidence of pre-eclampsia in North Cyprus.
Materials and Methods: Questionnaire based survey
were conducted to women at least 18 years of age. Thematernal variables including age, possible gestational age
and previous pregnancy associated complications were
collected from all the volunteers. The social-economic andeducational status of the women were taken into considera-
tion for this analysis. The knowledge and awareness of pre-
eclampsia associated risks and complications wereevaluated.
Results: The overall awareness of pre-eclampsia was
53% and 39% had experienced pre-eclampsia themselves.Due to the lack of knowledge on the complications, women
with pre-eclampsia speci ﬁed that they experienced sub-
stantial panic and stress upon diagnosed. The awarenesswas associated with the level of education. However,
generally the women were not aware of the maternal/fetal
mortality risk or any possibilities with the geneticpredispositions.
Conclusion: Lack of awareness translates to worse health
outcomes, including fetal and maternal death or pre-termbirths. Therefore, proper counselling should be provided to
the community about the incidence and the indication of
this threatening condition.
P. Tulay: None. M.C. Ergoren: None. R.
Kalkan: None.
E-P19.03
Clinical Genetics and rare diseases in University Hospital
Brno, Czech Republic (Genetic counselling - Diagnostics -Care - Research - Education)
R. Gaillyová1,2, M. Macek3,4, A. Arellanesová5, I. Valáková1,2,H .
Bučková6, L. Homola7, L. Fajkusová8, M. Havlovicová3
1University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno,
Czech Republic,2Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic,3Dept. of Biology
and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, CharlesUniversity in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague,
Czech Republic,
4National coordination Centre for Rare1040 J. del PicchiaDiseases, Prague, Czech Republic,5Czech Association of Rare
Diseases, Prague, Czech Republic,6University Hospital Brno,
Dept. of Pediatric Dermatology, EB Centre Czech Republic,
Centre for Rare Skin Diseases, member of ERN-Skin, Brno,
Czech Republic,7University Hospital Brno, Clinic of Pediatric
Infectious Diseases, CF Centre, Brno, Czech Republic,
8University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and
Gene Therapy, Clinic of Internal Medicine –Hematology and
Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic
In accordance with the, Council Recommendation on an
action in the ﬁeld of rare diseases “the Czech Government
approved the 2ndNational Strategy for rare diseases. The
Department of Medical Genetics University Hospital Brno
cooperates with the National Coordination Centre for RareDiseases (Prague-Motol) and with centres for rare diseases
in University Hospital Brno (part of respective European
Reference Networks), e.g. mainly in the area of geno-dermatoses and epidermolysis bullosa, cystic ﬁbrosis, neu-
romuscular diseases, rare cardiac arrhythmias and malignant
hyperthermia. Clinical geneticists and molecular biologistsare involved in genetic counselling, provide postnatal and
prenatal genetic diagnostics and preventive testing in
families with various rare diseases. In cooperation with theCzech Society of Medical Genetics and Genomics ( www.
slg.cz ) our department organises an annual conference for
professionals in the ﬁeld of medical genetics on the topic of
rare diseases. Rare diseases are also the theme of lectures
for students of the Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of
Science, Masaryk University (MU) in Brno. In cooperationwith patient organisations, as DEBRA CR, Czech CF
Association, Parent-Project and others, we prepare lectures
and informational materials for patients with rare diseasesand their families. Together with the Czech Association of
Rare Diseases ( www.vzacna-onemocneni.cz ), we
organize lectures for students of Masaryk University in2017 in which are patients with rare diseases directly
involved and interact with students. An integral part of our
work are also lectures for the public and an annual meetingin Brno organized on the occasion of the annual Rare
Diseases Day.R. Gaillyová: None. M. Macek: None. A. Arellanesová:
None. I. Valá šková: None. H. Bu čková: None. L.
Homola: None. L. Fajkusová: None. M.
Havlovicová: None.
E-P19.04
The effect of neuroeducational methods on leucocyte
telomere shortening dynamics
D. Serapinas1, M. Mendele2, J. Tumaite1, A. Serapiniene1,K .
Martinsone3
1Mykolas Romeris University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of
Neuroeducational Methods, Oslo, Norway,3Department of
Health Psychology and Education, R īga Stradi ņUniversity,
Ryga, Latvia
Introduction: Recent data points the importance of psy-
chological factors for health state including genetic level.
The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of neu-
roeducational methods on telomere length shortening.
Materials and Methods: This study summarizes the
ﬁndings on telomere length changes from a controlled
group study of neuroeducational methods over a 6 monthperiod. The study was conducted on 20 relatively healthy
subjects aged 20-59 years old. 10 persons had regular
neuroeducational sesions (stress reduction, mindfulness, arttherapy with professional specialists). Control group
consisted of 10 individuals, matched by demogra ﬁc and
health history criteria. HT-Q-FISH was used to measure themedian telomere length (LifeLenght, Spain)
Results: Subjects that have passed neuroeducational
sessions decreased telomere length over the 6 monthsperiod non signi ﬁcantly (100±27bp; p =0.63), whereas
subjects in the control group signi ﬁcantly lost telomeres
(420±80bp; p =0.02).
Conclusions: Theﬁndings of this pilot study suggest that
neuroeducational methods can contribute for the slower
shortening of telomeres.
D. Serapinas: None. M. Mendele: None. J. Tumaite:
None. A. Serapiniene: None. K. Martinsone: None.Abstracts from the 51stEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: … 1041